                                                                                                                     BEIS0000418
                                                                                                               BEIS0000418



                                                                                       j.


                                  RESTRICTED - POLICY & COMMERCIAL

     The &.t Hun Par Mandelson MP
     Secrerary of State for Trade and industry
                                                                    z        Mr Macdonald
                                                                                                 Secretary of Stntt
                                                                             Mr Baker CGBPS      Department of
                                                                            Mr Macintyre CII     Trade and Industry
                                                                            Dr Hopkins CII       I Victoria Street
       The RL Hon Stephen Byers MP                                          Mr Hosker FRM        Londnn SW I H peT
       Chief Secretary to the Treasury                                      Mr Fraser IBB
                                                                            Mr Sklaroff COM
       Parliament St
       London SW1P 3AC                                                      Mrs B,, e,fIPORT
                                                                            Mr Osborne Legal C
                                                                                                 GRO
          /c   December 1998                                                Mr Sibbick CGBPS     e-mail          -------.---
                                                                            Mr Whitehead CGBPS   TLo.Nlnd lson:.-.- GRO
                                                                            Ms Anderson CGBPS
                                                                            File: KRJ69

      BA/POCL kUTOMATION PROJECT                                             NJr Wee   ,tT

      I was disappointed that our meeting yesterday was again unable
      to reach a clear decision on the way forward for the BA/POCL
      automation project. The continued uncertainty is becoming
      increasingly damaging for all the parties Concerned. As I see
      it., the choice is a straightforward one;

      * to continue with Horizon, we will need to secure heads of
        agreement. Within two to three years Horizon will have
        equipped the Post Office with a modern IT system, capable not
        only of handling the benefit payment card, but also front-end
        banking facilities in conjunction with the commercial banks.
        This will help us to implement our social banking policies,
        and to bring modern electronic government into communities
        which other organisations simply do not reach.

     • or we can take a major step into the unknown, delaying the
       modernisation of the Post Office Counters network, risking
       the departure of existing clients and virtually eliminating
       the possibility of attracting new ones. The damage to the
       confidence ow subpostmasters and the knock-on effect of
       network closures will produce political fall-out, no matter
       how carefully we try to 'handle it. The reduction in the
       network will reduce Our ability to extend social banking and
       modern government into the very communities we most wish to
       target. Our relations with Fujitsu, a major inward investor
       into the UK over the past decade, would be severely damaged,
       as would the credibility of PF1.




                                                          dti
                                                 rkw<mcm w'T,.We e,.,I ItlJuwn


T0:39dd                    GRO                                                               0;W0ad      £O;TT 86-2t-9T
                                                           ""




                                                                        o
                                                                              BEIS0000418
                                                                           BEIS0000418




                                                                                  0
                     RESTRICTED - POLICY & COMMERCIAL




      There is still some way to go to complete the Horizon project,
      but the basic development work has been thoroughly evaluated by
      independent experts who have pronounced it viable, robust and
      of a design which should accommodate future technological
      developments. it can provide a seamless transition for benefit
      recipients from existing outdated paper based systems to
      eventual ACT, the end-game on which we are all agreed. The
      price whl,ch we are now asked to pay is higher than we had hoped
      but is one which the post office believe will make commercial
      sense for them. Certainly, against the cost of any alternative
      we should need to add the costs of terminating Horizon, which
      could be considerable,

      I believe the only sensible choice is to proceed with the
      Horizon project. It is the way forward which offers the least
      commercial and technological risk. We still need further
      clarification of certain elements of the ICL package and there
      is still scope through further discussion with the company to
                                                      importance to
      secure improvements to elements that are of key
      us, particularly acceptance procedures. Adrian Montague should
      pursue these aspects urgently.

      Zan McCartney and I stand ready to contribute in any way we
      can. I regard. it as one of my highest priorities to put Ln
      place the automated system that will provide the unique channel
      for delivering our ambitions en social banking and modern
      government.

      I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, Alistair
      Darling, Jack Cunningham, Charlie Falconer and to Ian McCartney
      hare.




                         GRO
                                         du
                                Drparm'XUL of T& •n4 J V!bY


20:    d            GRO                       GRO             O;l   id   E5-TT 66-2T-9T
