                                                                                                         BEIS0000337
                                                                                                      BEIS0000337

 O4--DEC- 1998       13: 17        FROM      JAPAN SECTION NERPD             TO        L GRO          P • 06

                              R. lr TR. lG T -) — P D k t C,-► 4 CO ti t." blZ t A~
vclk, SU                         II
                                    :KU,_.TQ.kYo.300•$211, Japan                            C V j I i SU
61 _.M rtjnouchi --oilome._Ghivra'd
                              S
                                                       GRO
            .-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-. i; -----------------------------
           GRo
                 f
            4:I    i-
               Vice Chairman



        Sir David Wright KC1~IC1 LVO
        Her Britannic Majesty's Ambassador
        British Embassy Tokyo
        No.1 Ichibancho, Cljiyoda-Ku
        Tokyo 102.8381
         Japan

         4th December 1998




                                                  BA/POCL AUTOMATION PROJECT

                                                               largest and most complex IT projects in
          Known as the Horizon project, this is One of the
                                                             use P'FX for a large and complex Information
          Europe. It is also ose of the earliest attempts to
                                                                1996.
          Technology project. -,It was awarded to ICL in May
                                                                                                          up
                       designed  tip automate the payment   of DSS benefits via an IT network
           Horizon  is                                                                               work of
                                                       payment authorisation) and the          al t links
           the Benefits Agency which provides the
                                                          benefits in cash to those eligible to receive them
           some 19000 post ofl'ibes which pay out the
                                                                       improve the quality of service while
           (about 20 million people, in total). The intention is to
                                                               eliminating encaahrnent fraud. The Horizon
            reducing the cost of administration and virtually
                                                            modernise its counter services.
            IT network will also finable the Post Office to
                                                                                                   this is
               project  is running two years behind schedule and is heavily over budget. Because
           The                                                                                   project's
                                                     ICL. However, ICL is in dispute with the
           a PFI project, the risk is being bonne by
                                                          responsible for the many changes made to the
           sponsors. In ICL's view, the sponsors were
                                                               bulk of the delays and the additional costs
           project's technical specifications thus causing the
           which have ensued.
                                                                                                  Project
                     start, this p oject was not treated properly as a PFI by the two sponsors. A
            From the
                      Authorityi(PDA)      of more   than 150  officials drawn from the two sponsoring
            Delivery
                                                                                                  BEIS0000337
                                                                                               BEIS0000337

04—DEC-1998   13:17    FROM       JAPAN SECTION NEAPD              TO
                                                                                     GRO I P.07s


                                                                                     FU ?TSU
                                       -2-         4`" December, 1998

                                                                               aspect of the
    Government Agencies was established whose sole task was to oversee every
                                                                        permission from the
    project. But the pDA► had no authority to act without seeking prior
    sponsors, thus adding o the delays and costs of the project.

                                                                              of the PDA, it was
     Following complaintsiby ICL about the unnecessarily bureaucratic nature
                                                                                behind schedule.
     abolished in the Au1 min of 1997. But the project had already fallen
                                                                         supply us with the data
     These problems were' compounded by the inability of the DSS to
                                                                           the right people at the
     which we needed to insure that the right benefits were being paid to
                                                                      Horizon was based on the
     right time. The original timesoale for the implementation of
                                                                             September 1991. It
     agreement of the Benefits Agency to provide us with all of this data in
                                                                  running four to five years late
     later emerged that th it programme produce this data was
                                              to




                                                              enable us to create the necessary
     and that instead of sµpplying us with all of the data to
                                                                     in phases. This has added
     databases for Horizon, we would only be given the data
     significantly to our delays and costs.

                                                                £200 million. The system is up and
     To date, ICL - suppoted by Fujitsu - has spent over
                                                                     complete system will involve
     running in some 200 post offices. The cost of rolling out the
                                                                   commercial terms will need to
     ICL and Fujitsu in raising a fiuthe°r £ 600 million. But the
                              ICL can raise the necessary funding and, in due course, have
                                                                                             some
     be revised to ensure
                           twat




                                                                                      assuming that
     expectation of recouping the money it has invested (and will continue to invest,
                                                                          some months to try and
     the project goes forward). Negotiations have been taking place for
     find a way forward.

                                                                     panel in Pebruary,1998 and this
      At ICUs request, "t`rea'sury Minister Robinson set up a review
      reported constructively in mid-July. Five months later
                                                                      the Benefits Agency is still
                                                                                10 million a month.
      obstructing a reasonable settlement. Meanwhile ICL has been investing £
                                                                            of making unreasonable
      Now Treasury 1Vlinisttr Byers is accusing ICL of being in default and
      commercial demands..

                                                         reluctant partner in this project; we
      We now know that the Benefits Agency has always been a
      believe that many o the problems we have encountered have their
                                                                       roots in the Benefits
                                                                                 channels, in spite of
      Agency'9 wish to find another way of distributing benefits eg via banking
                                                                     the post office network This
      the Government's derision to continue payments in cash via
                                                              the project, and casts doubt on the
      has added to the getieral uncertainties surrounding
                                                                                                  BEIS0000337
                                                                                               BEIS0000337

e4-DEC-1998   13:17     FROM   JAPAN SECTION NEAPD                TO                G RO        P•08




                                                                                     FUJITSU
                                      -3-      4th Deceniber,1998



    willingness of the pubic sector partners to negotiate with us in good ilsith.
                         a
    There has been an ox     ge of letters between the Chief Secretary to the Treasury and Keith
    Todd, CBO of ICL. Iinisters have set a deadline -9 December - by which time they wish to
    see progress on flndixg a resolution. But it is clear that they still see ICL at fault and thus
    the party which must 4arry the bulk of the financial burden.

    Fujitsu has been kept fully informed of the unhappy developments In this case. Fujitsu will
    continue to support xjith Todd and his management team. Fujitsu has already informed DTI
    of cials of this. Furthermore, Fujitsu will continue to support ICL in good, well founded
    PFI contracts such a ea DTI ELGAR project. But ICL and Fujitsu will now be much more
    careful about PFI in ure, given the developments in Horizon.

                                                                                         reasonable
    So far as the Horizon (project itself is concerned, Fujitsu arc willing to support a
    commercial solution. But Fujitsu will not provide or underwrite another £ 600m of costs
    without a valid coinme'rcial case for doing so, No management could justify such a decision
    to its shareholders - as must surely be obvious to all.




                 GRO
     Vice Chairman
     Fujitsu Limited




                                                                                                 TOTAL P.08
