                                                              CB000100001 _072
                                                            CB000100001_072

                                   RESTRICTED                                     u-O




                                                      From: Geoff Mulgan
                                                      Date:    9 December 1998

Prime Minister                                        cc       Lord Falconer
                                                               Jonathan Powell
                                                               David Miliband
                                                               Jeremy Heywood
                                                               Geoffrey Norris
                                                               Sharon White

Horizon, ICL and the Post Office
1. A decision now needs to be taken on whether to proceed with the Horizon
   project. You will recall this is the initiative to automate the Post Office
   network, involving ICL. The project is nearly three years behind schedule,
   having been plagued with problems. Negotiations have been underway since
   the summer to find a way to continue the project.


2. The sums involved are big. Total spending, through DSS contracts, will be
   around £5bn between now and 2008.


3. After a tough period of negotiation ICL has made an offer which represents a
   significant move. Acceptance would still cost the government around £200m
   more than previously envisaged; equally, ICL would be set to lose £270m in
   total on the project. Their offer still leaves a significant gap with the
   government: £110m on funding, as well as differences over the practicalities
   of implementation. But the Post Office would be prepared to meet the funding
   gap out of existing resources, and, despite the continued opposition of the
   Benefits Agency, it will almost certainly now be possible to reach a
   settlement.




                                  RESTRICTED
                                                                 CB000100001 _072
                                                              CB000100001_072

                                      RESTRICTED                                        Lt I

                                           -2-
n




    4. However, the decision is not clear cut. The problems that have beset this
       project may well continue; continuation would lock the government in for 10-
       12 years to what many see as a Clawed system; cancellation on the other hand
       would enable the Post Office to take advantage of newer, cheaper and more
       flexible technology, while the DSS could move rapidly to paying benefits into
       people's bank accounts. Cancellation would also release around £2-3bn over
       the next decade to be spent in other ways to support and automate the Post
       Office.


    5. The attached paper sets out the main options and contains two alternative
       recommendations. Both options involve broadly similar financial implications
       for government.


    6. In making a judgement, the following issues are paramount:


    • The virtues of the project itself: overall, Horizon, now looks increasingly
       flawed. It is centred around a technology, the Benefit Payment Card (BPC),
       that is both overengineered - and very expensive - and likely soon to be
       obsolete. Indeed, ICL acknowledge that the BPC will have no commercial
       value to them at the end of the project. Although they remain underdeveloped,
       the alternatives, which involve simpler off-the-shelf banking technology, look
       increasingly attractive, offering a route to universal banking, automated Post
       Offices and better provision of government information.


    • The effects on the Post Office network: cancellation would undoubtedly be
       destabilising. Subpostmasters fear that without Horizon they will lose their
       customer base. Their concerns can be partially, but not wholly, addressed



                                     RESTRICTED
                                                                     CB000100001 _072
                                                                CB000100001_072

'                                      RESTRICTED

                                             -3-



        through commitments on subsidy and promises that there will be government
        support for an alternative automation system. Rural subpostmasters' fears will
        be particularly acute. Subsidies could be structured to keep the great majority
        of these open, but, whatever happens, there will be a continuing stream of
        closures.


    •   Effects on ICL: Cancellation would directly affect 270 jobs in ICL and more
        in suppliers. It would destroy ICL's prospects of flotation and lead to a
        heavy (£200m) loss this year, although even if the project continues the
        £250m losses incurred so far may at some point have to be written off (NB the
        figures in the attached paper are wrong on this issue). Cancellation would
        also have a big effect on their reputation. It would probably force the
        resignation of the Chief Executive and would put them into a protracted legal
        battle with government, in which they would seek to pin blame on government
        in general and the DSS in particular.   C Seri     Ie 61 V


    •   Effects on Fujitsu: Fujitsu have provided the financial commitment to secure
        a deal. This is a sign of how important the project is for them. There would
        undoubtedly be a cost in terms of UK relationships with them in particular,
        and possibly with Japanese investors in general. They would argue that the
        government was guilty of a breach of faith: blaming ICL for what is in effect
        a change of policy.


    • Effects on PFI: continuation would set a precedent for renegotiating PFIs that
        are failing; cancellation would make the funding of large IT projects harder in
        the future.




                                      RESTRICTED
                                                                  CB000100001 _072
                                                               CB000100001_072

                                       RESTRICTED

                                             -4-

0
    • Effects on the Benefits Agency and welfare reform: continuation would
       hold up ACT. DSS estimate that they would save £800m if the project was
       cancelled. Government would also lose the opportunity to bank the unbanked.


    7. Departments remain divided.       Alastair Darling remains strongly opposed to
       continuing. Ian McCartney for DTI will argue strongly for accepting a deal
       (Peter Mandelson has largely kept out of the discussions). The Treasury is
       divided at official level, but Stephen Byers will probably, on balance, want to
       accept the deal for pragmatic reasons, even though he would prefer to cancel.


    8. At first glance, most of the factors point towards continuation. However my
       view, which Lord Falconer broadly shares, is that although short-term
       considerations and expedience point strongly towards making a deal, this will
       in the long-run prove unsatisfactory, leaving the Post Office and government
       dependent on a hugely expensive, inflexible, inappropriate and possibly
       unreliable system.


    9. In our view, the best outcome would be a deal with ICL to continue with an
       automation strategy which drops the Benefit Payment Card but focuses instead
       on helping the Post Office to provide banking services. This would enable a
       rapid move towards ACT and Post Office automation, but without the many
       problems associated with the BPC. It would also enable good relations to be
       maintained with ICL and Fujitsu. The costs to government and ICL resulting
       from the BPC could legitimately be blamed on the previous government.


    10.However, it will not be possible to reach this position without first rejecting
       ICL's offer and making it clear that the government no longer wishes to



                                      RESTRICTED
                                                              CB000100001 _072
                                                           CB000100001_072

                                   RESTRICTED

                                        .5.



   continue with Horizon in its present form. There would then be a danger that
   ICL would refuse to negotiate over a deal which excluded the BPC. In other
   words, this option is only feasible if the government is prepared to accept the
   significant risk that it would in practice lead to complete cancellation.


11.Our view is that the case for cancellation is, just, strong enough to warrant
   that risk, although it would need to be announced alongside a strong package
   of support for Post Offices and for an alternative automation strategy.


12.Ministers are meeting on Monday afternoon. There are essentially three
   options:


• Option 1: Attempt to conclude a deal, broadly along the lines offered by ICL


• Option 2: Seek a deal with ICL but excluding the Benefit Payment Card
   (recognising that in practice this may quickly lead to option 3)


• Option 3: Reject ICL's offer, move to terminate the project and press forward
   with an alternative.                                                            )


13. Do you wish to give a steer?                                      I
                                                                          v"




                                          _         1
                                   RESTRICTED
 CB000100001 _072
CB000100001_072
