                                                                        EXP00000006
                                                                     EXPG0000006




REPORT 1




                              REPORT 1

               FOR THE POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY



EXPECTED AND BEST PRACTICE IN RESPECT OF THE STANDARDS OF GOVERNANCE,
   MANAGEMENT AND LEADERSHIP IN COMPANIES SUCH AS THE POST OFFICE
                              COMPANIES



                        DAME SANDRA DAWSON

                          DR KATY STEWARD



                            26 MARCH 2024




                                                            Page 1 of 133
                                                                                              EXP00000006
                                                                                            EXPG0000006




                                          CONTENTS

   Introduction

1. Governance Principles and Codes

   1.1. Historical Context: Corporate Governance Foundations in Rights of Owners

   1.2. Corporate Governance in the UK: the Development of Codes of Practice

   1.3. The Applicability of Corporate Governance Codes Developed for Listed Companies to Other
        Forms of Ownership and Organisation.

   1.4. The Governance of Businesses which are Largely or Wholly Owned by Government.

   1.5. Role of NEDs and Boards in Government Departments.

   1.6. Governance and Management Arrangements in, and of, the Post Office Business, 1999-2019

   1.7. Questions Arising from Section 1 Relevant to POHI



2. Accountability

   2.1. Principles of Accountability

   2.2. Board Role Accountabilities

       The Board as a whole

       Board Committees

       Chair of the Board

      Non-Executive Director

       Senior Independent Director

       Chief Executive Officer (or equivalent most senior Executive)

       Other Executive Board Members

       Company Secretary

   2.3. The Role of the Shareholder

   2.4. The Role of the Executive

   2.5. Strategy at the Heart of Board Accountability

   2.6. Questions Arising from Section 2 Relevant to POHI




                                                                                   Page 2 of 133
                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                   EXPG0000006




3. Monitoring and Audit

   3.1. Introduction

   3.2. Guidance on Monitoring and Audit in Public and Private Bodies

   3.3. Board Audit Committee

   3.4. Internal Audit

   3.5. External Audit

   3.6. Questions Arising from Section 3 Relevant to POHI



4. Risk

   4.1. Introduction

   4.2. Executive Role in Risk

   4.3. Board Role in Risk

   4.4. Board Risk Committee

   4.5. The Role of the Shareholder

   4.6. Questions Arising from Section 4 Relevant to POHI



5. Governance and Management of Technically Complex Major Projects

   5.1. Introduction

   5.2. Characteristics of Major Projects

   5.3. The Role of the Executive

   5.4. The Role of the Board or other Governing Body in Major Projects

   5.5. Questions Arising from Section 5 Relevant to POHI



6. Governance and Management of Whistleblowing

   6.1. Introduction

   6.2. The Role of the Executive: The Management of Whistleblowing



                                                                          Page 3 of 133
                                                                                                  EXP00000006
                                                                                               EXPG0000006




   6.3. Guidance and Regulation

   6.4. The Role of the Board: The Governance of Whistleblowing

   6.5. Questions Arising from Section 6 Relevant to POHI


7. Stakeholder Management

   7.1. Introduction

   7.2. Identifying Important Stakeholders

   7.3. Considerations in Stakeholder Relations

   7.4. Managing Stakeholders: The Role of the Executive

   7.5. Stakeholder Relationships: The Role of the Board

   7.6. Key Stakeholder Relationships

   7.7. Questions Arising from Section 7 Relevant to POHI about Relationships with:
               Government
               Fujitsu
               Sub Post Masters


8. Experiencing Governance and Management

   8.1. Introduction

   8.2. Authority, Power, Interest, Influence and Conflict

       Questions Arising from Section 8.1 Relevant to POHI

   8.3. Leadership

       Questions Arising from Section 8.2 Relevant to POHI

   8.4. Culture

       Questions Arising from Section 8.3 Relevant to POHI

   8.5. Communication

       Questions Arising from Section 8.4 Relevant to POHI




                                                                                      Page 4 of 133
                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                 EXPG0000006




Annex A Chronology of Laws, Governance Codes and Guidance 1998-2019

Annex B Chronology of Ownership and Governance of the Post Office Business 1999-
2020

Annex C Glossary

Annex D Acronyms and Abbreviations

Annex E Sources

Annex F Qualifications and Expertise of Dame Sandra Dawson and Dr Katy Steward

Annex G Statement of Truth




                                                                       Page 5 of 133
                                                                                                        EXPO0000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




   Introduction

 i.    We are instructed to provide a report which sets out what might typically be expected/best
       practice in respect of the standards of governance, management and leadership in companies
       such as the Post Office Companies. Annex F provides a summary of our expertise and
       qualifications relevant to undertaking this work.

ii.    This report makes few observations on the specifics of the issues under investigation by the
       POHI. It deals with generally expected standards. In concluding each section, we have posed
       a serious of questions which might assist the Chair, Counsel and Core Participants as they
       consider the evidence they will be seeing in the coming phases of the Inquiry.

iii.   Annex A provides a chronology of the laws and guidance on governance of companies which
       applied during the relevant period 1999-2019. The material is presented chronologically, split
       into columns. On the left-hand side are the requirements and guidance which apply to
       companies, with special attention to publicly listed companies. On the right-hand side are the
       requirements which apply to companies and other entities which are wholly owned or
       controlled by the government.

iv.    Whilst there are differences between publicly listed and publicly owned companies, it is
       notable that in matters of governance during the relevant period, one finds the requirements
       and expectations for all organisations in the UK have tended, and tended to be encouraged by
       governments and regulators, to follow the approach adopted in law and guidance for publicly
       listed companies. It is these laws and guidance which have set generally accepted standards,
       which are then adapted in detail, but not in principle, for the situation of companies wholly
       owned by the government. There are additional, and occasionally alternative, laws and
       regulations which apply to government ownership and oversight (right hand columns of
       Annex A). These add complexity and layers to governance, but do not undermine the
       principles set out in the left-hand columns.

       Furthermore, there are considerable interlocking directorships within and between publicly
       owned and publicly listed companies in this period. This reflects a trend to introduce senior
       people with experience of governing and running businesses in publicly listed companies into
       the governance and management of publicly owned companies. For example, some of the
       Executives and Board members in the Post Office Organisations during the relevant period,
       either had held or were currently holding, positions in listed companies.

vi.    Beyond identifying specific requirements and guidance for governance as summarised in
       Annex A, we have commented on what might be normally regarded as known reasonable
       practice in governance, management, and leadership. Our commentary on `known reasonable
       practice' is based on our expertise and experience, and on widespread discussion and some
       consensus in the public domain on what constitutes good management and leadership. Such
       commentary is found in popular business literature, media commentary, and discussion
       documents issued to their mailing lists of senior executives and directors by professional
       service companies, e.g. search consultants, strategy and management consultants, lawyers,
       and accounting firms. Except on the occasions where we have cited research or reports listed
       in Annex E, we have not provided specific references to support our expert view.




                                                                                        Page 6 of 133
                                                                                                  EXP00000006
                                                                                              EXPG0000006




vii.   Our observations on what might be expected in respect of the standards of governance,
       management, and leadership in companies such as the Post Office Companies are set out in
       general terms under the following sections.

       1. Corporate Governance, Principles and Codes

       2. Accountability

       3. Monitoring and Audit

       4. Risk

       5. Governance and Management of Technically Complex Projects

       6. Governance and Management of Whistleblowing

       7. Stakeholder Management

       8. Experiencing Governance and Management




                                                                                    Page 7 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




1 Governance Principles and Codes

1.1 Historical Context: Corporate Governance Foundations in Rights of Owners

     1.1.1   UK corporate governance regulations, standards and codes have developed over time.
             Originally constructed for commercial companies, they have formed the foundations for
             codes and accepted practice in other forms of organisation, including those of the Post
             Offices businesses, which are wholly owned by the government. We start therefore with a
             summary of developments for commercial companies.

     1.1.2   Historically roots of contemporary governance lie in the development of `limited liability'
             companies, and the creation of equity to increase investment through selling ownership
             shares of a company to investors not directly involved in its running. With owners now no
             longer `sitting on the premises', concerns were raised that executive management might
             pursue their own interests, rather than those of the company. This separation of
             `ownership and control' prompted governments and owners to find ways to retain some
             owner oversight of current operations and future strategic direction in order to safeguard
             investments.

     1.1.3   The underlying question guiding corporate governance developments is: who is most
             likely to hold Executives to account and, if necessary, replace them, if they are found to
             be ineffective, incompetent, negligent, or single mindedly self-interested, and thereby,
             jeopardising the company's assets and the owners' investment.

     1.1.4   The response in the UK to this underlying question has predominantly been to focus on
             the owners (in practice, the holders of relatively large numbers of shares), to require (or
             enable) them to appoint, reappoint, or retire their representative directors as Chairs and
             Non-Executive Directors to the Company Boards.

1.2 Corporate Governance in the UK: the Development of Codes of Practice

     1.2.1   UK practice is to have a unitary Board of Executive and Non-Executive Directors, in
             which at least the CEO and often one or two other Executives sit as full members of the
             Board, alongside a majority of Non-Executive Directors.

     1.2.2   The rights, duties and responsibilities of the Board and its members, as Chair, NEDs and
             Executives, of companies, have an outline foundation in statutes, supplemented by codes
             and guidance.2 This provides a framework of company `self-regulation' within constraints
             set by statute, principles and guidance developed within a market environment.

     1.2.3   Contemporary modes of corporate governance are founded in the recommendations of the
             Cadbury Committee (1992)3, which together with the Greenbury (1995) and Hampel
             (1998) Committees, became enshrined in the Combined Code (FRC 1998, 2003, 2008)4.



I See Annex A, Section 1.1 (Companies' Act, 2006)
2 See Annex A, Sections 1.2 — 1.20.
3 See Annex A, Section 1.2.
4 See Annex A, Section 1.4b, 1.7a, 1.10, 1.12, 1.13, 1.14.


                                                                                            Page 8 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




     1.2.4   The Combined Code (FRC 2003, 2008), through its principles and provisions, gives a
             well-established base set of regulations and guidance ons

             a) The structure and operation of Boards of Directors, including roles and
                responsibilities of Chairs and Chief Executives; and

             b) Roles and responsibilities of Shareholders (particularly institutional shareholders with
                relatively large shareholdings).

     1.2.5   Boards in their public annual reports have to either `comply or explain' why, in their
             `special/individual circumstances', the Code's requirements and recommendations are not
             in their view appropriate or advisable in their circumstances.6

     1.2.6   Important underlying assumptions of the Combined Code:

             a) Good governance at Board level is the foundation of good executive management
                which in turn is the foundation of strong corporate performance;

             b) Those who `own' the capital of the company are the natural guardians of good
                governance and thereby good management;

             c) The owners will elect NEDs to safeguard the owners' (financial) interests;

             d) If the financial assets are secure then, other things on which the business depends (eg
                strategy, talent, technology, skills and workforce, operations, supply chain), will also
                receive strong oversight because financial success depends on management paying
                due regard to these things.

             e) The shareholders and their elected NEDs will have sufficient access to relevant
                information to enable them to discharge their duties;

             f) Transparency in public reporting of key aspects of the business will ensure full
                disclosure and scrutiny of relevant specified information which will reveal if there is
                'good governance' and if this 'good governance' has delivered 'good management'
                and met expectations of performance; and

             g) If there is a failure of performance, shareholders will use market mechanisms and sell
                stock and/or change Board membership.'




     1.2.7   None of these assumptions necessarily always hold. For example, they may not hold if:

             a) Shareholders (and their elected NEDs) are not assiduous or diligent in discharging
                their responsibilities;




' See Annex A, Sections 1.7a and 1.10.
' See Annex A, Section 1.2.
' See Annex A, Sections 1.2, 1.4a, 1.4b, 1.6, 1.7a, 1.9a and 1.18.

                                                                                          Page 9 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




             b) Short term financial gain, or the outcome of present operational decisions, may be at
                the expense of longer-term sustainable performance; and

             c) Emphasis on financial targets may encourage poor management of other assets
                (people, subcontractors, investments in technology, safeguarding the planet).

     1.2.8   As imperfections and misalignments became clear (often through corporate failures),
             additional regulations and codes were introduced. In the last 25 years for example, there
             has been greater emphasis on reporting on Executive remuneration and the evaluation of
             Board and Board member performance (Greenbury, R 1995), disclosure on progress in
             policies in diversity (FRC, 2012) and whistleblowing (Financial Conduct Authority,
             2016) reporting and risk oversight (Walker, D, 2009; FRC 2009, FRC 2014a, FRC
             2016b).8


1.3 The Applicability of Corporate Governance Codes Developed for Listed Companies
   to other Forms of Ownership and Organisation



     1.3.1   It has become increasingly accepted that Corporate Governance codes for commercial
             companies offer guidance to other forms of ownership, notably.

             a) Privately and family-owned companies, where shares are not listed or offered on an
                open market. In this context the owners decide the extent to which they wish to
                follow the codes. The governance of these type of organisations are not relevant to
                our instructions.

             b) Charities, where the Board are `trustees' of the charity's assets and the charity
                commissioners, as regulators, have a key role (acting in a sense for 'the public'
                owners/donors) in setting out corporate governance requirements. These are not
                relevant to our instructions.

             c) Publicly owned assets, where the owner is the national government (or local
                authority) and a major element of funding comes from the taxpayer, sometimes in
                combination with additional revenue from commercial activity. The governance of
                such publicly owned companies is central to our instructions.9


1.4 The Governance of Businesses which are Largely or Wholly Owned by Government

     1.4.1   The government has drawn on corporate governance for publicly listed companies to
             provide a framework for how the governance of an array of public bodies should be
             governed. To quote, 'good corporate governance is fundamental to any effective and well-
             managed organisation and is the hallmark of an entity that is run accountably and with the
             long-term interest clearly in mind' (HM Treasury, 2005). 10



8 See Annex A, Sections 1.3, 1.12, 1.13, 1.16 and 1.18.
9
  See Annex A, Sections 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.1Oa and 2.13.
to See Annex A, Section 2.3.

                                                                                        Page 10 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




    1.4.2   Although there are a variety of accountability relationships (and an NAO (2015) report
            hinted at the array and inconsistency in structures), the government may offer specific
            guidance on their governance to companies in government. In doing this it borrows from
            corporate governance:
            a) HM Treasury (2016) guidance on Audit and Risk Assurance in Central Governance,
                2016 has this opening sentence: `Under the Corporate Governance Code in Central
                Government'.

            b) Guidance from 2020 between BEIS, POL and UKGI (Department for Business,
               Energy and Industrial Strategy, March 2020), specifically provides for Board
               Composition governed by the Corporate Code for Government: 'In line with the
               Government Code of Good Practice for Corporate Governance, it is agreed between
               the Shareholder and POL that the Board will include a Non-Executive Chair a Group
               Chief Executive, a Chief Finance Officer and a number of Non-Executive Directors
               ("NED'), one of whom should be a Senior Independent Director ("SID) .

    1.4.3   Where the government is the majority or sole shareholder in a company, the government
            should establish some way of providing shareholder oversight. This might involve direct
            control through appointment of Directors and/or indirectly through a specialist entity.
            This was the rationale for the formation of the Shareholder Executive in 2003.

    The Shareholder Executive 2003-2016

    1.4.4   The Shareholder Executive was created as part of the Civil Service. Originally located in
            the Cabinet Office, it subsequently moved into the former Department for Business,
            Innovation and Skills. It was given responsibility for managing the government's
            financial interest in a range of state-owned businesses, including Post Office businesses.

    1.4.5    It had a combined turnover of £25M in 2007 (National Audit Office, 2007).

    1.4.6   Its aim was to improve government's ability to act as an effective shareholder. AnNAO
            Report 'The Shareholder Executive and Public Sector Business' 2007, noted it was doing
            well but could expand to cover all public sector businesses and be given greater
            independence from political influence.

    1.4.7   The Shareholder Executive `Annual Review 2014/15' described its activities: 'We
            manage the Government's shareholder relationships with businesses owned or part-
            owned by the Government. We offer corporate finance expertise and advice to
            Government departments to ensure the taxpayer gets best valuefrom the assets it owns.
            We deliver growth and boost the economy in new and innovative ways— via entities like
            the Green Investment Bank, investing in green projects, or the British Business Bank,
            helpingfinance markets to work better for smaller businesses'. The corporate finance
            aspect of its role appears to be given greater prominence than its corporate governance
            role.

    UKGI (UK Government Investments) 2016 to Date

    1.4.8   In 2016 UKGI was formed from the merger of the Shareholder Executive with UK
            Financial Investments (UKFI), under a single holding stand-alone company. UKGI was
            placed within the HM Treasury group to offer 'our unique and invaluable blend of civil

u See Annex A, Sections 2.3 and 2.1Oa, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, March 2020
in Annex E

                                                                                            Page 11 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




        service and corporate finance experience'. It was to be the 'government centre of
        excellence in corporate governance and corporate finance'. (UKGI 2017)

1.4.9    The corporate finance function was prominent; it was to have a `central part of the
        government s plan to deliver the biggest ever sale of publicly -owned corporate and
        financial assets'. It was also ambitiously assertive about its governance role, identifying a
         purpose as `delivering a shareholder function that seeks to drive continuously improving
         and sustainable asset performance'. (UKGI Annual Report 2017).

1.4.10 The UKGI website on 11 Jan 2023, reiterates that the UKGI `act(s) as shareholder for,
       and lead establishment of UK government arm's length bodies'. It identifies that it will
       be in the lead of governance by paying attention to the following, which mirror the codes
       and practices which are current in commercial companies.

        a) Governance structure and documentation: Driving accountability and effective
           shareholder relationships by working with assets and departments to put in place best
           practice and fit for purpose corporate and government governance frameworks;

        b) Objectives, business planning and performance: Supporting and challenging assets
           to produce fit for purpose business plans, performance metrics and reporting, and so
           drive increased accountability and improved planning between assets and HMG;

        c) Corporate capability: Challenging and monitoring our assets' internal systems and
           processes to help identify and mitigate risk and promote best practice internal
           governance, culture and organisational health;

        d) Effective leadership: Applying senior corporate expertise to influence ALB
           recruitment and remuneration processes, Board reviews and succession planning to
           help shape strong and fit for purpose capability in our assets' Boards and Senior
           Executive;

        e) Effective relationships: Facilitating effective, pragmatic, and transparent
           relationships between our assets and government, through formal and informal,
           senior-led, regular interactions; and

        f) Experienced Shareholder Non-Executive Director: Acting as Shareholder NED,
           contributing deep governance and government expertise to our assets' Boards, and
           facilitating the relationship and understanding between asset Boards and their
           departments.



Accounting Officers in Government
1.4.11 In parallel with corporate governance requirements, there is the government structure of
       Accounting Officers. The Accounting Officer is the person whom Parliament holds to
       account for the public spend. It is an individual to whom HM Treasury formally delegates
       responsibility for the stewardship of resources used by a government body, including a
       specific duty to account to Parliament for how public money has been spent. AOs
       personally sign the published financial accounts of their department or organisationand in
       doing so, acknowledge that they have a personal responsibility to ensure their


                                                                                     Page 12 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




             departments and any Arm's Length Bodies they sponsor, operate effectively and to a high
             degree of probity.

     1.4.12 The Accounting Officer is likely to be the Permanent Secretary in a central government
            department. The AO oversees a system of accountability which might include the Chief
            Executive of a company wholly owned by the government, whom the AO can designate
            to be an Accountable Officer.12

     Government Companies

     1.4.13 Accountability arrangements for government companies is complex.

     1.4.14 A government company may be led by an AO and also a Chairman and/or Chief
            Executive, who may be one and the same (and may also be a company director). The AO
            has personal accountability for the use of public money, but legally, company directors
            have a collective responsibility to the company's owners to manage it on their behalf.

     1.4.15 HMTreasury guidance (2012) Managing Public Money recognises the potential conflicts
            of interest and provides guidance on managing the `sensitivities' about the role of an AO
            in a company.13

     Values in Public Life

     1.4.16 The standards expected of all those who hold public appointments and are employed by
            the state are subsumed under the general category of expected `standards in public life'.
            These `Nolan' principles and standards in public life (Nolan, 1995) form part of the Terms
            of Appointment for Senior Executives, Chairs and NEDs of public bodies.14

     1.4.17 On the basis of the sections above, we assume that from 2016 those companies who were
            overseen by UKGI were expected to follow the codes as stated. Prior to 2016, less
            codified expectations were that wholly owned government companies with independent
            governance would, where possible, follow the corporate code.


1.5 Role of NEDs and Boards in Government Departments

     1.5.1   Where the government is the sole or majority shareholder in a company, in addition to
             participation at arm's length, there are also links into the sponsoring government
             department. This was arguably more important and direct before the formation of the
             Shareholder Executive in 2003; it is however still relevant after 2003 as there were still
             formal lines of communication between Arm's Length Bodies and government owned
             companies and their sponsoring department.15

     1.5.2   The governance of sponsoring government departments appears to be influenced by the
             corporate governance framework, with the introduction of NEDs and Boards1 6
             a) NEDs were introduced to government departments in the 1990s


12 See Annex A, Sections 2,5 and 2.9.
13
   See Annex A, Sections 2.5, 2.9 and 2.11 (NAO 2016).
14
   See Annex A, Sections 2.2, 2.11 and 2.12.
1s
   See Annex A, Sections 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.13.
16
   See Annex A, Sections 2.3, 2.4, 2.11 and 2.13 and HM Government, June 2012 in Annex E

                                                                                           Page 13 of 133
                                                                                                        EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




               b) Roles were broadly defined in the corporate governance code for central government
                  departments (and accompanying guidance note).

               c) In 2005, the first corporate governance code for government departments
                  recommended (but did not require) each department to have at least 2 NEDs to sit on
                  department Boards, which were then chaired by the Permanent Secretary. In 2005
                  there were 37 NEDs in 14 departments.

               d) The 2011 Code significantly revised and relaunched the framework, following a
                  review of operation of civil service"

               e) In 2011, the Department Boards were now to be chaired by the Secretary of State, not
                  the permanent secretary. There was to be increasing emphasis on recruiting NEDs
                  with private sector commercial experience.

               f) There was to be an overarching lead NED to convene all NEDs across the
                  departments.

               g) All government department NEDs were to meet from time to time, and ensure
                  learnings about policy making, governance and management from one department
                  could be shared with others.

               h) NED roles were described in terms of: advice on performance delivery and strategic
                  leadership and participating in a network to be a conduit for sharing best practice and
                  innovation.

       1.5.3   In 2023, Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Committee of the House of
               Commons (2023) produced a report on the role of NEDs in government This is beyond
               'the relevant period' however it comments that current trends had their origins in an
               earlier time. The report noted the role of NEDs to:

               a) `Provide advice and challenge to Secretary of State chaired departmental boards on
                  issues such as strategy, performance and the delivery of policies;

               b) `Bring commercial experience into running complex organisations and projects'; and

               c) Recommend ways of `improving consistency, accountability and effectiveness'.

       1.5.4   The report noted that there was little transparency in what the NEDs actually do and
               recommended increasing transparency in appointment and operation of NEDs. It
               expressed concerns that NEDs were becoming overly politicised, and of questionable
               independence, and that there was some function creep to unaccountable areas. The
               increasing numbers of NEDs who had been former special advisers to ministers was
               noted.




17   See Annex A, Section 2.4.

                                                                                          Page 14 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




1.6 Governance and Management Arrangements in, and of, the Post Office Business
   1999-2019

   1.6.1   This section provides a textual commentary on Annex B which gives a summary of
           governance and management arrangements in the Post Office Business as the authors
           currently understand them. It indicates accountability relationships in successive stages of
           ownership at a high level. It does not cover specific details eg in various company
           Articles. It is written on the basis of information currently known to the authors and
           indicates the authors' current understanding of accountability relationships in successive
           stages of ownership.

   Four Levels of Accountability

   1.6.2   We are concerned to understand accountabilities at four levels as shown in Annex B.

   1.6.3   LEVEL 1: POB (Post Office Business): The Executives and, when present, the
           Board, Chair and NEDs who were running POC/ L

           a) POC/L Executives were directly responsible for running the PO business including
              the sub postmasters' network and the commissioning and roll out of HORIZON.

           b) POC/L governance evolved from being an executive team, to having an independent
              non-executive chair, to the development of a full board with NEDs.

           c) POC/L's place within oversight and ownership structures and thus the structures for
              accountability, reporting and communication upwards, significantly changed during
              the relevant period.

           d) POC/L had accountabilities `upwards' to Level 2 (until 2013), to Level 3 (from 2003)
              and to Level 4 (the Government) for all the relevant period.


   1.6.4   LEVEL 2: OPOD (Intermediate Ownership of POB): The Executives and, when
           present, the Boards, Chairs, NEDs of various intermediate oversight (eg POA) and
           ownership (eg RMH) entities

           OPOB had responsibilities 'downwards'to Level 1 (their `subsidiary': POC/L) and
           `upwards' to Level 3 acting for government shareholder, to whom they were accountable
           for corporate performance and for corporate governance for some of the relevant period
           and to Level 4 (the Government) for the whole of the relevant period.



   1.6.5   LEVEL 3: AGS (Active Government Shareholder): The Executives and, when
           present, the Boards, Chairs, NEDs of investor organisations (ShEx, UKGI) acting
           for the government as shareholder

           AGS had responsibilities `upwards' to Level 4, their sponsoring government departments,
           `downwards' to fulfil the role of shareholders to their investments in Level 1 and/or in
           Level 2.




                                                                                       Page 15 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                               EXPG0000006




1.6.6   LEVEL 4: Government: The ministers and senior civil servants in the relevant
        sponsoring government departments on whose behalf investors were providing
        oversight

        Government had responsibilities downwards to their statutory authorities (POA until
        2001) and their wholly and directly owned companies (variously Consignia, RMH 2001-
        12, POL 2012-2020), and within Government, upwards to Parliament.

Three Phases in Accountabilities Between the Four Levels


1.6.7   Simplifying one can identify 3 phases during the relevant period. This high-level
        summary does not detail specific variations in the transition years between Phases. The
        transitions often did not occur at exactly the end of calendar years. We have taken the
        dates to 'the nearest calendar year' to describe the phases.

1.6.8   PHASE 1: 1999-2001

        a) Level 1 and its relationship to Level 2: POC and POL were each a `subsidiary' of
           The Post Office Authority, a Statutory Authority, or Consignia plc, a company wholly
           owned by the government. POC and then POL was one of three principal businesses
           within the Post Office Authority and Consignia. POCLs Articles of Association
           provided the POA with powers over POCL, including:

                    Director appointments;

              ii.   Providing information to the POA;

             iii.   To do, or refrain from doing, any specific things asked for by the POABoard.

            In the absence of any other information to the contrary, one would expect the
            Executives of POC to:

                    Agree strategy and goals with POA;

              ii.   'Run their business' within the strategic and financial parameters agreed with
                    POA;

             iii.   Establish the structures, internal controls and culture which will enable POC
                    operations;

             iv.    Seek approval from POA for any matters beyond the levels and scope of its
                    delegated authority; and

              v.    Report on business performance, key risks and any other matters it
                    considered the POA should know.

           One would expect POC Executive to meet all the formal reporting and consultation
           requirements specified in any agreement with the POA, and to maintain sufficient
           informal communication, so that POA was alerted to any major concerns which could
           jeopardise achievement of goals, predicted financial performance or reputation. One
           would not expect POC to have an independent Board.


                                                                                   Page 16 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




           b) Level 2 and its relationship with Level 4: The Post Office Authority was a statutory
              organisation with powers limited to those conferred by statute and overseen by the
              Post Office Minister on behalf of the Government. There was no level 3.

1.6.9   PHASE 2: 2001 — 2012


           a) Level 1 and its relationship to Level 2: POL Executive was directly accountable to
              the Royal Mail Group and during the period, oversight and key decision-making
              responsibility sat variously with Consignia Holdings, The Royal Mail Holdings plc
              (the Holdings) and RMG Board, (which only met for statutory purposes). Group level
              governance is modelled on the corporate governance of commercial companies,
              including

                       A fully functioning Board, a Chair and NEDs;

                 ii.   Group Board committees: including Audit and Risk, Remuneration,
                       Nomination and Pensions;

                iii.   Group Executive, headed by the Group CEO with MDs/CEOs of subsidiaries
                       including POL, and various Group Directors eg Finance, IT, and Strategy;

                iv.    POL adopted new Articles of Association in 2001 which gave Level 2
                       Consignia (Parent) and Level 3 (the Special Shareholder, the Government)
                       powers over POL:

                             -   POL upon request to meet the Parent or the Special Shareholder

                             -   POL was precluded from creating a charge or securing government
                                 securities held by it without written consent of the Parent.


           b) Levels 1& 2 and their relationship to Level 4: Appointments to positions of CEOs,
              Chairs, NEDs and other Directors would normally be appointed with the express
              approval of the SoS, or delegated minister. The PAO of the sponsoring government
              department could choose if they wished to appoint AOs in government owned
              companies within the purview of their department. There would be such other means
              of reporting 'up' and `down' as were specified from time to time, eg an annual letter,
              an annual meeting. The dominant mode of governance was according to the
              Corporate Code (LHS of Annex A), whilst acknowledging aspects of the Code for
              Government departments and entities (RHS of Annex A).


           c) Levels 1&2 and their relationships to Level 3: Various Holding Companies at
              Level 2 stood between POC/L (Level 1) and the Government (Level 4). In 2003 the
              government created the Shareholding Executive (SHEx) as an AGS at Level 3 to
              discharge the government's shareholder duties. Routes for SHEx to exercise formal
              and informal oversight of RMG group, including POL included:

                       Regular meetings;

                 ii.   Regular reports from the Executive on policy matters as well as financial
                       matters;

                iii.   Signing off on strategy;

                                                                                      Page 17 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




               iv.    Recruiting Chair, CEO and NEDs; and

                      New articles of Association created in 2000 and in 2002.


      The dominant mode of governance was according to the corporate code(LHS of Annex A),
      whilst acknowledging aspects of the Code for Government departments and entities(RHS of
      Annex A).

          d) Level 3 and its relationship to Level 4: ShEx was constituted as a part of
             government; its officers were Senior Civil Servants, and the departmental Permanent
             Secretary was the PAO who could choose if they wished to appoint AOs in
             government owned companies within the purview of their department.


1.6.10 PHASE 3: 2013 — 2019


          a) Level 1 and its relationship to Level 2: It was only in the final phase of the relevant
             period (2013-onwards) that POL had its own holding company and thus in a sense
             Levels 1 and 2 became solely concerned with the POB. Through a change in
             corporate structure, POL became a Public Corporation with its own Articles and own
             Board of Directors, with an independent Chair, Independent Non-Executives,
             including a Senior Independent Director and 2 Executives (CEO and CFO). The POL
             Board provided first line of accountability and oversight via:

                      Board committees, including Nominations Committee, Pensions and Senior
                      Remuneration Committee; Audit, Risk and Compliance Committee;

                ii.   The CEO established their own `Executive or Management committee',
                      comprised of CEO and their direct reports, supported by three specific
                      `Executive Committees' as follows:

               iii.   Risk and Compliance Committee, Transformation and Cost Reduction
                      Committee, and Pay and Reward Committee.


          b) Levelsl/ 2 and their relationship to Level 3: Relations with Level 3 (AGS) over
             2013 — 2019 are divided into two periods. The POL Board had a shareholder
             relationship first with ShEx (until 2016) which had a shareholder NED on the Board
             of POL and was located in the government department. In 2016 the government
             shareholding responsibilities were transferred to UKGI, itself a government company
             wholly owned by HM Treasury and no longer part of the Civil Service. ShEx
             continues as in Phase 2 (until 2016) to maintain a relationship with POL including
             oversight of, and through:

                      Risk;

                ii.   Remuneration of senior roles;

               iii.   Quarterly reviews with CEO and CFO to assess performance against
                      government objectives, especially around network sustainability,



                                                                                     Page 18 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




                 iv.    Shareholder NED on the Board; and

                  v.    POL Articles give Government consent rights over appointment and removal
                        of Directors, borrowing, approval and implementation of the strategic plan,
                        disposals and winding up.

                In 2016 oversight passes to UKGI which also had a shareholder NED on Board of
                POL. For 2016-2018, UKGI seems to act as the sole shareholder relationship. In
                2018, an MOU, between BETS and UKGI makes clear that responsibility for Policy
                oversight sits with BEIS and Corporate Governance oversight with UKGL In 2020
                (outside the relevant period) it is encapsulated in a formal framework agreement
                between UKGI and POL (BEIS,2020) This is the first time we have found
                confirmation that the Principal Accounting Officer, the Permanent Secretary of the
                Department of Business Energy and Industrial Strategy, has designated POL Chief
                Executive as an Accountable Officer. Accountability is also identified in terms of

                        Shareholder meetings two times a year, to be attended by CEO and CFO of
                        POL;

                  ii.   POL Board has operational control accountable to the shareholder for the
                        performance of POL, and is responsible for ensuring public access to 11500
                        branches;

                 iii.   The Special Share owned by the SoS gives SoS special rights in relation to
                        meetings, Chair or CEO appointments and removals, the strategic plan,
                        changes in remuneration, strategies, plan, cashflow,

                 iv.    Group plan to be mutually agreed;

                  v.    Articles; and

                 vi.    Governance guidance (both for Corporate and Accountable Officer).

            c) Level 3 and its relationship to Level 4 Whilst ShEx maintains shareholder relations
               the PAO is DTI Permanent Secretary_ From 2016 when UKGI assumes shareholder
               relations, the AO is the CEO of UKGI acting as an intermediary on behalf of DTI
               Permanent Secretary. The UKGI is owned by HM Treasury and has its own
               governance including its own Board, Chair, NEDs and       registers all now
                                                                      ri




                                                                           sk




               ultimately overseen by UKGI Board.



   Conclusion

1.6.11 In conclusion, based on the guidance (Annex A), and the information available to the authors
       as summarised in Annex B and in the text above. From 2001, one would expect governance
       structures in Levels 1 (POB) and Level 2 (OPOD) to be modelled on the corporate
       governance of commercial companies with fully functioning Executive and (where
       applicable) Board Structures including NEDs, Board committees etc, whilst also paying
       regard to aspects derived from their public ownership by the government.




                                                                                      Page 19 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




1.7   Questions Arising from Section 1 Relevant to POHI

      1.7.11 What codes and principles of governance and management did the principal players
             consider they were bound by?

      1.7.12 What variation did the principal players see in the governance of a publicly listed
             company and governance of a publicly owned company? What impact did this have on
             the way they discharged their responsibilities?

      1.7.13 How did the principal players perceive the dual accountability of Accounting or
             Accountable Officers and membership of Corporate Boards? Were there times and issues
             where Conflicts of Interest were manifest and how were they resolved?


  And more particularly,


      1.7.14 How did the various Holding Company boards in Level 2 and the POL Board navigate,
             deal with, and develop the knowledge and understanding to handle the sorts of Conflicts
             of Interest which arc inherent in the ownership of public bodies by government?




                                                                                       Page 20 of 133
                                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                              EXPG0000006




         Accountability

2.1 Principles of Accountability

       2.1.1    Accountability refers to a formal obligation, informal expectation, or voluntary choice to
                accept responsibility and to account for one's actions to a third party. The key governance
                question to be asked of any organisation is: who is accountable for what, to whom?

       2.1.2    Directors of all companies have a wide range of statutory responsibilities under the
                Companies'Act, 2006. Director duties exist in law and are irrespective of the ownership
                of the company. Directors are individually accountable, for exercising judgement and
                bringing their experience and skills to bear, and collectively accountable for the
                performance of their organisation.

2.2 Board Accountabilities Arising from the Corporate Code

       The following summarises the key accountabilities in the Combined Code and identifies any
       deviations for the post office businesses.

       Board as a Whole

       2.2.1    UK custom is to have a unitary Board, in which NEDs are in the majority, and the CEO,
                and possibly other Executive Directors, sit as full voting members of the Board.

       2.2.2    Where the company is a subsidiary of a company with a unitary Board, for example, as
                was the case of POL when it was a subsidiary of RMH, the parent company may choose
                to establish a subsidiary Board and may choose to appoint NINEDs and /or NEDs of that
                board, but is not normally obliged to do so. Should a subsidiary Board be established, the
                Parent will determine its composition, powers and relationship with the parent board.

       2.2.3    The Board is typically accountable to shareholders through annual reports presented at
                AGMs and relevant votes thereon and any nonroutine reports or proposals on which a
                shareholder vote, or approval, is required through a shareholder general meeting or vote.18

       2.2.4    The Board, as a whole, is accountable interalia for:

                a) Providing oversight and overarching Governance, Risk and Compliance (GRC)
                   frameworks;

                b) Nominating the Chair, who will subsequently be elected by a shareholder vote in
                   commercial companies and whose appointment would be approved prior to
                   appointment by ministers in government companies;

                c) Hiring and firing the CEO (Chair and NEDs only);

                d) Approving the strategy;

                e) Approving the corporate risk register,

16
     See Annex A, Sections 1.1, 1.2, 1.6, 1.7a and 1.11 for a selection of guidance on shareholder communication

                                                                                                 Page 21 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




                f) Announcements and proposals for shareholders;

                g) Annual report and annual financial statements;

                h) Executive remuneration policy, schemes, awards and clawbacl5

                i)   Oversight of operational performance, including through reports of `necessary items'
                     (e.g. financial and risk reports), and suggested or requested reports which the Board
                     chooses to review (e.g. staff or customer satisfaction surveys, or reports on major
                     projects);

                j)   Review, approve and scrutinise certain policies which must be held at Board level,
                     e.g. whistleblowing, health and safety, modem slavery; and others which the Board
                     choses to hold at Board level;

                k) Approval of `matters reserved to the Board';

                1)   Note (and enactment) of requirement of any matters which require a shareholder vote,
                     or in the case of public bodies, approval from relevant government minister or
                     Accounting Officer;

                m) Approval of schemes of delegation for decision making: identifying people or
                   positions and scale of items, usually in financial terms;

                n) Approval of Board Committee structures: number, remit, membership, and terms of
                   reference;

                o) Ensuring that Board members have appropriate knowledge, skills and expertise to
                   fully participate in Board and Board Committee work, including arranging for
                   induction of new members and ongoing training of all members;

                p) Approval of nominations for Board Committee membership;

                q) Receipt, discussion and approval of Board Committee reports;

                r) Review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the Board and its members; and

                s) Establishing working groups and other ad hoc arrangements for specific purposes and
                   projects, where the Board considers their oversight responsibilities need special
                   focus.19

       Board Committees

       2.2.5    Boards will establish several committees, to which it will delegate certain responsibilities.
                The following Board Committees are normally constituted

                     a) Audit committee (BAC) (a requirement of the Corporate Code);


19   See Annex A, Sections 1.1-1.19 and 2.3, 2.4, and 2.13.

                                                                                             Page 22 of 133
                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




            b) Remuneration committee (BRemC) to determine remuneration of Senior
               Executives (a requirement of the code);

            c) Nominations committee to nominate people to be Board members and Board
               Committee members; and

            d) Risk committee (BRC) required by regulation in financial institutions, voluntary
               for non-financial institutions. Where there is no BRC, Board risk responsibilities
               are usually handled through a combined Audit and Risk Committee.

2.2.6   Other Board Committees may be approved from time to time for example, Environmental
        and Social Responsibility, Ethics, Compliance committees.

2.2.7   Whatever the board committee structure, the Board should pay attention to ensure
        coverage of key areas for the business and to avoid confusing `duplication' or `gaps'
        between committees.

2.2.8   The terms of reference (including powers and delegated authority) and membership for
        each Board Committee should be published on the company website.

2.2.9   The Chair with support of Company Secretary is responsible for ensuring all committees
        have sufficient support to conduct their business effectively, e.g. with timely and
        appropriate papers and minutes.

2.2.10 Each committee should,
                                inter




                                        alia:




            a) Report to the Board on the nature and content of discussion, on
               recommendations, and on actions to be taken;

            b) Oversee any investigation of activities which are within its terms of reference

            c) Work and liaise as necessary with other Board Committees to maintain links and
               manage overlaps between Board Committee responsibilities;

            d) Ensure that each committee should have full knowledge of work of other
               committees through reports to the Board and, if possible, by appointing at least
               one member of a committee to each of the other committees,

            e) Committee Chairs should seek engagement with shareholders on significant
               matters related to the committee's areas of responsibility at AGMs and other
               times;

            f) Ensure a periodic evaluation of the committee's performance is carried out

            g) At least annually, review its constitution and terms of reference to ensure it is
               operating effectively, and recommend any changes it considers necessary to the
               Board for approval; and

            h) Ensure minutes of all Board Committees, once approved by the committee, are
               made available to all members of the Board.


                                                                                   Page 23 of 133
                                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




       2.2.11 Committees may:

                    a) Request the attendance of any employee at a meeting of the committee and/or
                       seek any information it requires from any employee of the company to perform
                       its duties; and

                    b) Obtain, at the company's expense, independent legal or other professional advice
                       on any matter within its terms of reference if it believes it necessary to do so.

       2.2.12 The effectiveness of the Board Committee structure depends                           on:




                                                                                    inter




                                                                                            alia
                    a) Clarity of specific terms of reference and how to handle inter-committee
                       interests; and

                    b) Relationships and communications: ensuring open two-way communications
                       and good relationships between the Board Chair, Board Committee Chairs, NEDs
                       and the CEO. 20

       2.2.13 Specific responsibilities of the Board Audit Committee are discussed in Section 3, Board
              Risk Committee in Section 4 and Remuneration Committee briefly in Section 8.4:
              Culture.

       Chair of the Board

       2.2.14 Chairs are accountable to those who appoint them (shareholders in listed companies or
              ministers in government owned organisations).

       2.2.15 On appointment Chairs will be declared either: Independent (i.e., having played no
              executive part in the company or its owner prior to appointment) orNon-Independent
              (i.e., having played an executive part in the company or its owner prior to appointment).

       2.2.16 Once the Chair has taken up office their independent status may change. As reflected in
              their letter of appointment, they may become:

                    a) Non-Executive and still Independent, as they have no part in the operations of the
                       company;

                    b) Non-Executive (but not Independent); and

                    c) Executive, where they take explicit Executive responsibility, and the named
                       Senior Executive (normally CEO or MD) has a subordinate executive
                       accountability to the Chair).


       2.2.17 Chairs are accountable for running of the Board, i.e. for ensuring that the Board:

                    a) Through its conduct of business, fulfils its accountabilities in a timely and
                       effective way;


20   See Annex A, Sections 1.7a, 1.13, 1.18, 1.9a, 2.3 and 2.4 for a guidance on roles

                                                                                                         Page 24 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                EXPG0000006




            b) Maintains a balance between its strategic responsibilities and oversight of
               operational matters, for which the Executive is responsible;

            c) Maintains a balance between oversight and scrutiny, on the one side and support
               of the Executive team on the other. This is especially important in determining
               how the Board handles 'bad news' or crises (see Sections: 6 Whistle Blowing, 8.4
               Culture and 8.5 Communications);

            d) Reviews its effectiveness, including the effectiveness of individual directors and
               takes account of such reviews in proposing changes to the conduct and culture of
               Board meetings;

            e) Ensures there is active succession planning for CEO, and with the CEO, their
               Executive Board colleagues, all other Board members ie. SID, INEDs, and
               where applicable NINEDs. However in cases like the Post Office Businesses,
               NINEDs will be appointed by the owner/oversight body or sponsoring
               government department and the Chair may have little say in their appointmentk
               and

            f) With the Company Secretary, ensuring that movement on and off the Board is
               accompanied by appropriate induction (training and familiarisation with duties of
               Board membership and company strategy, operations and risks) and exit
               (confidentiality, equipment, access controls) procedures.

2.2.18 The Chair plays a vital part in building trusting, productive relationships within the Board
       and particularly with the CEO, the CEO's Executive team and the NEDs.

2.2.19 The Chair/CEO relationship is especially important. It includes formal aspects, e.g:

            a) Leading on the hiring and, if so determined by the Board, firing of the CEO;

            b) Conducting CEO annual appraisals; and

            c) Making recommendations, or providing comment, on CEO remuneration and
               reward.

2.2.20 And informal aspects, e.g:

            a) Being a `sounding board' for ideas;

            b) Responding to requests for advice;

            c) Offering advice; and

            d) Giving and receiving feedback on any aspect of individual and corporate
               performance.

2.2.21 Being supportive, does not mean condoning bad behaviour or major errors. It does mean
       listening, not jumping to blame, whilst fully scrutinising reports and events, and ensuring
       clear `follow up' reporting and scrutiny.


                                                                                    Page 25 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                              EXPG0000006




2.2.22 Similar relationships may characterise the Chair's relationship with members of the
       CEO's Senior Executive team. If Executives are members of a unitary Board, they have
       individual responsibilities as Board members and (technically) an independent
       relationship with the Chair and other members. They also have Executive responsibilities
       for which they are accountable to the CEO as their operational `boss'. If Senior
       Executives are not members of the Board, their accountability is singly to the CEO.
       Nonetheless the Chair, with the support of the CEO, will probably seek to establish good
       informal relationships with other senior executives.

2.2.23 The Chair's relationship with NEDs as individuals, and as an informal collective, should
       be open and productive. Some groups of NEDs like to meet with the Chair without the
       Executive Directors present as a matter of course, so that when crises or matters of great
       confidentiality arise, and the Chair or a NED decides they cannot or should not be shared
       with the whole Board, `NED-only' slots are already a normal part of Board life.

2.2.24 `NED-only' sessions, whether routine or by exception, can be sources of tension and
       suspicion between the Executive and the NEDs; the Chair's role in mediating this
       relationship and aiming to keep it open and productive is important.

2.2.25 Depending on remuneration and evaluation policies and procedures and the remit of the
       remuneration committee, the Chair and NEDs may meet at least annually to consider and
       decide:

            a) The evaluation of CEO performance;

            b) The setting of CEO objectives for the next year; and

            c) Approval of the CEO remuneration proposals from the Remuneration Committee.

2.2.26 At times of CEO succession, the Chair and NEDs are likely to meet to consider the
       essential and desirable specifications for the next incumbent, and to be involved as agreed
       in the search, selection and appointment process.

2.2.27 The Chair will also

            a) Consult with NEDs on committee membership, ensuring they have the skills,
               induction and training which will enable committee members to be effective;

            b) Conduct reviews of individual NED performance and provide feedback on areas
               for development;

            c) Ensure relationships are sustained with representatives of any `intermediate'
               ownership or oversight entity (e.g. RMH, UKGI, Government department)
               including discussing appointments and expectations ofNINEDS to serve on the
               Board; and

            d) Cooperate with the SID in an annual evaluation of the Chair's performance and,
               expect and participate in feedback from that evaluation.

2.2.28 The debate about how much time Chairs should give to the Board and whether they can
       Chair more than one Board has swung around over the relevant period. Between 2003 —

                                                                                   Page 26 of 133
                                                                                                               EXP00000006
                                                                                                           EXPG0000006




               2008 the guidance restricted Chairs of FTSE 100 companies to chairing no more than one
               FTSE 100 Board. The Chair, like all Board members must assure the Board that they have
               sufficient time to be actively engaged in their Board roles.21

       Non-Executive Director

       2.2.29 NEDs do not have any responsibility in day-to-day operations of the company. They
              receive remuneration at agreed levels for their Board membership, but not as employees
              of the entity. They fall into 2 groups:

                   a) INEDs are Independent of any part of the operations including being independent
                      of any Executive or Board responsibility in any oversight or ownership entity.
                      They are accountable to the Board and the owners for:

                                   Bringing an independent perspective to the Board; and

                          ii.      Bringing specialist relevant experience/expertise to the Board


                   b)   NINEDs: May be EITHER:

                                   Nominated by shareholders, with whom they have some special
                                   relationship, e.g. through employment or as special representatives. The
                                   nominating shareholder expects they will:

                                         -   Keep the shareholder regularly informed about matters of
                                             concern;

                                         -   Keep the shareholder in touch with what is going on in the
                                             business;

                                         -   Consult with the shareholder prior to major decisions;

                                         -   Create and sustain 2-way communication channels between the
                                             Board (especially Chair and CEO) and the shareholder; and

                                         -   Like their INED colleagues, bring their own specialist relevant
                                             experience/expertise to the Board.
                                   OR
                          ii.      Have previously held executive positions in the entity or its owner in the
                                   recent past. Nonetheless, the Board judges that their special expertise,
                                   experience or networks are of such value that they should be retained in a
                                   Non-Executive capacity. Their appointment would require `explanation'
                                   to shareholders as it would not comply with the code, which indicates
                                   that their very involvement in the operations of the company may cloud
                                   their views on what is in the best future interest of the company. For
                                   example, in the recent past, they are likely to have been in part architects
                                   of the strategy and responsible executives in operational matters which
                                   will come under board scrutiny.

21
     See Annex A, Sections 1.10.

                                                                                               Page 27 of 133
                                                                                                              EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




       Senior Independent Director

       2.2.30 Since Hampel (1998), it has been normal for the Chair to consult with NEDs about
              selecting a NED to serve as SID, to be accountable to shareholders and the Board, for.

                   a) Stepping into Chair role in the Chair's absence;

                   b) Convening the nominating process for the `next' Chair,

                   c) Convening the process for evaluating the Chair's performance;

                    d) Ensuring an avenue `independent' of the Chair, for representatives of
                       shareholders/owner/oversight entities to raise concerns about the Chair or the
                       company;

                    e) Working with the Chair to develop/oversee the process of Board evaluation;

                    f) Acting informally as a `convenor' of the NEDs if they wish to raise issues with
                       the Chair; and

                   g) Acting informally for any Board member to raise concerns about the conduct of
                      business of the Board.22

       Chief Executive Officer

       2.2.31 The CEO is accountable to the Board for:

                   a) Bringing forward strategic proposals;

                   b) Running the Company and it's business, providing operational leadership,
                      management and oversight of all functions, departments and delegations;

                    c) Creating an organisation structure, and as appropriate restructure, which is fit for
                       purpose for the business, reflecting strategy, priorities and risks, so that
                       appropriate operational oversight and direct management is secured and
                       maintained;

                    d) Ensuring an organisation structure in which all employees know to whom they
                       are accountable, with ultimate Executive accountability resting with the CEO;

                    e) Sharing plans for Senior Executive succession planning;

                    f) Consulting or informing the Board on Senior Executive appointments at one level
                       down from the Board;

                   g) Ensuring the financial viability of the business and reporting deviations from
                      plan;


22
     See Annex A, Sections 1.4a.

                                                                                             Page 28 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




                  h) Active management and reporting of the corporate risk registei in light of
                     changing circumstances;

                  i)   Ensuring crisis and risk mitigation and contingency plans are up to date and can
                       be realistically deployed;

                  j)   Ensuring good communications with the Board about operational matters,
                       through regular and exceptional reporting and follow up;

                  k) Meeting expectations about the communication (receipt and supply) of real, or
                     potential, bad news;

                 1)    Setting and living the culture and values which guide behaviour in the
                       organisation. In this matter, the CEO's role is crucial but not solo, it is much
                       influenced by their experience of relations with the Chair and their observations
                       of behaviour within the Board (see Section 8.3 Culture);

                  m) Playing their part in building open trusting relationships within the Board; and

                  n) Paying close attention to communications within the organisation (see Section
                     8.5) and with stakeholders(see Section 7).23

    Other Executive Board Members (e.g. CFO, COO, CRO)

     2.2.32 The CEO is accountable to the Board for: The number and remit of additional Executive
            Directors on the Board is a matter for the CEO to agree with the Chair and Board. If
            appointed, they share in generic Board membership duties and powers and (technically)
            have an independent relationship with the Chair and other members. They also have
            Executive accountabilities directly to the CEO as their operational `boss'. If Senior
            Executives are not members of the Board, their accountability is singly to the CEO.

    Company Secretary

     2.2.33. A Company Secretary is an officer who is appointed by the company's directors to advise
             the board on all governance matters and codes24. They will normally seek to ensure
             compliance with the company's legal obligations. Their accountability is to the Board
             and the Chair to ensure that all appropriate governance measures are brought to the
             Board's attention. As regards the functioning of the Board, they are technically
             independent of the CEO, and accountable to the Chair. However, as an Executive
             colleague (and in a sense subordinate to the CEO) they need a very good working
             relationship with the CEO, who is likely to be very influential in their relationship.


     2.2.34 A Company Secretary's accountabilities normally include:


                  a) Maintaining the company's statutory books, including registers of directors and
                     shareholders;


23 See Annex A, Sections 1.2, 1.4b, 1.7a and 1.11, 1.12 for role of the CEO in the board
24 See Annex A, Institute of Directors, 2018 (Annex E)

                                                                                           Page 29 of 133
                                                                                                        EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




               b) Working with Chair to ensure that all Board members are aware of their duties
                  and powers;
               c) Providing secretarial services to the Board and all its committees including
                  arranging meetings, minuting meetings,
               d) Working with the Chair on the Board agenda; and
               e) Arranging participation of non-Board members for specific items in Board
                  discussions (including handling sight of relevant minutes, timing ofBoard
                  appearances, follow up).



2.3 The Role of the Shareholder

   2.3.1   Shareholders should be the quiet drivers of governance. Technically they are all powerful
           in that it is they who elect (or appoint, in government owned companies) the Board who
           will approve the strategy and oversee operations to a plan which will have been approved
           by the shareholders at the AGM, or by some other means in Government owned
           companies e.g. via an Annual Letter or Review.

   2.3.2   In publicly listed companies, the shareholder who is dissatisfied with the company's
           performance, or has no faith in the strategy, or considers the risks to the business are
           outside their own risk appetite, can consider four options.

   2.3.3   The first is to have informal discussions with the Chair or SID, to express their disquiet
           and seek to influence the Board in its proposals about Board membership, strategy,
           operational oversight and financial plan. This is available to the government as
           shareholder, although there is always sensitivity about undue political influence and is
           one reason why the `intermediate' role of an oversight/ownership body is attractive to
           governments. Nonetheless where the government is the shareholder, it should understand
           and enact such means as it can, in order to ensure its views are known.

   2.3.4   The second is to cast their votes against the recommendations of the Board for the
           appointment of the Chair or other Board members, thus voting to change the Chair, Non-
           Executive or Executive members of the Board.

   2.3.5   The third is casting their votes against other recommendations of the Board, e.g. voting
           against the annual report, voting against accepting the accounts, voting against the
           remuneration report or voting against any other motions put before the AGM, or EGM.

   2.3.6   The Fourth, one might say, ultimate, option is to sell the shares. This is not one whichis
           likely to be undertaken lightly, as it may impact the company's share price and business
           viability. But it is always an option. This option is not readily available to the government
           as the sole shareholder. There are of course instances where a publicly owned company is
           sold through a public listing or private sale. This requires the business to be able to
           demonstrate it could survive, or even thrive in the commercial space. Furthermore, where
           the company is considered to provide a public service, a possible sale becomes a major
           political matter with arguments arising , for example, over the safeguarding of citizens'
           access to public services. For these reasons, one could argue that the shares the
           government holds are much more `sticky' than those held by shareholders of publicly
           listed companies, and that this should incline the government, as shareholder, to be even



                                                                                         Page 30 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




             stronger in its shareholder role in holding the Board of government companies to account
             for their current performance and future strategy.25


2.4 The Role of the Executive (CEO and Senior Leadership Team)

    2.4.1    In listed companies, where corporate governance codes unequivocally apply, the CEO
             will (and possibly other Executives may) be part of the Unitary Board. In addition to their
             Board responsibilities, they crucially have individual Executive responsibilities and
             accountabilities to run the business of the company.

    2.4.2    These executive responsibilities include proposing strategy to the Board, establishing
             structures, internal controls, communication networks and culture within the company to
             enable it to meet its strategic goals, including maintaining oversight of all its business
             lines and holding all management lines to account for their performance, including their
             risk management.

    2.4.3    Executives typically make choices about the type of structure they adopt on the basis that
             they believe some forms are more appropriate (a better fit) for some types of work,
             bearing in mind the history, culture and performance of their business.

    2.4.4    By way of illustration, one can identify some basic choices about distinct and yet
             interactive organising principles. For example, placing the organisation on a scale of
             centralisation to decentralisation for executive action and decision making, that is, the
             extent to which the organisation is hierarchical/pyramidal or `flatter'.

    2.4.5    The flatter the organisation, the more there is dependence on the knowledgeability and
             capability of people in the organisation to act relatively autonomously, in situations for
             example where there is a need for timely, innovative solutions to problems.

    2.4.6    Another choice would be the relative dominance in executive reporting lines and
             decision-making structures given to product lines, functions, or major projects.

    2.4.7    There is no one universal right way to organise; restructures occur over time, fashions
             change and there is often a blend of different principles. It is the Executive's job to
             determine at any time, the structure, systems and processes which they consider best
             enables them to achieve the organisation's goals and strategy, given history, culture,
             performance and stakeholder pressures.

    2.4.8    CEOs often establish their own `Executive Committee' (or similarly named grouping)
             which constitutes their Senior Executive Leadership team of first line reports. The
             Executive Committee would normally sit at the apex of lines of management
             accountability throughout the business. Its membership and terms of reference are
             normally listed on a company's website.

    2.4.9    Where the company is a subsidiary of a company with an independent Board, as in the
             case of POC and POL when it was a subsidiary of RMH, the Executive of the subsidiary
             is still expected to 'run' the subsidiary company in ways, and within limits, given by the
             Board of the parent company and, if it exists, the board of the subsidiary company.

25 See Annex A, Sections 1.2, 1.6, 1.7a and 1.11.

                                                                                          Page 31 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




       2.4.10 Where there is no Board with NEDs, in situations where there are no external
              shareholders, or the shareholders that own unlisted stock in the company do not wish to
              have independent representation on a Board, the appointed or self-appointed Executives
              are still required to run the company in accordance with relevant laws and regulations.

       2.4.11 In summary one may say that Executives have responsibilities and accountabilities to 'run
              their businesses' whatever the ownership. Variation in ownership impacts reporting and
              oversight, but not the basic requirement to 'run the company' 26


2.5 Strategy: The Heart of Board and Executive Accountability

       2.5.1   Strategy provides the framework for determining future direction, evaluating past
               performance, and determining the scale and nature of business operations.

       2.5.2   The Board's role is to discuss, approve, review and evaluate the company strategy and the
               underlying business model.

       2.5.3   The Executive's role is the operational management of company resources to deliver the
               business plan and corporate strategy. It is also accountable for providing data which will
               enable the Board to oversee the Executive's operational management of the business.

       2.5.4   The Shareholder's role is to approve (or not) the Board recommended strategy, as it is put
               as part of the narrative reporting in the Annual Report, and as it is reflected in the
               financial and risk statements and any other recommendations from the Board.

       Approval by the Board

       2.5.5   The Board's process for approving strategy is normally undertaken in the context of sets
               of papers provided by the Executive, which will include commentary on past and present
               business context and performance, and proposals looking out 3-5 years.

       2.5.6   A short-term business plan and annual budget for the next financial year is normally the
               most granular part of future plans. It is the delivery of this 1-year business plan and
               budget to which the Executive will be specifically held to account within any one year.

       2.5.7   The 3-5-year outlook provides a view on the direction of travel and an early look at
               operational demands. Within the forward plan, the Executive would normally provide an
               account of present and past performance, including:

                    a) Review of business performance (financial and non-financial), having regard to
                       agreed strategic plans and goals;

                   b) Review of business landscape (including competitors, stakeholders, customers,
                      regulators), to provide foundations of a SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses,
                      Opportunities and Threats) analysis, which leads inter alia to a



26
     See Annex A, Sections 1.1.

                                                                                           Page 32 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




            c) Review of Risks (in terms of probability and degree and direction of impact) and
               Mitigants; and

            d) Review of internal capabilities (workforce skills, organisation structure, current
               technology).

2.5.8   And a summary of future plans, including:

            a) Plans for the business (areas for growth, innovation, retrenchment, exit, entrance)
               and associated risks;

            b) Resourcing plans (for workforce, skills, technology, business as usual structure,
               major project management structure) to deliver the plans for the business, within
               the parameters of:

            c) Financial plans (income and expenditure); and

            d) Capital plans for major investment, including any major projects which are
               materially significant for the business.



2.5.9   The Executive also need to assure the Board that:

            a) They can provide sound progress data, giving line of sight to key risks and
               operational performance;

            b) The company has the financial resources and operational capabilities (e.g.
               structures, skills, contracts) required to realise the strategy, including sourcing
               any significant technical or other specialist knowledge, systems and equipment
               from third party contractors; and

            c) Where third party contractors are key to the strategy, the contract is fit for
               business purpose, and they have a management approach to contract delivery
               which is aligned with the delivery of strategic plans: on time, within budget and
               to the required costs.

Reporting and Review

2.5.10 The Board will agree the frequency and nature of reports, through which the Executive
       will keep the Board informed of progress with realising the strategy.

2.5.11 This is normally done annually, often facilitated by a `Board away day', in which there
       will be free wide-ranging discussion without any of the `normal' operational agenda
       items. Should the company hit serious unanticipated problems or opportunities which
       require a mid-year reappraisal of the strategy, or a revision of the current plan, additional
       sessions for strategy review and business re-planning should be incorporated into the
       Board's meeting schedule.

Reporting Performance



                                                                                      Page 33 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




   2.5.12 Reporting progress against strategic targets and plan objectives is the Board's consistent
          source of knowledge about in-year business operations, performance, and risks. Where
          unexpected /unplanned serious operational matters arise which threaten the delivery of
          strategic and operational plans (interalia because of crystallisation of financial or
          reputational risk), key questions are:

               a) When and how did the CEO and Senior Executive team become aware of the
                  issue, how did they handle the emerging problems and crucially when and if the
                  CEO informed the Chair, and when and if the Chair (or CEO) informed the
                  Board; and

               b) What are the reasons and detail of any required replan, and in particular, does the
                  Board consider the Executive should have foreseen the obstacles which are now
                  appearing, and are they capable of rectifying them?

   Judgement, Culture and Communication

   2.5.13 Statements of Board accountability for the development, approval and oversight of
          strategy and Executive accountability for the operational management of the company to
          realise that strategy, are clear in governance codes and in many companies' annual
          reports. However, what actually happens in any organisation is that the statements will be
          understood and enacted by the players in various ways, which will be much influenced by
          the culture and communication landscape which is both a legacy of the past and the
          ongoing creation of current players, (see Sections 8.4 Culture and 8.5 Communications).


2.6 Questions Arising from Section 2 Relevant to POHI



   NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and managementfor the organisations which
   ran and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in
   the chronology.

   2.6.1   On matters of Strategy, what were the mechanisms for reporting and feedback in the
           chain of oversight and ownership described in Annex B, e.g., the use of Annual Reports,
           AGMs, Regular and ad hoc meetings, Regular reports, Annual appraisals? With what
           consequences and follow up?

   2.6.2   On matters of Operations, what were the mechanisms for reporting and feedback in the
           chain of oversight and ownership described in Annex B, e.g., the use of Annual Reports,
           AGMs, Regular and ad hoc meetings, Regular reports, Annual appraisals? With what
           consequences and follow up?




   Particular Aspects of POC/L Structure



                                                                                       Page 34 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                               EXPG0000006




2.6.3   Where did oversight of, and accountability for, the investigations and prosecution
        functions lie? How was this accountability demonstrated?

2.6.4   Where did oversight of, and accountability for, the contractual and personnel management
        of SPMs lie? How was this accountability demonstrated?

2.6.5   Where did oversight of, and accountability for, the response to the growing body of
        evidence that there were faults in Horizon system which made its records unreliable, lie?




                                                                                   Page 35 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




3      Monitoring and Audit

3.1 Introduction

       3.1.1    Requirements for monitoring and audit are embedded in company law and regulation and
                custom and practice. Executives are required and expected to monitor and report on the
                financial flows in and out of the company, including verifiable data to show such tlings
                as their tax liabilities and payments, their turnover, allowable expenses and profit- in
                simple terms how they have acquired and spent money.

       3.1.2    As the complexity of a business grows and ownership structures provide for the
                separation of ownership and control. The way Executives need to account for their
                finances becomes more complex, and subject to more regulation, which becomes both
                more specific and extensive. Additional requirements for reporting non-financial aspects
                of the company's operation also develop over time, for example with regard to money
                laundering, equality, and modem slavery.

       3.1.3    Monitoring and audit have become part of the normal functions expected in all
                companies. The perspective is predominantly one of looking back, accounting with clear
                data, for what has happened in the last financial year and detailing compliance with legal
                requirements. An underlying assumption is that by requiring accounting for past
                performance, one inculcates behaviours which ensure compliance in the present.

       3.1.4    As requirements for Boards and Executives to assess risks to the company, and internal
                operational, as well as strategic, imperatives to look forward, became evident, the work of
                audit expands to include requirements to assess risk, for example, confirming the `going
                concern' requirement, solvency and liquidity risk and non-financial risk (Financial
                Reporting Council, 2009, Financial Reporting Council, 2016a, 2016b) and
                recommendations to increase transparency with stakeholders.27

       3.1.5    This section concentrates on monitoring and audit. It deals with risk in so far as Audit has
                responsibilities for reporting and assurance of risk. Risk management saw significant
                developments during the relevant period, and these are the subject of section 4.


3.2 Guidance on Monitoring and Audit in Public and Private Bodies

       Guidance on Corporate Monitoring and Audit

       3.2.1    Guidance on corporate monitoring and audit has developed over time

       3.2.2    Early codes focused on audit and in 2002, the FRC established a committee headed by Sir
                Robert Smith (Smith, R, 2003) which developed the existing guidance for audit
                committees. The purpose of the audit committee was to:
                a) Monitor the integrity of the accounts.



21   See Annex A, Section 1.4b, 1.5, 1.7a, 1.7b, 1.11 a, and 1.17

                                                                                             Page 36 of 133
                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




        b) Review internal financial control and risk management systems.

        c) Monitor and review effectiveness of internal audit; where there is no such function
           there should be an annual review of the need for this.

        d) Recommend to the board the appointment of the external auditor; approve auditors'
           remuneration and terms of engagement.

        e) Monitor external auditors' independence, objectivity and effectiveness.

        f) Develop and implement policy regarding use of external auditor to supply non-audit
           services.

        g) Ensure that appropriate plans are in place for the audit.

        h) Review the external auditors' findings.

        i) Review significant financial reporting issues and judgements involved in the
           preparation of:
               o Annual accounts;
               o Interim accounts;
               o Preliminary announcements;
               o Other formal statements.
        j) Review clarity and completeness of disclosures in the annual accounts.

        k) Where the audit committee has concerns about any issues within its remit it should
           refer these to the board.


3.2.3   The Combined Codes (1998, 2003) noted that the Board is entrusted to uphold 3 core
        principles. Boards should:

        a) Present a balanced and understandable assessment of the company's position and
           prospects;

        b) Maintain a sound system of internal control to safeguard shareholders' investment
           and the company's assets; and

        c) Establish formal and transparent arrangements for considering how they should apply
           the financial reporting and internal control principles and for maintaining an
           appropriate relationship with the company's auditors.

3.2.4   The Turnbull (1999) Guidance provided the original framework for overseeing internal
        control and risk management systems.


3.2.5   In 2005 the Turnbull Guidance was updated as 'Internal Control: Guidance for Directors
        on the Combined Code' (FRC 2005).




                                                                                     Page 37 of 133
                                                                                                        EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




     3.2.6   In 2014, the FRC's Risk Guidance28 combined Turnbull29 and Going Concern; Liquidity
             Risk: Guidance for Directors of UK Companies (FRC 2014a).30 It superseded the
             Guidance for Directors of Listed Companies that was issued in 1994. The 2014 guidance
             reflects a stronger role for the Board on internal controls, driven by its strategic
             responsibility for risk.

     3.2.7   The Board must ask itself: what risks face the organisation? And then two further
             questions follow: which controls are significant? How do we assure ourselves on these
             controls? The Board should now provide absolute clarity on where responsibility for
             providing and assuring internal controls sit (i.e. with risk or audit committee).

     3.2.8   In some companies, assurance on internal controls will be provided by internal audit

     3.2.9   Some companies develop assurance maps to identify the different sources of information
             around the key risks and controls.

     3.2.10 In 2016 FRC31 gives specific guidance in relation to Group Audit (i.e. where there is a
            group parent and subsidiary companies), indicating it will usually be necessary for the
            audit committee of the parent company to review issues that relate to particular
            subsidiaries or activities within the group (FRC 2016a).

     3.2.11 The 2019 Brydon review32 into the quality and effectiveness of audit contributed to the
            Government's commission on restoring trust in governance (Restoring Trust in Audit and
            Corporate Governance, Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 2022
            They highlight that a stronger controls framework was required to help directors take
            control of their own internal controls, especially key elements of assurance, risk and
            fraud.

     Government Guidance on Auditing Public Money

     3.2.12 The chronology on the right-hand side of Annex A deals with accountability for public
            money. However, in 2001 POL became a subsidiary company within Consignia, which
            subsequently became RMH, as shown in the more detailed chronology in Annex B. Since
            2001 Corporate Governance guidelines have been dominant, and guidance on auditing
            Public Money has been secondary.

     3.2.13 The auditing of public money and efficient use of `taxpayer' resources is an important
            part of the accountable relations in public bodies. Accountability for public money is
            maintained at every level all the way up to Parliament thus:

                 a) All public bodies have a board which is usually chaired by a Non-Executive
                    director with significant board experience (Accountability to Parliament for
                    taxpayers' money, NAO, 2016);




28
   See Annex A, Section 1.14.
29
   See Annex A, Section 1.5.
   See Annex A, Section 1.15.
 o




31
   See Annex A, Section 1.17.
32
   See Annex A, Section 1.19.

                                                                                        Page 38 of 133
                                                                                                              EXP00000006
                                                                                                           EXPG0000006




                  b) A public body's audit and risk assurance committee (ARAC) is responsible for
                     assuring the Board as to the standard of governance and risk management;

                  c) Some Executives agencies, that are more closely aligned with their sponsor
                     department, may have a purely Executives Board, without NEDs, and without
                     their own ARAC, in which case the ARAC of the sponsor department will
                     provide the agency with assurance on standard of governance and risk
                     management;

                  d) While ministers must account to parliament for the performance and "overall
                     effectiveness and efficiency" of the public body, the Principal Accounting Officer
                     (normally the departmental permanent secretary) is accountable for the
                     management of public money delegated to the department, including spending by
                     its public bodies;

                  e) The Accounting Officer (AO) in the Central Department (usually the Permanent
                     Secretary) will be held to account by Parliament sometimes directly, or
                     alternatively through an intermediary like the Public Accounts Office;

                  f) HM Treasury (2012, 2018) outlines the expectations and duties ofAOs in its
                     guidance on Managing Public Money, including the principles underpinning the
                     role;

                  g) In Arm Length Bodies and other Executing Agencies, it is traditionally the Chief
                     Executives who is the Accountable Officer; and
                     https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/article/explainer/public-bodies-
                     scrutiny-accountability

                  h) While the ultimate responsibility lies with those in the sponsor department, public
                     body leaders can be called to account to parliament, usually through the relevant
                     select committee, for their decisions and are "personally responsible and
                     accountable to Parliament for the use of public money" (Institute for
                     Government, 2022).

    3.2.14 In this way, a virtual chain of accountability for public money ideally runs all the way up
           to Parliament from executing agencies.

    3.2.15 The Permanent Secretary for DTI was the Accountable Officer whilst ShareEx was
           performing shareholder functions within DTI; the Chief Executives for UKGI became the
           Accountable Officer on behalf of DTI when UKGI replaced ShEx.

    3.2.16 The ARAC in central government departments supports the Accountable Officer in audit,
           risk and internal controls. The scope of the ARAC committee and their relation to audit is
           closely modelled on the corporate requirements on companies for their Annual Report.

    3.2.17 The ARAC Chair has a pivotal role in keeping a close eye on how well the system of
           internal control, governance and audit is working. Because not all work happens in
           committees, the ARAC Chair should meet regularly, bilaterally, with the Accounting
           Officer, Director of Finance, the head of Internal Audit and the External Auditor.33

33 See Annex A, Sections 2.2a, 2.3, 2.4, 2.10a and 2.13 for guidance on audit in public bodies

                                                                                                 Page 39 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                           EXPG0000006




3.3 Board Audit Committee (BAC)

       Functions and Duties of BAC

       3.3.1   Establishment: The Code states that Boards should appoint an audit committee with
               clear Terms of Reference.

       3.3.2   BAC Membership: Members are appointed by the Board to be a minimum of three
               independent Non-Executives Directors (two for smaller companies). Since 2018, there
               should be at least one member with recent and relevant financial experience. The audit
               committee as a whole should have competence, relevant to the sector in which the
               company operates.

       3.3.3   With the emergence of risk as a major governance consideration in 2010 (FRC 2010),31
               BACs often specifically included risk in their title and Terms of Reference, unless and
               until, a separate BRC is established. (Risk management is the subject of section 4,
               although there is inevitably some overlap in this section).

       3.3.4   Boards should determine and publish the BAC Terms of Reference on its website. Many
               BAC duties are prescribed, others may be added by the Board. Some duties required of
               the Board, which interact with monitoring and audit, may be carried out by another Board
               committee. BAC Duties normally include:

                   a) Financial Reporting: Monitor and approve all financial statements, review and
                      report to the Board on significant financial reporting issues and judgements
                      contained in those statements, having regard to matters communicated to it by the
                      external or internal auditor, paying attention to:

                                  The clarity and completeness of disclosures and the context in which
                                  statements are made;

                          ii.     All material information presented with the financial statements,
                                  including the strategic report and the corporate governance statements
                                  relating to the audit and to risk management.

                   b) Narrative Reporting: Where requested by the Board, the committee should
                      review the content of the Annual Report and Accounts and advise the Board on
                      whether, taken as a whole, it is fair, balanced and understandable, and provides
                      the information necessary for shareholders to assess the company's performance,
                      business model and strategy and, whether it informs the Board's statement in the
                      annual report on these matters.


                   c) Internal controls and risk management systems (unless these are specifically
                      the remit of a BRC or are matters reserved for the Board).




34   See Annex A, Section 1.12.

                                                                                            Page 40 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




                        Review the company's internal financial controls systems that identify,
                        assess, manage and monitor financial risks, and other internal control and
                        risk management systems;

                  ii.   Review and approve the statements to be included in the Annual Report
                        concerning internal control, risk management, including the assessment
                        of principal risks and emerging risks, and the viability statement.

           d) Compliance: Make arrangements to ensure compliance with regulations,
              including speaking-up (whistle blowing), fraud, and the Modern Slavery Act,
              where these are not the responsibility of the BRC.

                With regard to whistleblowing, new rules were issued by the Prudential
                Regulation Authority (PRA) and Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in 2016.
                These require affected firms to assign responsibilities to a Non-Executive
                Director to be its whistleblowers' champion (part ofNon-Executives' supervising
                role and the Board's collective responsibilities). That champion needs to be in
                good communications with Chair of the BAC or BRC, whichever already has a
                responsibility on this matter (see section 6).

           e) Internal Audit:

                        Monitor and review the internal audit function, and assure itself of the
                        competence and independence of IA;

                  ii.   Agree an annual work plan for IA;

                 iii.   Receive interim and final reports on IA investigations and monitor
                        required management actions for remediation/ improvement against their
                        due dates; and

                 iv.    Annually to consider, where there is no internal audit function, whether
                        there is a need for one.




           f)   External Audit:

                        Recommend the appointment or replacement of external auditors and
                        review the effectiveness of their work;

                  ii.   Develop and implement policy on the use of the auditors for non-audit
                        services; and

                 iii.   Report in the annual report how the BAC has assessed the effectiveness
                        of the external audit process; the approach taken to the appointment and
                        reappointment of the external auditor; and the information on the length
                        of tenure of the current audit firm and when a tender was last conducted.

3.3.5   In performing their duties in respect of EA, BAC should:


                                                                                    Page 41 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                               EXPG0000006




            a) Set clear expectations with external auditors about the annual scope of work and
               the fee;

            b) Meet regularly with the auditor, without the management present, ensuring
               ongoing dialogue between BAC Chair and auditors to deal with on-going issues,
               ask candid questions, inquire about sensitive topics and have confidential
               conversations;

            c) Receive the EA's annual management letter which communicates matters arising
               from the audit. Management letters are less formulaic than audit opinions, more
               tailored to individual company circumstances and provide insights on, and
               recommendations to improve, the companies' governance, accountability, risk
               management and control arrangements;

            d) Receive the auditor's report on the annual accounts which will include a
               statement as to whether the accounts give a true and fair view of the company's
               financial affairs (unqualified) or is qualified because of issues concerning the
               accounting policies or the financial position; and

            e) Show clearly how relations with the external auditors are managed and what is
               done to ensure their independence. As the volume of audit and risk work grew,
               the practice of using external auditors to perform non-audit services also grew,
               and with it, concerns about conflicts of interest. Boards (through BAC) must now
               scrutinise the volume and type of non-audit work an EA may undertake and
               explain how shareholders' interests for independent verification have been
               achieved, the special circumstances which justify their appointment for non-audit
               services and the arrangements in place to monitor their effectiveness,
               independence and objectivity.

BAC role in Communications

3.3.6   Communications with shareholders: the BAC Chair should engage with shareholders at
        the AGM, and at other times they consider it advisable.

3.3.7   Communications with External Auditors: the independence of external auditors is
        fundamental to corporate governance. Nonetheless the BAC Chair will maintain open
        lines of communication with the External auditor normally through the external audit lead
        partner.

3.3.8   Private Sessions: As part of custom and practice, BAC meetings will normally conclude
        with a `private' session (all the Executives having left, except for the head of Internal
        Audit) with IA and EA. The BAC may also choose to have separate private sessions just
        with either Internal Audit or External Audit present. Discussion in these private sessions
        normally revolves around 'is there anything you are worried about to which you wish to
        alert us, and which has not come up in the meeting?' This is an informal way of ensuring
        that both IA and EA may comment in confidence on any concerns about individual or
        corporate performance, and any looming risks which are not yet on the audit and risk
        agenda.

3.3.9   BAC communications within the Board and the Executive: the BAC Chair should aim
        to establish strong and open communications with the Chief Executive, the Finance

                                                                                    Page 42 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




                Director and other Executives, the Board Chair and Non-Executives, and the head of
                internal audit. This is in addition to the regular reports of BAC activities and business
                which the BAC makes to the Board, and the minutes of BAC which, once approved, are
                circulated to the whole Board. Executives should not wait for BAC to ask for
                information. The Executives should ensure that the BAC is kept informed of relevant
                matters and take the initiative in supplying information to it 35

3.4 Internal Audit

       3.4.1    The function of IA has emerged as a specialism in the broad field of accounting, designed
                to offer separate, independent assurance. The head of IA is appointed as part of the
                Executive team (i.e. they are directly employed by the organisation) and in employmert
                matters is accountable to the CEO. However, the head of IA should also maintain an
                independence from the CEO, CFO and all other Senior Executives, and have a direct line
                of accountability and communication to the Board Chair and to the Chair of BAC.

       3.4.2    The BAC (if no BAC, the Board, and if no Board, the CEO) should agree an annual work
                plan for Internal audit. This plan will be informed by data on past performance and
                considerations on future risks. It drives the work of internal audit and should highlight
                areas of concern for Board/BAC and Executives. The BAC, or if none, the Board, or if
                none, the CEO, will receive interim and final reports on IA investigations and be able to
                monitor required management actions for remediation/improvement.

       3.4.3    The scope of IA work will depend on perceived priority given to IA (reflecting Board and
                Executives understandings of risks in present and future) and the resources (human and
                financial) made available to IA. The extent to which IA's scope will be extended, for
                example into technical and IT matters will be an important decision which would
                normally be discussed with a recommendation by both the CEO and their team and the
                BAC/Board.

       3.4.4    One customary item for those commissioning IA reports will be 'to review progress of
                completion of remediation/improvement items against their due dates'. In practice a
                record of the volume and nature of `overdue, incomplete management actions', arising
                from IA reports, may be taken as rough measure of management effectiveness. This
                record can provide great insight into both the strength of the Executives and the culture of
                the company.

       3.4.5    Providing the plan of work reflects major areas of concern, providing the investigations
                have been adequate and proportionate, and the recommendations are clear and relevant,
                the management response in terms of timely, full remediation is instructive. These
                provisions are often the subject of robust contention between IA and the area ofExecutive
                responsibility under investigation. Any Board or alert Senior Executives will want to
                know of any major areas of contention and if there are systems for really rectifying
                identified problems with controls and risks.




       3.4.6    Internal audit activities should enable:


3s
     See Annex A, Sections 1.7a, 1.7b, 1.14, 1.17, 2.3, 2.4.

                                                                                             Page 43 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




                 a) Shareholders and directors to have some means ofindependently verifying that
                    financial and nonfinancial statements are accurate and are not subject to fraud or
                    misappropriation.

                 b) Provide Executives with the capacity to undertake internal investigations which
                    help management keep track of transactions, tax compliance, reporting to
                    regulators, audit, reviewing processes and compliance in third party suppliers
                    (e.g. with respect to child labour) or in legislation including those relating to
                    counter-fraud, such as the Fraud Act 2006, Theft Act 1968 and Bribery Act 2010.

    3.4.7    How will Boards and Executives know their Internal Audit function is effective? The
             guidance given in the Combined Code 2003 still stands:

             In publicly listed companies the BAC should monitor and review the effectiveness of the
             internal audit activities. Where there is no internal audit function, theBAC should
             consider annually whether there is a need for an internal audit function and make a
             recommendation to the Board. The reasons for the absence of such a function should be
             explained in the relevant section of the annual report 36



3.5 External Audit


    3.5.1    EA is provided at the company's expense to provide the shareholders, through the Board,
             with independent objective analysis and conclusions. In lay summary, EA has the duty to
             report on the integrity of financial statements; whether the annual report and accounts,
             taken as a whole, is fair, balanced and understandable, and provides the information
             necessary for shareholders to assess the company's performance and prospects; and
             whether the company's systems and controls are adequate.

    3.5.2    BAC duties in respect of EA are summarise above.

    3.5.3    An issue of current concern is that as interest in companies grows, and a wider pool of
             stakeholders across society (activists, investors, staff groups) shows an interest in annual
             reports and governance, there is a widening expectation gap, as audits may fail to reflect
             the societal and environmental interest of stakeholders in the sector in which the company
             operates.37

3.6 Questions arising from Section 3 Relevant to POHI


NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and managementfor the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.

Boards in the Organisations which Ran and Oversaw POC/L




36 Annex A, Section 1.7a.
37 See Annex A, Section 1.19.

                                                                                         Page 44 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




   3.6.1   How did the Boards discharge their auditing and monitoring responsibilities, particularly
           when audit identified problems with internal controls?


BACs in the Organisations which Ran and Oversaw POC/L


   3.6.2   Did BACs evaluate BAC effectiveness? And consider and implement any
           recommendations to increase effectiveness?

   3.6.3   Did BACs show knowledge of whistleblowing arrangements, and how whistle blowing
           was perceived in the organisation? What whistleblowing records were shared with BAC?


Internal Audit in the Organisations which Ran and Oversaw POC/L

   3.6.4   When and how (including resources) was an internal audit function established?

   3.6.5   Was there an annual IA plan? With follow up on items?

   3.6.6   Did IA annual plans of work ever reference HORIZON or SPMs?


Horizon and SPMs Issues in the Organisations which Ran and Oversaw POC/L

   3.6.7   Did BACs or Boards commission/receive reports about any matters concerning Horizon
           and SPMs issues, including compensation claims (and when?), and did they respond to,
           or act on, the findings?

   3.6.8   Did BACs or Boards receive unsolicited information about any matters concerning
           Horizon and SPMs issues, including compensation claims (and when?)

   3.6.9   What, if any, and when, were provisions or notes made in the financial statements in
           annual reports or AGMs in respect of any financial aspects of Horizon and SPMs issues?

   3.6.10 What, if anything, and when, did the organisations which ran and oversaw POC/L, say in
          the narrative reporting in their annual report, or at their AGM, about the SPMs set of
          issues?

   3.6.11 Did IA annual plans of work, or reports, ever reference HORIZON or SPMs? When?
          With what results?

   3.6.12 Was whistle blowing ever referenced by or with IA?




Investigations and Prosecutions in POL

   3.6.13 Did Boards or BACs commission/receive reports about any matters concerning
          Investigations or Prosecutions of SPMs? If so, what outcomes followed the reports?


External Auditor in the Organisations which Ran and Oversaw POC/L


                                                                                      Page 45 of 133
                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                     EXPG0000006




3.6.14 Did EA annual programmes of work ever reference HORIZON or SPMs? If so, who
       reviewed resulting work and with what results?

3.6.15 Were any matters relating to HORIZON or SPMs ever mentioned in annual management
       letters from EA? If so, when? And with what results?

3.6.16 Was whistleblowing ever discussed with External Audit?




                                                                          Page 46 of 133
                                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




4      Risk

4.1 Introduction

       4.1.1    Risk is an executive function, a vital area of Board oversight, and of fundamental
                importance to shareholders. Whoever is making strategy, whoever is responsible for the
                operational realisation of that strategy and, whoever is investing in the delivery of that
                strategy, should understand and make judgements about their appetite and tolerance of
                risks, which may derail strategic achievement and operational performance.

4.2 Executive Role in Risk

       4.2.1    Risk is a fundamental and necessary part of Executive responsibilities. The identification,
                analysis and management of risk lies at the very heart of running a company, contributing
                directly to effective management and corporate performance. Historically risk was rarely
                designated as something specifically identifiable in Executive responsibilities; it was
                simply a key part of running any business. In the last 50 or so years, risk has become an
                important named area of management at all levels, as well as a specialist function to
                support Executives in identifying, assessing, and managing risk. It is an Executive
                responsibility to build an integrated and dynamic understanding of the company's risk
                profile which is effectively communicated to the Board and to shareholders.

       4.2.2    Corporate risk management is rooted in the fact that companies will take financial risk so
                they can grow. Although most risks, if crystallised, will have a financial impact, their
                origins may be outside the corporate financial system and their impact feltin many areas
                of corporate life. Risks may originate anywhere in the company e.g. in technology,
                markets, employment or sales practices, the handling of third-party suppliers, or in the
                wider environment, e.g. war and conflict, pandemics, or climate change. Risks may
                crystalise into financial or reputational damage, with impacts interalia on business
                performance, capacity to recruit and retain staff, customer loyalty, and company
                survival.38

       4.2.3    As no one can know or predict everything which may happen, those running the company
                need to make judgements on the likelihood and impact of risks, on risk mitigation and
                risk ownership and come to a view on risk appetite. These executive judgements and
                supporting data need to be clearly and fully shared between the Executive and the Board,
                and between the Board and the shareholders.

       4.2.4    The tools most commonly used in the executive management of risk are those associated
                with the creation of risk registers which identify and rank risks to the organisation (or part
                thereof) in terms of a multiple of judgements about the `likely' magnitude and nature of
                impact on the company (or part thereof), and the likelihood of the risk actually occurring
                (crystallising in the lexicon of risk management). Registers also note mitigations to
                reduce magnitude or impact and who `owns' the management of the risk.

       4.2.5    Depending on the structure of the company, `subsidiary' risk registers may be compiled
                and owned in different functions or business lines, and at different tiers in the hierarchy.
                Each register will relate to the risks of that part of the company and be owned by those

38   See Annex A, Sections 1.2, 1.4b, 1.5, 1.7a, 1.7b, 1.8, 1.11, 1.1la, 1.12, 1.14, 1.15, 1.17, 1.18 and 1.19.

                                                                                                      Page 47 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




        responsible. A crucial question then becomes how subsidiary risk registers are scrutinised
        and adjudicated by higher levels in the hierarchy, to build a comprehensive risk picture
        for the company, which is then owned and managed by the CEO and their senior
        leadership team.

4.2.6   At any one time, risk registers are a `snapshot `of judgements made at a particular time
        about the future. The register becomes dynamic over time, as Executives track the way
        their judgements change about the rank and criticality of items on the register. Paying
        attention to the direction of travel for any identified risk is a vital Executive function. This
        can be facilitated by identifying entrances, movements, and exits of risk items, and
        plotting trajectories of change on a two-dimensional map of impact on one axis, and
        probability of occurrence on the other.

4.2.7   With the help of hindsight, Executives can get an indication of the accuracies of their
        predictions of the trajectories of identified risks, and a view on the comprehensiveness of
        their horizon scanning capacity to place, or move risks on and off, their register. Such
        hindsight can be employed to improve Executive capacity for foresight, which is a central
        art of risk management.

4.2.8   The effectiveness of risk identification and analysis in hindsight or foresight is not simply
        a matter of technical excellence in the construction and use of risk registers. It depends to
        a large part on the Executives' curiosity, openness to learn from signals inside and outside
        the company, and to challenge assumptions. Without this openness, looming problems
        may not make the register until `unexpectedly' they hit the organisation; or they may stay
        down in the 'low impact' andlor 'low probability of crystallisation', when they are
        becoming increasingly likely to occur and /or have major impact. Executives' approach to
        risk is in part, both the creature, and the creator, of the company's culture (see Section
        8.4, and Power et al 2013).


The Organisation of Risk in Companies

4.2.9   Following an FSA statement in 2003, the organisation of risk is often described in terms
        of three lines of defence, to stop risks crystallising and obstructing the achievement of
        company strategic objectives. The first line of defence is the line managers who own and
        manage the risk in their (part of the) business. The second line of defence is the risk
        specialists who remain part of `management' and provide advice, analysis and control,
        including securing compliance with internal controls designed to manage risk. The third
        line of defence is Internal Audit, which is not part of 'management'per se and provides
        internal independent assurance, monitoring, and challenge, including specifying and
        monitoring management actions to improve risk management processes and internal
        controls (see section 3.4). This section focusses on the position and place of the second
        line of defence (risk specialists), and their relationship to the first line.

4.2.10 Section 2.4 described how the CEO makes decisions about the organising principles
       underlying the operational structure of their company between, for example, business
       lines, specialist functions and major projects. Implications of such choices impact the
       company's approach to risk management, since they indicate the primary lens (for
       example, business lines, functions, or major projects) through which risk is first viewed.
       Whatever that perspective, however, effective CEOs normally want to check on other


                                                                                        Page 48 of 133
                                                                                                      EXPO0000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




        perspectives and ensure that there are integrating mechanisms to build an overall
        company perspective on risk.

4.2.11 Company-wide integration of risk management is a development from a traditional
       approach of more piecemeal assessment of risk in particular areas, (e.g. health and safety
       on the production line, or software bugs in technology failures), which were seen as the
       responsibility of specific divisions supported by specialist risk personnel from other
       functions, (e.g. compliance, internal audit, finance, corporate services).

4.2.12 The development of the corporate executive risk function arises in part, from experience
       of corporate failure and crises, which led professional services consultants and regulators
       (e.g. Financial Conduct Authority 2003) to draw attention to the need to see risk as
       embedded in core Executive responsibilities and to require an integrated approach across
       the company. The study of disasters (e.g. Turner 1978, Dawson 1991), illustrates the
       consequences which could arise if there was a failure to connect different sources of
       information, and in particular the importance of viewing data about technologies in
       interaction with considerations of culture and behaviour.

4.2.13 As the perceived need for corporate risk management grew, two trends emerged. The first
       was that the risk responsibilities for all Executives become centrally placed in their job
       specifications. The second was an enhanced profile for those with specialist risk
       responsibilities, including perhaps, the decision to appoint a CRO as part of the senior
       leadership team. Risk specialists began to be seen variously as `partners' in any business
       unit or major project, independent advisers to line management, and even change
       facilitators, rather than simply skilled technicians in a specialist function.

4.2.14 Whatever the structure, tensions are commonplace between ensuring a technically
       excellent risk function, and risk as a core Executive responsibility. For example, there is a
       danger that core business Executives may feel they can `in-source' their risk
       responsibilities, handing them over to specialists, relinquishing accountability for their
       own risks, and at the same time complaining that the risk specialists are 'too cautious' and
       inhibiting corporate growth. It is the CEO's job constructively to manage these tensions
       to secure a system of risk management, where the risks are owned by those who are
       making business decisions and are doing so with access to the best, trusted specialist
       analysis.

4.2.15 Essentially there is no one right answer for the place or remit of risk. Big questions to be
       answered in any company are:

            Does the structure and culture around risk enable it to be identified and managed
            effectively?
            Are people in the business `educated' in how to identify and handle risk?
            How do risk specialists manage their `independence' and autonomy, and yet work in
            partnership with the business and support business decisions?
            Do Executives understand that the management of risk involves behaviour and
            culture, as well as ever more sophisticated data acquisition and analysis?




                                                                                     Page 49 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




4.3 The Board Role in Risk

    4.3.1    Where the company is publicly listed, the Board has specific duties and responsibilities
             for Risk.

    4.3.2    The Board's role in Risk derives from its core duty to approve strategy, in which risks are
             embedded, and oversee operations wherein risks will be manifest, and should be
             controlled through internal controls. The Board is responsible for determining the
             company's risk appetite, that is, the nature and extent of significant risks which it is
             willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives. The Board should seek to anticipate,
             and guard against, major losses by risk reduction and mitigation.39

    4.3.3    The system of risk management outlined in the corporate codes is fundamentally aimed at
             ensuring transparency to shareholders, so that they will be in an informed position to
             decide whether (to continue) to invest 40

    4.3.4    The Board should present a balanced and understandable assessment of the company's
             position and prospects (for `prospects' one can read `risk'). This principle was supported
             in 2010 by a new provision requiring Directors to state in annual and half-yearly
             statements, whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the `going concern' basis of
             accounting and, to identify any material uncertainties to the company's ability to continue
             to do so over a period of at least twelve months, from the date of approval of the financial
             statements (FRC2010).41

    4.3.5    In the wake of failures in banks in the period from 2007, The Walker Review (2009) of
             `Corporate Governance in UK Banks and other Financial Institutions', had ramifications
             beyond financial services 42 Greater emphasis was placed on the need for Boards to
             engage in realistic discussions about what will happen to the firm in the future, to get
             assurance that risk is being managed and to make clear to shareholders how the Boards'
             judgements on risk were being made. Ensuring the quality of the data was central to these
             developments with their increasing emphasis on the Executive responsibility to provide a
             true and fair picture of the risks (Walker 2009).

    4.3.6    Expectations of all parties rose. Executives expected the Board to provide a clear strategic
             direction on risk, to be supported in tackling problems, and to appreciate that theBoard
             must be fully part of building a consensus on what constitutes risk and how it will be
             mitigated. Executives were expected to ensure NEDs had access to information which
             communicated risk in ways that were understandable, insightful and timely and to ensure
             the effectiveness of underlying controls and processes.

    4.3.7    The Walker (2009) review also shone a spotlight on the importance of 'risk culture' and
             the ways in which risk is `embedded and socialised' throughout the company. This
             generated a proliferation of new tools to assess and manage risk culture, to be added to
             the armoury of risk management expertise. It also widened the Board's potential scope of
             interest in risk and suggested that the Chair and the Board had a key role in setting the
             context for open and honest conversations about risk culture between Executives, their


39 See Annex A, Sections 1.2, 1.4a, 1.7a, 1.8, 1.10, 1.12, 1.14, 1.17 and 1.18.
ao See Annex A, Sections 1.4a, 1.7a, 1.8, 1.10, 1.12, 1.14, 1.17 and 1.18.
ai See Annex A, Section 1.12.
42
   See Annex A, Section 1.11, 1.11a and 1.12.

                                                                                          Page 50 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




               risk specialists, and NEDs. There is much debate on whether risk management `leads'
               business decisions or `follows', but the essence is that it doesn't really matter so long as
               it is jointly debated, and risk is integrated into the Board's decision making.

       4.3.8   These developments are reflected in the 2014 Combined Code (FRC2014b)43. Principle
               C2: 'Risk Management and Internal Control', has two new provisions to drive a stronger
               narrative about the principal risks facing the company and how they have been assessed.
               The language on `going concern' is strengthened. Directors must sign off on the `going
               concern' statement and report in the Annual report on any material uncertainties that they
               might have on the companies' ability to be a `going concern' over the next months.

       4.3.9   The FRC 2018 Code (re) states that: 'the Board should [...] establish a framework of
               prudent and effective controls, which enable risk to be assessed and managed [and] the
               Board should carry out a robust assessment of the company's emerging and principal
               risks' .44


4.4 Board Risk Committee (BRC)

       4.4.1   The codes do not prescribe how the Board is to discharge its duties to provide effective
               controls to `enable risks to be assessed and managed'. Regulations required Banks and
               financial institutions to establish a BRC, but companies in other sectors were at liberty to
               determine how they would meet their risk duties. Increasingly nowadays, organisations
               tend to have Board Risk Committees (BRC), whereas in the late 90s and early 2000s, this
               was much less common. Faced with explicit duties for the assessment and management of
               risk, many Boards initially relied on their BACs to undertake relevant oversight. At that
               time, there was also considerable uncertainty in Board rooms about what exactly a risk
               committee, if constituted, would do, and how it would not duplicate, or add unnecessary
               complexity to, the work of the BAC.

       4.4.2   As Risk management became more clearly defined through practice, some companies
               chose to amend the BAC terms of reference to make explicit reference to riskand some
               chose to do that and to rename their BAC, `Board Audit and Risk Committee'. Yet others,
               and over time, a larger group, chose to establish a Board Risk Committee (BRC). Board
               decisions to separate audit and risk committees reflected inter alia, the size of the
               company, the levels of risks, stakeholder expectations, regulations, and resources.

       4.4.3   In time a distinction between BACs and BRCs became clearer Audit committees
               typically look back ensuring compliance, whilst Risk committees typically look forward,
               with a view on risk appetite, where risk will arise, and how best to mitigate it. In the
               absence of a BRC, Boards must assess the effectiveness of the BAC to undertake the
               Board's risk duties, taking account of the workload of combinedAudit and Risk.

       4.4.4   Even where a BRC is established, Audit committees are still required to review the
               company's internal financial controls and other material controls, including risk
               management controls as part of their audit role, independent of management.




     See Annex A, Sections 1.14 and 1.15.
as




44
     See Annex A, Section 1.18.

                                                                                             Page 51 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




    4.4.5    If Boards decide to have a separate BRC, they must determine its responsibilities and
             delegated powers in the committee's terms of reference which must be publicly available
             (normally now through the website). Boards should also determine BRC membership,
             which would normally have at least three members, who are all independent NEDs,
             including at least one member of the audit committee and/or remuneration committee's

    Duties of Board Risk Committee

    4.4.6    In summary, BRCs are normally established to:

             a) Advise the Board on the company's overall risk appetite, tolerance and strategy, the
                principal and emerging risks the company is willing to take to achieve its strategic
                objectives, and any changes to risk profile and appetite which are consequent upon
                proposed changes to strategy. Risks will be specific to the company's circumstances
                but are likely to include: Threats to the business model or future performance;
                Operational risk; Capital risk; Insolvency risk; Market risk; Conduct risk;
                Reputational risk; Risks from ethical, environmental, social and governance (ESG)
                issues; IT operations, including cyber risk; Health and safety and pandemic risk;
                Business continuity risks; Regulatory, litigation and legal risks; and Terrorism or
                major accident.

             b) Advise the Board on the likelihood and the impact of principal risks materialising,
                and the management and mitigation of principal risks to reduce the likelihood of their
                incidence or their impact;

             c) Advise the Board on the accuracy of narrative reporting on risk and internal controls
                in the annual report and other public statements.

             d) Monitor and review the effectiveness and value of the company's risk management
                and internal control systems, including seeking assurance that corrective action is
                taken when necessary;

             e) Monitor and review the appropriateness of the company's values and culture and
                reward systems for managing risk and internal controls, and the extent to which the
                culture and values are embedded at all levels of the company; and

             f) Work and liaise as necessary with other Board committees, ensuring interaction
                between committees, and with the Board, is reviewed regularly, taking account of the
                impact of risk management and internal controls on the work of other committeesa6

4.5 The Role of the Shareholder

    4.5.1    The shareholder(s) have a right to expect to receive timely accurate information on risks
             which impact the company's ability to achieve its strategic aims.

    4.5.2    The government as shareholder should be active in seeking and receiving relevant
             information on risk, and where it was not satisfied that either the information was not


as See Annex A, Sections 1.11, 1.15 and 1.18.
46 See Annex A, Sections 1.14 and 1.15.

                                                                                         Page 52 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




                forthcoming or it was inadequate, then to engage with the Board Chair (and with their
                appointed NEDs), or in the absence of a Board, the CEO, to seek out the information."

       4.5.3    Central Government Departments48 manage risk through the AO who is expected to
                oversee internal controls and audit. Risk management features in the Code for Central
                Government Departments from 2011 (HM Treasury and the Cabinet Office, 2011) which
                indicates that AOs in Public Bodies should be supported by an Audit and Risk Assurance
                Committee (ARAC) (HM Treasury, 2012).


4.6 Questions Arising from Section 4 Relevant to POHI

       NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and managementfor the organisations which
       ran and oversaw POC/POL. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations
       in the chronology.

       Executive Arrangements for Risk Management

       4.6.1    What arrangements for risk identification, management and assessmentwere practiced at
                Executive level?

                    a) Where did risk become integrated into lines of accountability in the business?

                    b) Where, if at all, were risk specialists located in the organisation? When?

                    c) Were risk registers created and reviewed? When?

                    d) How did Executives construct an integrated view of company-wide risks?

                    e) How did Executives `report up' to relevant Executives and Boards on risk?


       Board Arrangements for Risk Management

       4.6.2    What arrangements for risk identification, management and assessment were practiced at
                Board level?

       4.6.3    Were risk registers used as a means of reporting to BAC and/or BRC? If so, when did this
                start?

       4.6.4    How did Boards develop an integrated view of their Risk Profiles and Risk Appetites?
                How frequently were they reviewed and amended, and `reported' to the next level of
                oversight? If reported 'up', did feedback and discussion follow?

       4.6.5    Did Boards consider the risk culture in their risk assessments?

       4.6.6    What internal controls were in place to mitigate the risk of fraud, were these
                internal controls effective?

     See Annex A, Sections 2.4, 2.5 and 2.1Oa.
48
     See Annex A, Sections 2.2a, 2.3, 2.4, 2.7 and 2.10a.

                                                                                            Page 53 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




Horizon

4.6.7   Did (when?) Boards, BRCs, BACs introduce any special arrangements for risk oversight
        of the Horizon project? (with what data and scope?)

4.6.8   When and how did the Horizon project feature on risk registers? What were the identified
        risks and mitigations? How did this change over time?


SPMs

4.6.9   Did Boards, BRCs, BACs introduce special arrangement for risk oversight of the SPM
        issues? (When? With what data and scope?)

4.6.10 How (it at all) did SPM issues feature on risk registers? What were the identified risks
       and mitigations? How did this change over time?




                                                                                   Page 54 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




5   Governance and Management of Technically Complex Major
    Projects

5.1 Introduction

    5.1.1   From time-to-time Boards initiate, approve, and oversee major projects as part of their
            strategy. Executive management and control of major projects requires special structures,
            systems, and capabilities. It is for the Executive, in consultation with the Board, and/or in
            the case of government owned companies, the government entity to whom they are
            accountable, to decide how best to achieve project delivery, so that they maintain
            effective management and control of both `business-as-usual' and the major project.

    5.1.2   Such projects will be time limited between origination and completion and may relate, for
            example, to major infrastructural technology driven change, re-branding, or corporate
            activity (e.g. M&A). The introduction and roll-out of the Horizon computer system by the
            Post Office was a technically complex major project, originally designed and operated by
            ICL Pathway Ltd, which was subsequently integrated into Fujitsu, a third-party supplier.

5.2 Characteristics of Major Projects

    5.2.1   Three characteristics of major project management present particular challenges

    Uncertainty, Complexity, and Scale

    5.2.2   Complex projects are never straightforward; there is always a degree of uncertainty about
            delivery to plan. This partly reflects the optimism of those who propose the project, who
            are often inclined to emphasise the imperatives to do the project, the advantages which
            will flow from it, and that the risks of not doing it outweigh the risks of doing it. Such
            optimism is often sustained by considerable uncertainty about exactly what the project
            will involve, in terms of resources, innovation, problem solving capacity and accessible
            knowledge.

    5.2.3   Uncertainty may increase for internal reasons (e.g. unexpected shortage of skills or
            unexpected/apparently intractable technical problems) or externally (e.g. political
            upheaval, economic shocks, or changes of government). Things which may derail a
            project may be unknown or unknowable at the time of project approval; they may not be
            represented in risk registers.

    5.2.4   There will also be unanticipated consequences of the very actions that have been taken
            for good management practice, e.g. unexpected incentives and disincentives which arise
            from contract clauses, or remuneration structures; or regular reporting structures which
            can lead to information being 'siloed' and not shared between reporting lines.

    5.2.5   Complexity and uncertainty are exacerbated by scale. The magnitude of the challenge
            posed for the Executive who are also `running' their regular business means they are, as it
            were, running two very different organisations which can incur `indirect costs' on routine
            business. This is often not fully appreciated, especially as these `indirect costs' are not
            always visible, or the subject of curiosity, by those who are proposing the project.

                                                                                          Page 55 of 133
                                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




       5.2.6    The Board and the Executive, in their different roles, should each be assuring themselves
                they have the right level of oversight in place, including their readiness' to spot and reveal
                unexpected or unplanned problems as they are emerging, their readiness to take remedial
                action, and their readiness to secure their own specialist advice where they consider they
                are dealing with matters outside their own expertise and experience.49

       Inherent Tensions and Trade-Offs

       5.2.7    Inherent in most major projects are tensions between (putting it very simply)cost, quality,
                and time. At various times in the project life cycle, the Executive, the Board Government
                sponsor and the contractor, each in their different roles, will need to consider such trade-
                offs. Major projects may overrun on their original timetable, overrun on their original
                budgets, and not deliver the specified scope, or specified quality in the specified, or
                revised, time.

       5.2.8    For example, delivery to the announced timetable may result in an interruption to other
                critical paths in business-as-usual plans; delivery to the announced quality standards may
                require delays to allow for problem solving; delays may increase costs and so on. These
                trade-offs will be viewed differently at different stages in the project life cycle, depending
                on one's role and position in the organisation and the complex stakeholder landscape.

       5.2.9    The degree to which the Executive can determine an optimum approach to trade-offs will
                depend          on:
                          inter




                                  alia




                a) The interests of stakeholders and their capacity and inclination to work together to
                   find common solutions;

                b) The openness of discussions about the trade-offs;

                c) The nature of contracts;

                d) The availability of additional resources;

                e) Stakeholder judgements on the balance of risks posed in different trade-off scenarios;
                   and

                f) The relative power, legitimacy and authority of external stakeholders and internal
                   players.


       The characteristics of key stakeholders are discussed further in Section 7.


       Contracting with Third Party Specialist Suppliers

       5.2.10 The scoping and delivery of major projects normally depend on third-party contractors,
              with all the requirements for their management and control. A further consideration will
              be how much of the organisation's own project management and control will be
              undertaken 'in house' and how much will be contracted to specialists, independent of the

49   See Annex A, Sections 1.1, 1.2, 1.4a, 1.4b, 1.6, 1.7, 1.12, 1.14, 1.15, 1.19, 2.1, 2.2a, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7 and 2.9.

                                                                                                         Page 56 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




           contractor. The higher degree of specialist knowledge and capability, and the greater the
           quantum of additional resource required, the more likely it is that significant elementsof
           `internal' project management, will be outsourced.

   5.2.11 For every major piece of outsourcing, the Executive must decide, and may agree in
          contract:

               a) Specified deliverables (inter alia cost, quality, time);

               b) Risk: which parties bear and share the recognised risks in the project

               c) Reporting: matters and schedule;

               d) Evaluation: data and criteria; and

               e) Escalation: when and how problems are regarded as sufficiently serious to 'go up
                  a level'.


5.3 The Role of the Executive in Major Projects

   5.3.1   The Executive who are responsible for a project's delivery may not necessarily have been
           centrally involved in the decision to proceed. It is an additional complexity if the
           organisation which is proposing the project (e.g. government) is different to the
           organisation which will be building and using the project (e.g. a government company)

   5.3.2   The proposing Executive will be responsible for producing a full project appraisal,
           including the following as a basis for Board (or other governance) approval:

               a) Business Case: the contribution of the project to delivering the company's
                  strategy, including problems it will solve, opportunities it will open and why
                  alternative options are inferior;

               b) Risks to the business of a) proceeding and b) not proceeding with the project

               c) Resourcing plan (skills, knowledge, specialist technical capacity, finance,
                  space); and

               d) Opportunity costs (impact on other priorities).

   5.3.3   Once approved the delivery Executive needs to produce, inter alia,:

               a) A sufficiently granular project plan, detailing milestones and stages and a matrix
                  of progress chasing, reporting, monitoring, logging and follow up of problems
                  and plan deviations, to enable the Executive to keep track of progress and risks,
                  and to be prepared to explain the imperative for reappraisal of risks or replan of
                  project;

               b) Statements and enactments of the systems, controls and structures of roles,
                  relationships, and communications to enable effective project management,


                                                                                       Page 57 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




                 including attestations that `stages' have been completed and gateways to the next
                 stage may be `opened';

            c) Risk register system, to identify, track, and evaluate project risks in a dynamic
               and integrated way;

            d) Risk register system, which will integrate the project risks with the risk profile of
               the company, and, if part of a group, the Group as a whole;

            e) Contracts with third party suppliers, which are aligned with the business case and
               risk analysis for the project, and which provide sufficient powers for managing
               the contractors for effective delivery;

            f)   Escalation: clarity on when and how problems are regarded as sufficiently serious
                 to 'go up a level'; and

            g) Authority to approve and expectation to be informed: clarity on matters within
               Executive delegated authority levels, matters which require Board/higher
               approval, matters on which the Board expects to be informed

Culture, Leadership and the Reality of Project Management

5.3.4   The items above outline the characteristics of an effective project management
        organisation which one would expect to see documented. If they are absent, there is no
        basis for believing the project will be well managed.

5.3.5   Their presence as documents, however, does not necessarily mean one has effective
        project management. The documentation may not result in their enactmentbecause, for
        example

            a) Although there are reports, problems are not followed up;

            b) Communication of progress and problems `upwards', including to the Board, is
               patchy and superficial;

            c) There is little effective internal scrutiny through e.g. internal audit;

            d) The culture does not encourage people to speak up if they foresee, or see,
               problems or issues arising;

            e) There is little transparency of required reporting and communications with
               stakeholders; and

            f) Bad news (e.g. failures on time, quality, cost expectations, or any unanticipated
               problems which may be outside a narrow project remit) is downplayed or hidden
               and this becomes a habit.

5.3.6   These considerations bring us to the subjects of culture, leadership, and the experience of
        those working on project delivery and oversight. A culture which is very quick to blame,
        in which people do not have courage to be accountable, or covers up 'bad news', becomes


                                                                                          Page 58 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




             pervasive and will undermine any formal structures which proclaim they are securing
             transparency and accountability.

    5.3.7    The Executive role is fundamentally important in building and sustaining a culture which
             will support effective project management in conditions of high complexity and
             uncertainty. This often means managing tensions between two opposing forces. On the
             one hand the need to encourage innovation and problem solving and on the other to keep
             a careful eye on progress with the project plan. Matters of leadership and culture are
             discussed further in Section 8.



5.4 The Role of the Board, or other Governing Body, in Major Projects

    5.4.1    Whereas it is for the Executive to determine how it will manage, organise, and control the
             delivery of major projects. It is for Boards or other governing bodies, to decide whether a
             major project will be approved (assuming it is requires Board approval, being above the
             limit for Executive decision making), how the Board will maintain effective oversight of
             project process and delivery, support the Executive in its work, and intervene if the
             project gets into difficulty.50

    5.4.2    In discharging its oversight responsibilities in relation to major projects, the Board would
             normally be involved as follows:

             Pre `go-ahead approval': Board discussion and decision about:

                  a) Overview on the project's place and importance to the strategy (what it promises
                     to deliver; why this is important, what it will deliver, at what direct, indirect and
                     opportunity cost, and in what time frame);

                  b) Evaluation of risks and scrutiny of risk profile and anticipated impact in an open
                     way, unconstrained by current forecasts. A phrase sometimes used at an early
                     stage of project risk analysis is to construct a 'pre-mortem', (the opposite of a
                     `post-mortem') i.e. looking behind the project plan to ask what might result in,
                     and result from, project failure;

                  c) Consideration of whether the Board encourages curiosity which might spot the
                     emergence of unanticipated consequences;

                  d) Sufficiency and sources of information provided to the Board about the project
                     preapproval; consideration of any additional work, analysis, or specialist advice
                     required?

                  e) The capability of the Executive to deliver the project, including project
                     management structure and capabilities, technical competence in.house, and
                     access, choice, and management of outsourced technical capabilities; and

                  f) How the Board will maintain oversight and support of the Executive.




so See Annex A, Sections 1.7a, 1.12, 2.3 and 2.5.

                                                                                           Page 59 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




               As part of `go-ahead approval' (or about the time of that approval): Board
               discussion and decision about

                   a) The level and type of involvement the Board and its committees will institute to
                      oversee the Executive's planning and management of the project, including the
                      Executive degree of `reach' into contractors. Essentially how the Board will
                      ensure that it has sufficient line of sight into what is going on (especially what
                      may be going wrong, as they will certainly hear about what is going right); how
                      progress in relation to plan is being evaluated and reported, without unduly
                      interfering in project operations and without skewing the `normal business' of the
                      Board?

                   b) How the Board will use its existing committee structure and its existing
                      independent advice and monitoring (from Internal audit, External audit, and other
                      independent advisers and consultants already retained to maintain oversight of
                      project progress to delivery (is responsibility clear and how will it be reported?k

                   c) Whether, and how, the Board will seek its own specialist advice51, which is
                      independent of the Executive and the contractors. This will depend on such things
                      as the degree of specialist knowledge already available to the Board, complexity,
                      materiality and risks inherent in the project, and the internal capabilities of the
                      organisation;

                   d) The nature and timing of reports on fulfilment of project plans, according to
                      agreed major project milestones for the Board (involving evaluation against plans
                      and risk register);

                   e) Any specific review points, or deep dives into project progress, where Board
                      reaffirmation of the decision to undertake the project will be formally considered

                   f) Understanding how crises and serious concerns about deviation from project
                      plans will be escalated. Will there be candid and timely assessments of what's
                      gone wrong? And what are we going to do about it? Will we also request 'post
                      hoc' reports at different stages, e.g. to examine: How did we do? And what
                      lessons can we learn?

                   g) How will the Board informally keep in touch, and be available for support, and as
                      a sounding Board, to the Executive?

               Once the project is underway

                   The outcome of the Board discussions and decisions above should mean that over the
                   project life cycle, the Board should have a clear understanding of, and pay attention
                   to:

                   a) Roles and responsibilities for the Chair, CEO, Board and its committees, as well
                      as independent specialist advice in maintaining oversight of the project

                   b) Project Reporting: schedule and subjects of reports from Executive;



51
     See Annex A, Section 1.11.

                                                                                          Page 60 of 133
                                                                                                                 EXP00000006
                                                                                                           EXPG0000006




                    c) Board Committee reporting, and including follow through of issues;

                    d) Milestone approval: schedule and subjects of any milestone approvals, including:

                                 Attestations of phased completion or delays

                          ii.    Risk revisits: opportunities for intelligent interrogation of the risks posed
                                 by and in the project.

                         iii.    Supporting the Executive in balance with oversight


       Culture, Leadership, and experience of The Board52

       5.4.3   Just as at Executive level, the existence of a formal structure of systems and controls for
               project oversight at Board level is a necessary part of an effective Board, but it is not a
               sufficient condition.

       5.4.4   Does the culture and leadership at Board level encourage effective enactment of these
               systems and controls, and especially, does it encourage the Board to look with curiosity
               beyond them?

       5.4.5   How and who is maintaining a curiosity driven enquiry into the unexpected?

       5.4.6   Are members encouraged to take an enquiring look into the unanticipated consequences
               of the good faith decisions taken by the Board and the Executive?

       5.4.7   How is the hint or the reality of 'bad news' greeted between the CEO and the Chair and
               within the Board more generally? These considerations bring us once more to the subjects
               of culture, leadership, and the experience of those working on project delivery and
               oversight which are discussed further in Section 8.


           5.5 Questions arising from Section 5 Relevant to POHI

       NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and managementfor the organisations which
       ran and oversaw POC/POL. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations
       in the chronology.

       5.5.1   What did each organisation consider to be the risks of Horizon? Was there an integrated
               view of the risks between each of the four organisational and governance levels described
               in Annex B?

       5.5.2   How did each of the four organisational and governance levels described in Annex B,
               maintain oversight of Horizon?

       5.5.3   What, if any, conflicts of interest arose between the 4 organisational and governance
               levels in Annex B in association with Horizon? And how were they raised and managed?


52
     See Annex A, Sections 1.11 and 1.18.

                                                                                               Page 61 of 133
                                                                                               EXP00000006
                                                                                             EXPG0000006




5.5.4   At what point did SPM issues become `part' of the risk reports on Horizon project?




                                                                                  Page 62 of 133
                                                                                                              EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




6    Governance and Management of Whistleblowing

6.1 Introduction

     6.1.1   A Whistle blower is a person (usually in their capacity as an employee at work) who
             discloses (passes on information) what they perceive as wrongdoing in the workplace.
             Their disclosure should be in the public interest, that is, it must affect others, for example
             the general public, stakeholders in the company or other employees, and not be a matter
             of individual grievance.

     6.1.2   Whistleblowing is the term used when the whistle blower passes on information to a third
             party, with allegations of matters of public interest caused by misconduct, wrongdoing,
             criminal activity or mismanagement in the organisation, and which the whistleblower
             believes has caused, or is likely to cause, harm to others, eg. the health and safety of
             workers, miscarriages of justice, damage to the environment, employee rights, covering
             up information or failure by Executives or managers at any level of the organisation to
             comply with legal obligations s3

     6.1.3   Whistleblowing can relate to damage to reputation, financial performance, intellectual
             property, operational failures and business resilience, eg. because of loss of engagement
             with a staff group, or incompetence or lack of capacity amongst employees or contractors.
             Examples of conduct with direct implications for the business, on which the whistle may
             be blown, are falsifying information, denying errors in systems and accounting, and
             inflating sales.

6.2 The Role of the Executive: The Management of Whistleblowing

     6.2.1   The role of the Executive is to run the company, so that it achieves its strategic goals and
             to keep the Board (or other governing body) informed of all major risks to the
             organisation achieving its business goals, including those which come to light through
             whistleblowing claims. Whistle blowing is a source of knowledge which the Executive
             must ensure is made easily available to them54

     Systems and Environment

     6.2.2   An executive responsibility is to create the environment where people can 'blow the
             whistle', without fear of reprisal, and in a way which allows the company to learn and
             take timely remedial action, and which encourages others to speak up in the future.
             Enabling whistleblowing has been a requirement on organisations since the 1990s, when
             the 1996 Employment Rights Act and 1998 Public Disclosure Act provided statutory
             protection to workers speaking up or whistleblowing in the public interest.55

     6.2.3   Managing whistleblowing involves a proactive approach, which the FSA captured in their
             2005 guidance (see FCA Handbook 2024) and Department for Business, Innovation and


s3
   See Annex A, Sections 1.0 and 2.0
sa See Annex A, Sections 1.0, 1.7a, 1.9, 2.0, 2.2, 2.4 and 2.10.
ss See Annex A, Sections 1.0, and 2.0.

                                                                                            Page 63 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




             Skills captured in their 2015 guidance (Dept for Business, Innovation and Skills, 2015).56
             It involves:

             a) Providing rights to protection for certain categories of workers but not all For
                example, workers who have a contract with an employer are covered, but the self-
                employed are not. Self-employed members of the workforce are more likely to be
                contracted to provide services over a certain period of time for a fee and be in a
                business in their own right. Managing whistleblowing involves considering which
                other categories might be covered and where there are employee groups where
                whistleblowing protection might also be extended (FCA Handbook 2024 suggests key
                contractors).

             b) Distinguishing the difference between whistleblowing and reporting a grievance.
                Whistleblowing involves allegations about matters of public interest caused by
                wrongdoing or incompetence, and which the whistleblower believes has, or is likely
                to, cause harm to others. A grievance is a complaint or allegation by an individual (or
                group believing they share the same grievance) about unfair treatment or other causes
                of distress, which employees raise with their managers or higher levels in the
                company, and which stakeholders (e.g. customers) may raise with a company.

             c) Setting up systems and processes so whistleblowing is managed effectively, ie.
                having written policies, codes of conduct, including

                          Naming a choice of individuals to whom disclosures may be made;

                    ii.   Making and interrogating reports of investigations, including ensuring they
                          are conducted;

                              -    Proportionately;

                                   Independently of the people and matters identified by the whistle
                                   blower; and

                              -    Are fully followed up.

                   iii.   Ensuring employees are clear about their rights and processes; and

                   iv.    Dealing with concerns strictly confidentially and ensuring anonymity in any
                          reports

             d) Collecting, analysing, evaluating, and reporting data. The processes of collating,
                recording, evaluating and regularly and openly reporting anonymised data to the
                Executive and to the Board is essential if there is to be learning, change and justice
                from whistle blowing. Data should show,
                                                            inter




                                                                    alia:




                          The number of disclosures;

                    ii.   Their reasons;


56 See Annex A, Sections 1.9 and 2.10.

                                                                                         Page 64 of 133
                                                                                                                  EXP00000006
                                                                                                                EXPG0000006




                     iii.         The outcomes;

                     iv.      Adherence to the process;

                      v.          Justifications for any disciplinary actions / suspensions / exclusions; and

                     vi.          Lessons learnt.

                    As understanding of human factors and diversity and inclusion evolves, an
                    appreciation of the importance of assured fair and transparent processes for
                    monitoring becomes even more important.

       Culture and Behaviour

       6.2.4   There are additional important behavioural and cultural requirements for effective whistle
               blowing, which extend beyond formal systems and controls. They include:

                    a) Communicating with employees and others who may wish to blow the
                       whistle. Executives should use multiple channels to convey to workers their
                       protection from victimisation for speaking-up. A written policy was
                       recommended by FSA in 2005 (FCA Handbook, 2024a); this can be
                       supplemented by training and induction and informal means57

                        Those responsible may identify specific channels, emphasising freedom to speak
                        up or blow the whistle. It is important that organisations train line managers as
                        well as central functions, e.g. HR on whistleblowing rights, duties, and processes.
                        If the size of the organisation warrants it, the role of a central whistle blowing
                        team also needs to be explained, so it becomes widely understood as being part of
                        the process but not absolving any others of their responsibilities.

                    b) Learning about the lived experience of whistleblowers. To increase the
                       likelihood that others will speak out, the organisation must understand how it is
                       handling whistleblowing and the lived experience of whistleblowers, after they
                       have blown the whistle. This requires that feedback is sought from the whistle
                       blower by someone independent of the matter concerned and support offered to
                       them, regardless of whether their allegations are found to be proven. Cases where
                       the allegations are not proven and are said to be mischievous or malicious or
                       inconsequential need careful review by a third party after the initial
                       consideration. Nothing in the way any cases are handled should discourage others
                       from coming forward with their concerns.

                    c) Challenging the assumptions that may be being made at any stage in the process
                       and which can introduce bias and influence outcomes. For example, assumptions
                       about:

                                      The nature of the concern/ complaint;

                            ii.       The status and veracity of the people against whom the allegations are
                                      made;

57   See Annex A, Section 1.9.

                                                                                                   Page 65 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                           EXPG0000006




                           iii.   The status and veracity of the whistle blower;

                           iv.    Complexity of the complaint and the assumed benefit to investigating ii

                            v.    The need to limit the scope of the complaint;

                           vi.    The time required and evidence available for investigatiorr,

                          vii.    Competence and experience in handling whistleblowing.

                     d) Keeping the Board up to date. Traditionally this has taken place through the
                        Board Audit Committee for listed companies, in compliance with the Combined
                        Code (2003). The BAC and Internal Audit may take a closer look at the
                        effectiveness of the whistleblowing function. The Chair of BAC should also be
                        told of any whistleblowing disclosures and depending on the risk to the
                        organisation, these should make their way onto a risk register for monitoring.
                        Such monitoring is usually done by BAC for the Board, although the Chair of the
                        Board would usually also be told of Whistleblowing incidents in an anonymised
                        way. 58

       6.2.5    This section has covered the Executive role in creating the environment, systems, and
                culture for enabling and sustaining whistle blowing and must be kept completely distinct
                from any Executive role in any specific whistle blowing case. Any actions, or direct
                involvement, or conflicts of interest arising from specific cases ofinvestigated or
                discovered wrongdoing, including taking disciplinary action, dismissal and the
                involvement of law enforcement agencies should always be handled in accordance with
                the overall remit of Executive responsibilities, systems and procedures.

6.3 Guidance and Regulations

       6.3.1    This short section on the key guidance and legal requirements for organisations on
                whistleblowing sets the context for the Board's role in governance of whistleblowing that
                follows.s9

       6.3.2    The Public Interest Disclosure Act (PIDA) 1998, which applies to public, private and
                voluntary sectors, states that if a worker who discloses their concerns in the public
                interest has any form of reprisal or mistreatment from their employe; after raising a
                concern, they have the right to compensation in an employment tribunal. PIDA covers the
                rights of workers to disclose, through regulatory and wider channels, including
                disclosures to MPs and public disclosure through the media. It signalled a change in
                culture towards promoting and protecting public interest whistleblowing. This was part of
                a cultural shift towards transparency in public life, which the Committee on Standards in
                Public Life (Nolan, 1995) also addressed through the Nolan Principles.

       6.3.3    The UK Corporate Governance Code 2003 and all subsequent versions, recommends that
                listed companies have whistleblowing policies in place i.e. they must comply, or explain

58   See Annex A, Section 1.7a.
s9
     See Annex A, Sections 1.0, 2.0, 2.2, 1.7a, 1.9 and 2.10.

                                                                                                 Page 66 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




               why not. Although there is no legal requirement for all organisations to have
               whistleblowing written policies, guidance is clear that a written policy is good practice,
               particularly in larger organisations.

       6.3.4    Guidance by the Department for Business Innovation and Skills (2015) for public entities,
                places a premium on having the right culture and especially communication at all levels.
                Through communication, people will be encouraged to speak up: written policies, training
                and support, effective processes and above all quick responses to issues raised are all
                parts of the culture of good practice.

       6.3.5   In addition, since 2016 there has been guidance about the appointment of a NED as a
               whistle blowing Champion. Rules for affected firms and guidance (2016) by the FCA for
               all organisations it serves, required a company to appoint a Non-Executive Director as
               their 'whistleblowers' champion'.60 The role is designed to be supportive of NED's
               supervisory oversight role, and the Board's collective responsibilities, and not to mean
               that a NED will take on operational responsibilities or be expected to be the only person
               on the Board who is really concerned with whistle blowing.

       6.3.6    Looking forward, it seems that the direction of travel is for more protection of employee
                rights and a greater role for NEDs in overseeing whistle blowing.


6.4 The Role of the Board: Governance of Whistleblowing

       6.4.1    The Board as a whole has major responsibilities for whistleblowing, with relevant duties
                also following for BAC and BRC (see Sections 2,3,4) 6'

       6.4.2    To illustrate the individual and collective roles:

                    a) Executives and managers prepare reports on the effectiveness of whistleblowing
                       systems and controls for the Board;

                    b) The NED Whistle blowing Champion (if it exists), is responsible for ensuring
                       that a report is made to the Board at least annually, and may comment on its
                       adequacy and quality in preparation;

                    c) If no NED Whistle blowing Champion exists, the Board must still ensure a report
                       is made to the Board at least annually; and

                    d) The whole Board will consider the report and decide as a Board what action, if
                       any, to take in light of the report.

       Collective Board Responsibility

       6.4.3   The Board has three overall tasks to perform in enabling it to do its job of holding those
               in the company to account for enabling, responding to, and learning from,
               whistleblowing. All of these tasks involve the basic Board skill of knowing how their


60
     See Annex A, Section 1.16.
61
     See Annex A, Sections 1.7a, 1.9 and 2.0.

                                                                                            Page 67 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




             Executives are likely to think and act, and to be ready supportively to oversee, and
             rigorously to challenge, their decisions and actions:

                     Maintaining focus on whistleblowing and being alert to any issues which are
                     serious enough to be shared with the Board, which do harm to people, finance,
                     operations and reputation, and have not surfaced through whistleblowing even
                     though they could have done so. The role of the Board (and BAC) is to provide
                     excellent challenge and interrogation to whistleblowing data, the quality of
                     investigations and effectiveness of whistleblowing processes, in ways which
                     encourage people to speak up.

               ii.   Ensuring the Board is not complacent, is open to new perspectives, will carefully
                     consider criticism of current practices and is curious to learn. If the Board can
                     develop these attributes, then it will be more likely to engender a similar outlook
                     in the Executive, encouraging them to be more inclined to be open with their
                     NED colleagues. Whistle blowing by its nature is likely to disclose allegations or
                     evidence of wrongdoing, which are unpalatable or threatening to some people. A
                     natural defensiveness from those who feel threatened is to be expected. It is very
                     important the Board is not pulled into a defensive stance, and keeps an open mind
                     on the matters raised, whilst still being both supportive and interrogative with the
                     Executive.

              iii.   Appreciating how whistleblowers are treated, their lived experience and how
                     whistleblowing is handled. How people see whistleblowing being handled,
                     effects whether others will speak up. When managers are asked about the
                     experience of whistleblowing they may answer along the lines of `we're one big
                     team here, everyone can speak freely'. Whereas closer investigation may show
                     bias in the whistleblowing process, with not all voices treated equally and some
                     staff groups `counting' more than others. Understanding the reality means being
                     curious about a wider range of information than the summary of cases brought b
                     the Board. This will be helped if NEDs make occasional visits to meet people
                     outside the Board room, dropping into various company activities or asking to see
                     evidence of anonymised responses to whistleblowers. This will give different
                     perspectives on what is going on, whilst demonstrating they understand their
                     governance role in overseeing, but not encroaching on the Executive's role.

    Culture and Behaviour

    6.4.4    All the ways in which the Board, its members and its committees, approach and govern
             whistle blowing will have a profound effect on how the culture of the company is
             experienced and the inclination of everyone to relate and report wrongdoing, as well as
             real and potentially bad news, which may not be the result of whistle blowing.

    6.4.5    It is an ill-defined responsibility, implicit in their governance function, for Boards to be
             alert to cues which indicate how the Executive is likely to approach whistle-blowing
             incidents as reported to them, and how they are likely to report to the Board. This is
             further discussed in Section 8.4 Culture. 62




62 See Annex A, Section 1.16.

                                                                                            Page 68 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




6.5 Questions Arising from Section 6 Relevant to POHI
NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and management for the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.


   The Role of the Executive

   6.5.1   What Policies and arrangements for whistle blowing existed? How, if at all, did they
           change over the relevant period?

   6.5.2   Did the Executive seek to understand the perception of whistle blowing in their
           organisation?

   The Role of the Board

   6.5.3   Did the Board /BAC ask for, and receive, information on whistleblowing?

   6.5.4   Who led for whistleblowing on the Board?

   Whistleblowing, with Specific Regard to Horizon and / or SPM Issues

   6.5.5   How could SPMs raise any concerns about wrongdoing in POC/L?

   6.5.6   Is there a record of whistle blowing cases which referenced Horizon?

               a) Who reviewed such reports/record and with what consequences?

   6.5.7   Is there a record of whistle blowing cases which referenced SPM issues?

               a) Who reviewed such reports/record and with what consequences?




                                                                                      Page 69 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




   Stakeholder Management

7.1 Introduction

   7.1.1   All organisations exist in a landscape in which there are external stakeholders who are not
           directly employed by the organisation, and internal stakeholders who, although employed
           by the organisation, are not directly part of its governance. `Stakeholders' are defined by
           their belief, and /or the fact, that they have a stake or an interest in what the organisation
           does, i.e. its business, how it does it in the present, and what it may or will do in the
           future.

   7.1.2   Internal stakeholders typically include:

           a) Employees who may see themselves, or be seen as, a single group with common
              interests or as members of several groups (e.g. general workforce, specialists, middle
              management);

           b) The elected or designated internal representatives of employees in trade unions or
              other associations.

   7.1.3   External stakeholders typically include:

               a) Customers/ clients who 'buy' goods and services through sales from the
                  organisation;

               b) Suppliers of goods, equipment, and services (including professional services of
                  audit, legal, management and technical consultancies) to the organisation;

               c) Distributors of goods and services provided by the organisation;

               d) Funders through grants/ subsidies (e.g. government, charities and other bodies);

               e) Funders through equity (stock investors, owners);

               f)   Funders through debt (banks and other creditors);

               g) Trade unions or other associations who represent employees;

               h) Regulators and law officers; and

               i)   Representatives of `public opinion', citizen `watchdogs' and media
                    commentators.

   7.1.4   Stakeholder management, as an identified activity for Boards and Executives, has grown
           as a subject for attention in the last 30 years, even though it has always been implicit in
           governing and running companies. This trend has come with increasing sophistication in
           risk management, and more recently, increasing emphasis on the importance of Boards
           taking account of non-financial, workforce related and wider considerations like




                                                                                         Page 70 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                          EXPG0000006




             sustainability, human rights and equality. For organisations which are wholly owned by
             the government, the emphasis on wider public interests is more likely to have an impact 63

     7.1.5   For example, in POL, securing a universal network of post offices is a public good and a
             policy goal of great interest to the government, whereas it may not sit easily with the
             corporate strategic objective to run an efficient network.

7.2 Identifying Important Stakeholders

     7.2.1   The list of stakeholders to which a Board or Executive are required to consult, or report is
             usually short, and limited by specific laws and regulations. For example, reporting to
             shareholders, consulting with recognised trade unions, or negotiating on the terms of
             specific contracts with suppliers, customers or employees64

     7.2.2   Nonetheless it is considered good practice for Boards and Executives to pay attention to
             key stakeholder relationships, beyond specific requirements, for the simple reason that
             their capacity to deliver their company's strategic goals and to run the comparry depends
             in part on building good stakeholder relationships.

     7.2.3   A Board's or Executive's attention will focus on stakeholders who:

                 a) Have rights in law to be consulted and to receive reports;

                 b) Are powerful, with strength which can significantly impact the organisation's
                    financial performance, growth, or reputation. The power of any stakeholder rests
                    in part in law and contract, and often reflects the ease with which they can be
                    replaced, and the strength of their voice in the Board room, in media, and in other
                    contexts, where their views can positively or negatively impact the organisation.


7.3 Considerations in Stakeholder Relations

     7.3.1   Once a stakeholder is identified as one who must, or should, not be ignored, the following
             considerations come into play, although not usually in a formal explicit way.

                 a) Strength and Base of Relationship:

                         i.   Power: source and strength (e.g. market scarcity, the law);
                        ii.   Influence: source and strength (e.g. history, connections); and
                       iii.   Legitimacy: the basis of their `right' to be involved.

                 b) Interests: Aligned, Conflicting, Unrelated:

                         i.   Areas of conflict/ compatibility/ complementarity/ synergy of interests,
                              goals and priorities;
                        ii.   Inclination to support, delay, obstruct each other's goals;
                       iii.   Compatibility of perceived risks, and their mitigation;


63
  See Annex A, Sections 1.1
a See Annex A, Sections 1.1, 1.2, 1.6, 1.7a, 1.18 and 1.19 illustrative guidance stakeholder engagement

                                                                                               Page 71 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




                    iv.    Sources of tension in the relationship on either side; and
                     v.    On balance, are they allies, enemies or bystanders?

               c) Impact: Positive, Negative, Neutral:

                      i.   Contribution of technical, human, financial, reputational resources/
                           networks?
                     ii.   How scarce is their resource, are there multiple alternative suppliers?
                    iii.   Relevant knowledge: What? How much? How crucial?
                    iv.    Relationships, networks and coalitions: how do they fit within the wider
                           network of stakeholder relationships of allies, enemies and bystanders?

               d) Mechanisms for Management:

                      i.   Communications: formal and informal means of maintaining two-way
                           communications? Are the topics constrained by law or regulation?
                     ii.   Raising concerns: opportunities, encouragement, discouragement for
                           either party to raise concerns, highlight tensions or report major
                           problems?
                    iii.   Planning: mechanisms for sharing plans and seeking views?
                    iv.    Conflict: mechanisms for identifying and resolving conflict?

               e) Culture and History:

                      i.   What assumptions have grown and prevail about each party's integrity
                           and honesty, competence, skills, sense of common purpose?
                     ii.   Is the relationship governed by contract? And if so, where does it stand
                           on a scale from exclusively transactional (governed solely by contract,
                           with each party believing they should maximise their separate benefit), to
                           being part of a wider relationship in which specific contractual
                           obligations are a part?
                    iii.   Whether governed by contract or not, is the relationship seen as one in
                           which there is scope/ expectation for the parties to work to a common
                           purpose?
                    iv.    Trust: is either or both parties trusted by the other?

   7.3.2   The list above illustrates the complexities and choices involved in stakeholder
           management. It is not prescribed in any code, and it is not exhaustive in practice. It
           indicates the sorts of considerations which are made, often in piecemeal ways by
           Executives and Boards. These considerations over time become part of the culture. (See
           section 8.4).

7.4 Managing Stakeholders: The Role of the Executive

   7.4.1   Stakeholder management is a key part of the Executive's responsibility to run the
           business to achieve the company's goals. The Executive makes implicit or explicit
           choices about with whom, and how, to build relationships, and who internally will be in
           the `front' line of relationship management and maintenance. This is rarely formalised.
           Some relationships will fit into functional responsibilities (eg. HR leading on
           relationships with trade unions, PR with media, operations specialists with IT suppliers,
           investor relations with shareholders), others will be led by line management (e.g. for

                                                                                        Page 72 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                           EXPG0000006




                workforce and suppliers), and others will go with specific accountabilities (ag.
                Accounting Officer for Government, contract management for contractors).

       7.4.2    It is generally considered good practice that specific functional relationships will not
                absolve `line' management from creating and maintaining relationships in the normal
                course of their business.

       7.4.3    The higher up the organisation one goes, the wider and more diverse the stakeholder
                landscape and the greater the inclination to delegate and to make choices about `relative
                importance'.

       7.4.4    When there are multiple points of contact with any one stakeholder, the Executive should
                pay attention to the extent to which information is shared and synthesised within the
                company and should maintain an eye to omissions in communication to avoid an
                assumption that `someone' else is dealing with, or knows, something, which ends up
                being ignored by al1 65


7.5 Stakeholder Relationships: The Role of the Board



       7.5.1    As with all areas of Executive responsibility, the Board has a responsibility to oversee
                how the Executive is managing key stakeholders and to call the Executive to account for
                any problems. For example, if, through BAC or BRC, The Board was to find that internal
                controls governing reporting and control of third-party suppliers are not working as they
                should, it would expect the Executive to put in place remedial action and to report back
                on the matter. Given the organisation's stakeholder landscape is wide, the Board needs to
                maintain a wide interest in the Executive's performance in stakeholder management and
                keep an eye out for unexpected developments.

       7.5.2    At the same time, the Board itself will hold some key relationships and there should be
                clarity and good communications between those involved. For example, the Group Chair
                of a listed company would be expected to have relationships with large shareholders and
                with the Chairs of wholly owned subsidiaries. If there is a major supplier contract the
                Chair would probably want to open up direct communications with the Chair of the
                supplier. If there is a wholly owned subsidiary company, with a Board, it would be
                reasonable to expect the Chairs of parent and subsidiary Boards to have open
                communications. Other relationships will be led by other Board members, e.g. the Chair
                of BAC with the lead partner of the External Auditor; or the Chair ofRemuneration
                committee in direct contact with large shareholders or their representatives in order to
                explain remuneration policy and its application in remuneration decisions.

       7.5.3    These Board level relationships are often informal and not part of any formal governance
                arrangements. Their existence means there are already open channels of communication if
                tensions and problems arise. They do not always exist, and they are not always successful
                in alleviating tensions and solving problems 66




65
     See Annex A, Sections 1.1, 1.2, 1.4a, 1.4b, 1.6, 1.7a, 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
66
     See Annex A, Sections 1.4b, 1.6, 1.7a and 1.11.

                                                                                             Page 73 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




7.6 Key Stakeholders in the POC/L

   7.6.1   As there is no guide/ code for identifying and managing stakeholders, those involved in
           any context make their own decisions about how best to navigate the stakeholder
           landscape.

   7.6.2   Taking the relevant period 1999-2019, and the matters before the POHI, three external
           stakeholders stand out for attention:

               a) The government, and its representatives, as owner,

               b) Fujitsu as key supplier contractor; and

               c) SPMs.


   7.6.3    Building on the list of considerations in stakeholder relations (7.3 above), questions
              which are relevant to POHI are identified for each of these three stakeholders.


7.7 Questions Arising from Section 7 relevant to POHI



NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and management for the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.

   The Government

   7.7.1   The government, albeit at arm's length, was the only shareholder in POC/L.

   7.7.2   The government dealt with POC/L though intermediary oversight and ownership entities,
           as shown in Annex B and Section 1.6. At any one time there were relationships with up to
           four levels.

   7.7.3   The questions below relate to characteristics of the relationships within this quartet of
           levels.

               a) Strategic Interest and Goals

                      i.   Were the interests and goals of the POC/L and the Government aligned?
                           If there was divergence, was this discussed? And were suggestions made
                           for resolution?

                     ii.   Even if they went unvoiced, were tensions between strategies and goals,
                           and conflicts of interest, identified?




               b) Power and Authority



                                                                                        Page 74 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




                      i.   Once the strategy and goals were known, did the POCIL at Level 1 feel
                           and act as if it were relatively independent, or were its operations subject
                           to detailed scrutiny and instruction from the government or its
                           representatives?

               c) Maintaining Relationships

                      i.   Which roles in the Executives and Boards at each of the 4 levels were
                           expected to maintain an appropriate relationship with the others?

                     ii.   Was the nature of any of these relationships ever discussed in Boards?

Fujitsu


   7.7.4   Fujitsu was a key major contractor.

   7.7.5   The Horizon IT system contract was highly material to delivering the strategy and
           operations of the PO, and, we assume, highly material to Fujitsu's financial performance
           and reputation. Each had a great deal invested in the relationship. Relative power
           depended on the nature of the contract, and symmetry (or not) of knowledge of the
           progress and problems.

   7.7.6   The questions below relate to characteristics of the relationships between POB
           organisations identified in Annex B and Fujitsu:

               a) Contract

                      i.   What was the nature of the contract and the legitimacy, rights, and duties
                           of each side?

                     ii.   To what extent did the contract enable the interests and goals of PO and
                           Fujitsu to be aligned?


               b) Authority and Accountability

                      i.   What were the rights of each party to knowledge of progress and
                           problems, and to meet the financial and operational consequences of
                           problems?

                     ii.   What were the sources of power and authority in the relationships with
                           Fujitsu?

                    iii.   When inevitable tensions arose between the parties, how were they
                           resolved/ mitigated?

               c) Board Oversight

                      i.   How was Board oversight maintained, relations built and any identified
                           problems interrogated?


                                                                                        Page 75 of 133
                                                                                                 EXP00000006
                                                                                               EXPG0000006




Sub Post Masters


7.7.7   POC/l was highly dependent on the network of SPMs for delivery of its operations. The
        SPMs were dependent on the POC/L for their capacity to run a PO.

7.7.8   The questions below relate to characteristics of the relationships between POC/L and
        SPMs, and in so far as they were involved, the other 3 levels identified in Annex B:

           a) Goals and Interests

                   i.   In what ways were the goals and strategies of SPMs aligned with the
                        goals and strategies of the POC/L?

                  ii.   Was any attention given to addressing tensions in the relationship


           b) Power

                   i.   Was there a scarcity of people who wanted to be SPMs?

                  ii.   Could SPMs speak with an independent collective voice in negotiations
                        or raising concerns?


            c) Contract Conditions

                   i.   How was risk in the contract divided between SPMs and PO?

                  ii.   Arrangements for Training and Induction of SPMs.


            d) Communication

                   i.   POC/L communications: normally `two-way', `down', `across' or `up' to
                        SPMs?

                  ii.   Reporting about relations with SPMs from POC/L to other levels of
                        accountability in AnnexB? To whom? About what?

                 iii.   Opportunities, encouragement, discouragement for SPMs and any other
                        party to raise concerns, highlight tensions, report major problems?

                 iv.    Position within the wider POC/L organisation: which levels and functions
                        typically interacted with SPMs or their representatives?

            e) Place in POC/L Culture

                   i.   What attitudes and beliefs prevailed about SPM's skills, integrity,
                        motivation, honesty, competence, and replaceability?

                  ii.   Degree of trust assumed in the SPM /POC/L relationship?

                                                                                    Page 76 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




8   Experiencing Governance and Management

8.1 Introduction

    8.1.1   Sections 1-7 have been constructed around the scaffolding provided by the laws and
            codes which deal with the governance and management of companies in private and
            public hands (Annex A), paying particular attention to the accountability relationships
            current in POB during the relevant period (Annex B).

    8.1.2   Section 8 takes a different perspective. It addresses governance and management from an
            experiential perspective. It discusses concepts to highlight the actual experience of
            working, managing and governing in POC/L and associated organisations as outlined in
            Annex B.

    8.1.3   It has 4 sub-sections:

                a) Authority Power, Interest, Influence and Conflict;

                b) Leadership;

                c) Culture; and

                d) Communication.

    8.1.4   Each of these concepts is important in illuminating how the accountabilities and expected
            practices which are at the heart of governance and management and described in Sections
            1-7, become part of the lived reality of companies.

8.2 Authority, Power, Interest, Influence and Conflict

    Authority

    8.2.1   Authority derives directly from formal structures of roles and relationships, controls, and
            systems. It has face value validity in formal titles and positions. For example, Chair,
            CEO, NED, or Head of specialist IT function has authority to act and to take decisions as
            specified in various documents for someone in their position. Authority bestows a
            legitimacy to act within codes of governance and management. It provides the basis of
            accountability (Section 2).

    Power

    8.2.2   Power is related to authority, but it is not an exact replication, as there are sources of
            power which are beyond formal authority and their relationship to authority may be
            consistent, opposite, or independent. Sources of power, beside or beyond authority, may
            be considered in three categories:

                a) The first is the provision, control and access to scarce and valued human, social,
                   financial, and material resources.




                                                                                        Page 77 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




            b) The second is force, punishment, and negative sanctions. There is some linkage
               between these two: withholding the first, e.g. by denying promotion or restricting
               access to essential technical problem-solving skills, may provide the base for the
               second.

            c) The third source of power is in the characteristics of individuals: their personality,
               powers of persuasion, reputation and what may be called `charisma' or personal
               capacities (irrespective of resources or force) to get others to follow.

8.2.3   These 3 generic sources of power are not necessarily related to legitimate authority
        structures, although there are often links, particularly when it comes to the first, namely
        the provision, control, and access to scarce and valued resources, which is often aligned
        to authority structures.

Power and Authority

8.2.4   Power and authority can be viewed together as providing the capacity in a company to
        secure decisions, to take actions and to get others to play a part in enabling these
        decisions or actions. Whereas authority is vested in formal structures of legitimacy, power
        strays beyond the confines of legitimate authority, and may extend to the capacity to
        create situations in which formal accountability may be obscured.

8.2.5   Legitimate authority is predicated on a view that the structures in which it is embedded
        are designed to create conditions in which the organisation will be effective, and in which
        conflicts of personal interest will be transparently managed.

8.2.6   Power has no such foundation and indeed may create conditions which are aligned with
        interests which are not those of the company. Company interests are based in approved
        corporate strategies and operational plans. Power can be used to pursue other interests
        (including self-interests) which may negate, frustrate or impede the interests of the
        company.

Power and Conflict

8.2.7   Power and conflict interact in a fundamental way. Power is a property of social
        relationships, in situations where there is some divergence of, and conflict between, those
        involved. Conflict in companies may arise over who is going to make a decision or take
        an action; and over who is able to forward options to be considered or to set the agenda. If
        there is complete unanimity (no conflict) on both points, power is redundant, because
        there is agreement on who legitimately has the authority in that given situation to take the
        decision or action, and agreement on who legitimately has the authority in that given
        situation to put forward options for consideration and set the agenda. This emphasises the
        importance of having clear lines of authority and accountability as setting tie context in
        which decisions and actions are taken.

Interests

8.2.8   Power relationships may be exposed, or hidden when the voices, desires, or interests of
        one party are frustrated by the decisions, actions, interests of another party. Power play
        may be particularly evident in organisations where there is a lack of clear lines of


                                                                                     Page 78 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




               authority and an opaqueness or major disagreement about the company's strategies and
               operational plans.

       8.2.9   In such situations it is unclear what is really in, and not in, the company's interests, as
               well as being unclear about how such conflicts will be resolved. Advancing `other
               interests' may also be thought to relate to individual or group 'self interest', as well as
               advancing alternative views of what is in the company's best interests. Without a clear
               strategy, which is well communicated throughout the organisation, and without clear lines
               of accountability, there is plenty of scope for power play and conflict to become
               embedded and inhibit effective decision making and operational performance.

       8.2.10 Codes of governance and conduct stress the vital importance of having clear policies on
              declaring and handling conflicts of interest; which are implemented and regularly
              reviewed.

       Influence

       8.2.11 Influence can be viewed as the process by which the views and preferences of dissenting
              voices become aligned with those of another party or parties and thus agreement is
              reached without any exercise of authority or overt power.

       Overt and Covert Power and Influence

       8.2.12 The words `overt power' is a reminder that conflicts of interest are not always manifest in
              open disagreement or contradictory actions.

       8.2.13 Dawson describes five scenarios created by different conditions of overt or covert
              expressions of conflict, the exercise of power and the extent to which there is shared and
              symmetrical knowledge about the issue 67 In the first scenario, there are overt expressions
              of conflict, shared and symmetrical knowledge about the issue on which there are
              conflicting views, and each interested party will/can press its own interest. This, together
              with a clear strategy and plan, lays the foundations for an effective process of decision
              making and operations.

       8.2.14 There are 4 more scenarios (2 to 5) of increasing degrees of covertness of conflict and
              power which interact with access to relevant information. In Scenarios 2 and 3, there is
              full symmetrical knowledge of the issue, but some parties choose not to speak their views
              or press their interests. Two reasons normally prevail here. The second scenario returns to
              the concept of legitimate authority in that although parties disagree with the position
              taken by others, and may suffer some damage from it, they consider that the other parties
              are legitimately in `authority' over them and therefore they have no legitimacy to
              challenge and so they keep quiet. In the third scenario the decision is taken not to press an
              alternative view because of fear of consequences, for example, they will lose the
              argument anyway, they won't be given a fair hearing, they will jeopardise some other,
              more important, aspect of their personal position, or they will suffer reputational damage,
              and so they keep quiet.

       8.2.15 A greater degree of covertness is found in the fourth scenario where the issue is not
              known or fully understood by at least one of the parties. This may reflect the intentions of

67   Figure 7.1 Dawson, Analysing organisations 1986.

                                                                                           Page 79 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




               others to keep information from them, or it may be that they have simply not been in the
               communication flows where the issue is known. Whatever the cause of knowledge
               asymmetry, some parties are excluded (sometimes deliberately, sometimes not) from
               pressing their interest and raising their voice, because they do not have any or much
               knowledge about what is going on and miss the opportunity to press their interests.

       8.2.16 The most obscure forms of power and conflict (the fifth scenario) are found embedded
              within the prevailing culture. In this scenario, the `issue' which would be contested if it
              were seen and understood, is simply not raised or discussed; it is part of the taken for
              granted assumptions of how an organisation operates. Information is `institutionally'
              obscured and in so doing, excluded parties are disadvantaged in ways of which they are
              ignorant. Following Bachrach and Baratz,68 whose studies of political institutions can be
              directly read into work organisations, this is sometimes known as 'non decision making'
              which is 'the practice of limiting the scope of actual decision making to safe issues by
              manipulating the dominant community values, myths and political institutions and
              procedures '. 69

       8.2.17 There is no reason why academic analyses of power and conflict should be known by
              Boards and Senior Executives in companies. However, the underlying principles of
              coherence of strategy, clarity of accountability, articulation of the company's purpose, a
              culture of openness, transparency, challenging assumptions, curiosity and listening which
              we have discussed in the preceding sections draw attention to the role ofBoards and
              Senior Executives in living these principles. People at all levels in the company lnow
              through their experience whether authority is respected as legitimate, whether people are
              held to account for their actions, whether there is much political intrigue and power play,
              whether assumptions are challenged, whether contrary voices are heard and even sought,
              and whether there is open discussion of major issues including considerations of
              anticipated and unanticipated consequences which may seriously damage the company,
              its workforce or external stakeholders. Paradoxically against a background of clear
              coherent strategies and structures, an open debate in which many voices may be heard,
              can lead to everyone coming together and supporting the decisions which are made.

       8.2.18 Similarly, it is reasonable to expect the Board and Senior Executives to be alert to
              patterns of power and influence within their organisations, which are outside the
              legitimate authority structures and lead to the unusual dominance, isolation or
              subjugation of any part, or parts, of the organisation.

       Questions arising from Section 8.2 Relevant to POHI

NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and management for the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.


       8.2.19 Where do we find knowledge, interest or curiosity in understanding the situation of SPMs
              who were contesting their convictions or civil claims?

       8.2.20 What were the authority and power relations between SPMs (either individually or
              collectively) and those in POLL to whom they were accountable?

68   1963, p632.
69   Quoted in Dawson 1986, p 152.

                                                                                           Page 80 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




   8.2.21 What were the authority and power relations between SPMs (either individually or
          collectively) and those in POC/L with whom they routinely dealt?

   8.2.22 Where and over what was there conflict between the 4 levels of accountability
          summarised in Annex B?

   8.2.23 In what ways were the strategic interests of each of the organisations identified in Annex
          B aligned or misaligned?


8.3 Leadership

   Introduction

   8.3.1   Leadership is a word found in almost every discussion about management and
           governance. It is the subject of many definitions, thousands of books, articles and papers,
           hundreds of testing tools, and features as a set of skills in nearly all job specifications for
           middle and senior level appointments in most organisations.

   8.3.2   As a topic in personal training and development, it is often said that leadership is not
           necessarily synonymous with formal position; that leadership can be embodied by anyone
           who is practicing the art of getting others to come with them (the leader) to adiieve
           something or make changes they (the `others') may not otherwise choose to do.

   8.3.3   For this report however, we are dealing with a much more restricted focus on the
           behaviours and attitudes of those who were 'in charge', because they held formal
           `leadership' positions as Board members, Executives, and managers in the relevant
           organisations. In Section 2 on accountability, we dealt with the formal expectations
           associated with these leadership roles. In this section we deal with how the behaviours
           and attitudes of people in formal leadership roles are experienced by those who are junior
           to them.


   The Leadership Impact of those in Senior Leadership Positions

   8.3.4   We are interested in the set of behaviours, attitudes, and beliefs which the senior leaders
           in the organisations described in Annex B displayed (whether intentionally or not), and
           the impact of their behaviours, attitudes and beliefs on others. For example, Leadership
           may be experienced:

               a) As dictatorial (being told the task, what to do and feeling no opportunity to
                  question or alter the commands, or broaden or redefine the nature of the task

               b) As consultative (being asked for views on the task in hand and having
                  suggestions being considered before being told what to do); or

               c) As empowering (being given a task, and support and autonomy in deciding how
                  to undertake it or redefine it).



                                                                                           Page 81 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                EXPG0000006




8.3.5   Leadership may also be seen as `effective', `good', 'strong', or `ineffective', 'poor',
        'weak'. The prevailing subjective view of what is `effective', `good', and `strong'
        changes over time and space; it is context specific and is much influenced by prevailing
        beliefs in wider society, experience of leadership in organisations which have delivered
        and sustained strong performance, external commentary, and the results of research on the
        leadership behaviours, attitudes and beliefs which will deliver better performance.

8.3.6   What can be said for all times is that the impact ofleadership (in whatever guise) is
        always present. People will always be looking at what those `above them' are doing, how
        they are doing it and draw their own conclusions about what this means for how they
        should and will behave and act. In most organisations there are documents and procedures
        which describe what and why the organisation has done, is doing and will do in the
        future. People's experience of leadership reveals to them what they come to believe the
        organisation is really doing and seeking to do.

8.3.7   Here are 5 illustrative examples of the real impact of leaders in formal positions of
        authority:

            a) Whilst there will be statements about an organisation's purpose, vision, priorities
               and direction, people's experience of their leaders will show them what is really
               important;

            b) Whilst there will be statements of values and principles, the leader's behaviour
               and attitudes will show which values and principles are really rewarded,
               encouraged, discouraged, or sanctioned;

            c) Whilst there will be procedures for handling failures and problems, the leaders'
               actual response when problems arise, or there are identified failures, or there are
               implicit hints of problems/failures, will show if there is likely to be a quick jump
               to blame, or to learn lessons, or to close down discussion, or to open up a broad
               investigation;

            d) Whilst there will be many procedures and policies governing employment, and
               there may be a `people strategy', members of the workforce will experience the
               reality of these procedures through their interactions with their leaders; and

            e) Whilst there will be clear procedures for the identification, reporting,
               management and mitigation of risk, people's experience of their leaders'
               engagement with risk, will show them if these risk processes are mainly tick box
               exercises, or living management tools which may lead to reassessment of risks.

8.3.8   It is for the CEO and their senior team to decide the leadership style they believe best
        serves the organisation in any given time. Their decisions may be explicit or may simply
        emerge from the way they behave. In making their choice they should be mindful of their
        judgements about many things, including their employee expectations, experience and
        skills profiles, the amount of discretion and autonomy people need to do their jobs
        effectively, and the risk profile of the company.




                                                                                     Page 82 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




   Questions arising from Section 8.3 Relevant to POHI

NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and management for the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.


   8.3.9   What behaviours, attitudes and beliefs were believed to characterise those in leadership
           positions in each of the organisations which ran and oversaw POC/L?

   8.3.10 What was the impact on the POC/L of the behaviours, attitudes, and beliefs of those in
          leadership positions in any of the other organisations in Annex B?

   8.3.11 What was the impact of those in leadership positions in organisations which ran and
          oversaw POC/L on:

               a) The management of HORIZON;

               b) The handling of investigations and prosecutions of SPMs; and

               c) The SPM's claims of miscarriages of justice?


8.4 Culture

   Introduction

   8.4.1   Culture in an organisation refers to the collection of attitudes, values, behaviour, and
           beliefs which characterise the everyday experience of employees and those who regularly
           interact with companies as customers and suppliers. There is a strong overlap with the
           experience people have of their senior leaders (section 8.3), but culture is broader than
           that and embraces the whole organisation, as is illustrated by two examples.

   8.4.2   Culture is experienced by employees when they feel encouraged to speak up on matters
           of concern about someone's conduct, knowing their bosses and colleagues will listen and
           consider their views or, in a different culture, where they feel inhibited from speaking up
           about their concerns, fearing that they themselves may be ignored, humiliated, or even
           victimised.

   8.4.3   In a second example culture is experienced by contractors when they feel welcomed into
           a social environment which encourages collaborative joint problem solving with respect
           for everyone's views or, where they feel barely noticed and discouraged from making
           suggestions.

   8.4.4   These experiences are not constrained by formal statements or contractual terms. Indeed
           where experience and formal statements or contracts are contradictory, the experience
           always triumphs in influencing what people think about the culture of their organisation.
           Thus, in the first example (8.4.2), the experience of discouragement in the context of a
           statement that the organisation is committed to `listening and learning' contributes to an
           experience of cynical alienation.



                                                                                       Page 83 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




The Role of the Executive in Culture

8.4.5   The Executive's role is to run the company in ways which will achieve the company's
        strategic goals. Culture, being the attitudes, values, behaviour and beliefs, which are
        experienced in the company, is likely to have an impact on corporate performance. The
        Executive has a responsibility to attempt to ensure that the company has a culture which
        will support its strategy. However, whilst the Executive role in creating culture is crucial,
        its very nature means that culture cannot be created or managed by the Executive alone.
        This makes it especially important that the Executive seek ways to establish for itself, the
        real nature of the culture. This can be challenging as enquiries instigated voluntarily may
        reveal evidence which is unpalatable.

Statements, Experience, and Enquiry

8.4.6   Culture reflects what is said by Executives e.g. in publicised statements about the
        company's values, written codes of workplace conduct, formally reported structures and
        control systems or contractual terms, but it is neither limited by these statements, nor
        necessarily aligned with them. A statement that 'we are a learning organisation always
        eager to improve', may actually be experienced as 'they say they want our ideas, but no-
        one ever listens to us'.

8.4.7   Where the experience does not reinforce the statement, especially if the experience is on
        the negative side of the statement, the experienced culture may lead to cynical
        disengagement from what is seen as hypocritical or disinterested leadership. In cases
        where there is no misalignment and the experience matches or even exceeds the rhetoric,
        the culture is an asset creating a shared commitment to promulgated values and codes of
        conduct.

8.4.8   Executives who want to look beyond their rhetoric to find ways to check the experience
        of the people in their company may do this by inviting candid feedback from their
        subordinates in situations where there is no indication that negative feedback will elivit a
        `punishing' response; or by seeking the results of independently conducted anonymised
        staff or customer or contractor feedback and satisfaction surveys; or by independently
        conducted 360 degree feedback, or simply having their 'eyes and ears' open to what is
        going on.

8.4.9   Even if there are no statements about values (as was normally the case40 or so years ago)
        culture still exists, but without the added dimension of comparison with what is said or
        written.

Status and Stories

8.4.10 A good indicator of culture is the stories of those who are congratulated or ignored when
       there are corporate gatherings or other opportunities for collective social activity. These
       will reveal what, or who, is highly valued and may influence many people's future
       behaviour.

8.4.11 It is not unusual for stories and stereotypes about particular groups in a cunpany to
       become part of the culture, even though there is no basis in anything written or planned.
       Examples of shared beliefs include: 'W group is very aloof' or `X group is very clever but
       they are really helpful if you ask them' or 'no one ever stays long in Y group' or 'be

                                                                                      Page 84 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




        careful you can't really trust Z group'. Such beliefs are built over time and reflect, inter
        alia, the nature of people's work and careers as well as reflecting some of the issues of
        power and interest discussed in section 8.2. They do not necessarily reflect the reality, but
        they are real in their consequences. It is for the Executive to look beyond these
        stereotypes, to establish the reality in any area of the company and then, if they can, to
        address their root foundations and ensure standards of conduct and openness are upheld.

8.4.12 If left unchallenged, inaccurate and unhelpful stereotypes continue; some groups are
       unfairly ignored, others are unfairly championed.

8.4.13 A set of such assumptions may incline authority (at any level) to privilege the views and
       positions of certain groups who may be the subject of complaint because they are seen as
       more important to the business than others, more trustworthy than others, mote invested
       in the core business or some other reason. Similarly, a set of assumptions may incline
       authority (at any level) to disregard the views, raised concerns and positions of certain
       groups who are deemed to be easily replaceable or untrustworthy or more attached to
       their own interests which diverge from the interests of the company.

8.4.14 Not all Executives want to open themselves and their cultures to challenge, or to spend
       the time and resources on understanding more about culture. They may feel the culture is
       fine, or even if there are problems, they are relatively inconsequential or best left
       undiscussed.

8.4.15 Good practice is that culture does matter and that Executives should seek ways to
       investigate its impact and attempt, through their own example, to align it to support
       corporate performance.

The Role of the Board in Culture

Board Oversight

8.4.16 As with all aspects of the operations of the company, the Board has a responsibility to
       oversee, challenge and support the Executive's role in securing whatever will achieve the
       company's strategic goals. Formal guidance relating to the Board's specific role in
       overseeing culture in an organisation is limited and generic. The Board has responsibility
       for safeguarding the financial success of the company and other decisions are expected to
       flow from this.

8.4.17 Many Executive teams will report on the cultural aspects of strategy, only when they are
       specifically asked about matters which can indicate culture, for example: workforce
       perceptions of leadership in key areas, issues of talent acquisition and retention, staff
       feedback and more generically whether aspects of culture pose any risk to the prospects
       of the organisation.

8.4.18 The Board however, may choose to require the Executive to undertake particular surveys
       or use focus groups or other means to access culture. The fact it is not a required reporting
       matter means that a NED scrutinising role may be critical. The Board may decide it wants
       to ensure some direct NED oversight involvement in these activities.

8.4.19 The separation of roles of operations and oversight in respect of culture can be illustrated
       in the context of Whistleblowing (see Section 6). NEDs should ask about the perception

                                                                                     Page 85 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                        EXPG0000006




               of the whistleblowing processes and challenge whether the organisation is doing enough
               to safeguard an open culture. The Executive are responsible for reporting whether and
               how the whistleblowing processes are used, and for creating an open culture.

       8.4.20 Discussions of other company's scandals and crises create an opportunity for Boards
              collectively to consider whether they have sufficient oversight of the culture and in
              particular, to assure themselves that the organisation has suitable processes for listening
              and detecting problems. The guidance produced by the BEIS in 2015 (BEIS, 2015)
              emphasises the need for these processes?0

       Statements of Ethics and Conduct

       8.4.21 Modern governance codes dating back to the Cadbury (1992) reference the requirement
              for Boards and management teams to have a shared expectation of the standards of
              conduct expected of them and the Executive. The idea is that the Board should be able to
              trust that the Executive have principles or ethical standards which may be written down,
              so that a company Executive and its Board can recognise when such principles are being
              followed on not.

       8.4.22 Ethics statements provide a framework for behaviour within and by the organisation. The
              practice of involving staff in developing such statements has grown over time so that
              mutual expectations are set and understood, technically thereby making it easier 1r
              anyone to call out behaviour which is misaligned with the company's values and purpose.
              Whether this happens or not, and whether the rhetoric of the statement is matched by
              experience, are matters for the Board to consider.

       The Culture of the Board Room

       8.4.23 The Combined Codes (1998, 2003) guide the Chair to ensure the Board functions
              effectively. The Board and particularly its Chair, has an implied responsibility for
              ensuring that the culture of the Board is fit for its purpose of fulfilling its role in
              oversight, challenge, and support of the Executive.

       8.4.24 This responsibility means enquiring into members experiences of the Board itself. For
              example, do NEDs feel that the Chair allows sufficient time for discussion and challenge?
              Are questions which challenge accepted ways of doing things, encouraged? Are there
              questions which probe people's experience of behaviour and values in the company and
              including the extent to which they are aligned to formal statements and the pursuit of the
              company's objectives?

       8.4.25 The Board's responsibilities for evaluating its own performance (see section 2) are
              relevant at two levels. The effectiveness of the Board will depend to some extent on its
              own culture, and its effectiveness as a Board, impacts its effectiveness in enquiring into
              the nature of the culture of the company.

       8.4.26 There are dangers that the culture of the Boardroom may discourage exactly the
              behaviours which are identified as important in effective boards. For example: are
              conformity, obedience to hierarchy or the peer process of group-think encouraged? This
              can lead to the disregard of available evidence, a failure to look beyond accepted

70   See Annex A, Section 1.16.

                                                                                              Page 86 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                EXPG0000006




        available evidence, poor quality decision making and a very limited view of the Board's
        agenda. In contrast, if there is open debate, open horizon scanning, interrogation of
        reports and challenge to accepted assumptions, within well managed meetings which give
        time for discussion and yet ensure clear decisions are made, the quality of decision
        making is likely to be enhanced.

8.4.27 A particular aspect of Board culture will be experiences of sharing bad news. It is always
       in the company's interests for the Board to be appraised of real, or potentially, bad news.
       However if the Executive is fearful the Board will, as the Executive see it, over-react, and
       the Executives will get disproportionately `sucked' into the blame, they may be less
       inclined to full disclosure.

8.4.28 Fear of consequences increases when the Executive(s) are actually aware they are
       `culpable,' so there may be an inclination to `cover up'. Even Executive teams in genuine
       `learning organisations' with risk and learning at their core, often find reporting lad news
       to the Board difficult. The Chair and NEDs have a responsibility to establish they will be
       thoughtful and measured in their response to bad news. Neither quick to blame, not to
       condone, but to investigate and support and come to the right decisions for the company.

Remuneration and Culture

8.4.29 The Board's role, normally delegated to the Board Remuneration Committee (BRemC), is
       to develop and implement the remuneration policy, as it applies to Senior Executives.
       This becomes directly relevant to culture in so far as incentives and disincentives are built
       into every remuneration policy and are likely to result in Executives giving priority to
       some aspects of performance and behaviour, and less attention to others. The FRC
       guidance (2016c) offers as `helpful advice' that BRemC and the Board should regularly
       assess culture and ensure alignment of Executive rewards with corporate culture. Such
       advice should be heeded if the Board wishes to ensure that the incentives and
       disincentives in remuneration reflect those which will serve the company's interests. It
       must think carefully if there are any unanticipated consequences which could skew
       behaviour and culture.




8.4.30 The BRemC may also have a watching brief on the overall approach to remuneration for
       the whole company, although this is not a requirement. In any case, the Board's
       operational oversight responsibilities should encompass knowledge of any particular
       remuneration practices which are likely to impact the culture of the organisation For
       example, if there are bonus or commission arrangements, what sorts of behaviour do they
       encourage?




                                                                                    Page 87 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




   Questions arising from Section 8.4 Relevant to POHI

NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and managementfor the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.


   On the Culture of their Organisations

   8.4.31 When if at all, did the Executives or Boards:
            a) Have written statements on values, codes of conduct, and behaviours, which were
                 available to all employees?

               b) Seek to gauge the culture of their organisation?

               c) Review & report on policies & procedures for employee consultation or
                  `speaking up'?

               d) Review the impact of remuneration arrangements on the culture of the company?

   8.4.32 What evidence is there of Executives or Boards:

               a) Listening to views of those employed in their organisations?

               b) Displaying curiosity to learn in ways which might challenge taken for granted
                  assumptions about the nature of problems?

               c) Being open to consider the identification of problems and possible solutions in
                  non-hierarchical ways?

               d) If faced with a problem or crisis, seeking to learn from other organisations or
                  from those with direct knowledge of the issues?


   On the Culture Surrounding the Management of SPMs

   8.4.33 What data about SPMs was regularly collected and what of that was regularly reported to
          the Board? For example, did reports include:

               a) SPM experiences of working with POL?

   8.4.34 What evidence is there of institutional assumptions about SPMs:

               a) Why (for what?) were SPMs valued?

               b) SPM's presumed motivations? E.g. direct financial benefits, collateral benefits
                  from sales of other products (e.g. groceries), services (e.g. dry cleaning), and
                  service to the community?

               c) Was anything done to check assumed motivations?

   8.4.35 How were SPMs managed and controlled?

                                                                                      Page 88 of 133
                                                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




               a) Were there tight rules or some discretion?

               b) What was their experience of management and oversight?

               c) In what ways did their remuneration arrangements impact their behaviour?

   On the Culture of the Boards

   8.4.36 To what extent and how did they evaluate their own Board culture and address any
          issues?

   8.4.37 To what extent did they consider the impact of the remuneration policy for the culture of
          their organisation?

   8.4.38 Was there a culture of `attention to governance', including paying attention to quality of
          reporting, monitoring, scrutiny and problem solving.




8.5 Communications

   Introduction

   8.5.1   Communication is at minimum 2 way. It requires a sender, or senders, of a message or
           messages, and a recipient, or recipients, of a message or messages. Sending and receiving
           what is apparently objectively the same message does not mean it will be heard or
           understood in the same way by sender(s) and recipient(s). There are many filters which
           impact sender or recipient understanding, for example, intentions, interests, assumptions,
           anxieties, power differentials, authority differentials, level and nature of education,
           linguistic capabilities. Strong communications are where the recipient hears and
           understands the message as intended by the sender. Strong communications in this sense
           imply nothing about whether the recipient likes and supports the message, simply that
           there has been no misunderstanding of what the message means.

   8.5.2   Communications in companies can be formal or informal. Formal communications are
           normally those which exist, or have existed, beyond the spoken word, in some form of
           print media, and form part of the intentional systems and processes in any company. A
           minority of formal communications may exist as recordings of the spoken word, for
           example in a recorded announcement by the CEO or Chair, but such spoken forms would
           normally be followed up with print versions. Formal communications may be required by
           law or code, e.g. the Annual Report and Board minutes for listed companies; or voluntary
           (e.g. staff newsletters and notices). There is less room for misunderstanding within formal
           communications if they are received, but there are limited ways in which the sender can
           give assurance that the communications have actually been received by all for whan they
           were intended.

   8.5.3   Informal communications are often spoken in direct or electronic conversations or
           statements, as well as being written in print or social media. They may refer to formal


                                                                                       Page 89 of 133
                                                                                                        EXPO0000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




        communications, whilst also including rumour about what will or has happened;
        unsubstantiated and substantiated beliefs about what will or has happened; well-
        intentioned, mischievous or malicious observations on matters and people in, and
        associated with, the company, and a catch-all of what might be called `gossip'. The
        evolving world of social media blurs the division of formal and informal
        communications. It enables rumour, myth and legend to be more easily shared between
        some groups but does not necessarily enable sharing between groups. It also carries with
        it limited means of checking the veracity of the sender or the message. Nonetheless
        informal communications can be very powerful in their impact. If they are believed,
        whether objectively true or not, they are likely to be real in their consequences.

8.5.4   Whilst the Executive and middle management have limited capacity to control informal
        communications, they need to 'keep their eyes and ears open' to hear it, by listening to
        various informal conduits, e.g. that flow through social circles and social media. They
        need to be alert to prevailing attitudes and beliefs which are embedded in the culture of
        the company and will act as a filter or magnifier for messages and set patterns for
        communications flowing in the company. For example, it quickly becomes known
        whether one is in, or dealing with, a company in which alternative views, or bad news are
        likely to be voiced and disclosed before there is no escape from them.

The Role of the Executive

8.5.5   Key parts of the Executive Role in communications are to:

            a) Develop and maintain formal and informal communications internally within the
               company, and externally with stakeholders, in ways which will support the
               implementation of the strategy and effective operations;

            b) Give assurance that internal systems and controls which require or promote good
               communications are developed and maintained,

            c) Pay particular regard to ensuring appropriate communications are established
               with key stakeholders (see Section 7);

            d) Attempt to ensure that the messages as sent in formal communications are
               understood in the same way by recipients as by the senders;

            e) Keep in touch with informal communications, so they may understand various
               prevailing concerns, fears and hopes for the company, however ill-founded or
               misguided they may regard such concerns, fears and hopes;

            f)   Realise that the culture of the company, (which they have a key but not the
                 controlling part in creating, see section 8.4) will encourage particular patterns of
                 communications, including whether curiosity or challenge to taken for granted
                 assumptions is encouraged or discouraged, and

            g) Whether early and accurate disclosure of bad news is expected/encouraged

8.5.6   Within the Executive, the CEO has particular responsibility to ensure they:

            a) Establish strong, open communications within their Executive team;

                                                                                       Page 90 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




            b) Play their part in establishing strong, open communications with the Chair,

            c) Play their part in establishing strong, open communications with the NEDs;

            d) Set expectations through their own example and through normal processes of
               management that all managers will seek to ensure that:

                         The company's mission, purpose and priorities are widely communicated
                         and understood;

                   ii.   The structure of roles and responsibilities is widely communicated and
                         understood; and

                  iii.   The company's operational plans and priorities are widely communicated
                         and understood.

The Role of the Board

8.5.7   As with all areas of running the company, the Board has a role in overseeing whether
        communications are effective and support the achievement of the organisation's
        objectives. They should be interested to understand the prevailing culture and how this
        will act as a filter, distorter or magnifier of messages.

8.5.8   Communication between the Chair and the CEO is an important key to a well-functioning
        Board. The CEO is the Chair's main gateway to understanding what is going on in the
        organisation. The Chair is the lead evaluator of the CEO's performance. How this
        dynamic develops over time will incline the CEO to patterns of response. It becomes
        especially important when the CEO is in possession of what may be bad news for the
        company, but there is imperfect knowledge about the matter, which is still unfolding, and
        the potential crisis can only be glimpsed through a degree of 'fog' about the real situation.

8.5.9   Various responses are typical:

             `Let's keep the bad news to ourselves and hope we can resolve it

            'We are in this together and we will share the bad news before it is too late or leaks
            by other means'.

            'As we have this under control, there is no reason to alert the Chair outside our
            normal interactions'.

             `There is no need to alert the Chair until we know more'.

8.5.10 The tenor of the response will reflect CEO judgements about the issue itself and the
       likelihood of later and fuller discovery. But it will also be influenced by the culture of the
       company, the personalities of the Chair and CEO, their past experience, the level of trust
       established in their relationship, and the approach adopted by the NEDs

8.5.11 Chairs and NEDs can also be important in picking up informal communications and
       divergent views if they make visits 'out and about' the organisation, if they make and take

                                                                                      Page 91 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




           opportunities for informal discussions with other Executives and members of the
           workforce and, if they have open informal and free flowing conversations with their
           board colleagues.

   8.5.12 As discussed in Section 7, the Chair and CEO are also important in establishing lines of
          communication with external stakeholders.

   Questions arising from Section 8.5 Relevant to POHI
NB Annex B provides the chronology of governance and management for the organisations which ran
and oversaw POC/L. The questions below are taken to apply to all relevant organisations in the
chronology.


   Communications between Executives and their Boards


   8.5.13 How did the Executive assure the Board that internal communications were fit for
          purpose?

   8.5.14 What was the experience of sharing bad news' with the Board?

   8.5.15 What was the pattern and tenor of communications between the Board and the Executive
          team?

   8.5.16 What was the pattern and tenor of communications between the Chair and the CEO?


   Communications within Boards


   8.5.17 What was done to encourage NEDs to request, challenge and scrutinise data?

   Communications concerning SPMs Activities


   8.5.18 How would the Boards expect to have known if there were serious problems with or in,
          the SPM network?




                                                                                     Page 92 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




ANNEX A


                 LAWS,GOVERNANCE CODES & GUIDANCE
This Annex summarises governance advice for Boards in private and public regimes from legal
requirements, published codes and guidance. We identify the most important messages in relation to
the actions we believe Boards in all organisations are advised to take to ensure good governance is
achieved.

It provides a chronology of the laws and guidance on governance of companies which applied during
the relevant period 1999-2019. The material is presented chronologically, split into columns. On the
left-hand side are the requirements and guidance which apply to companies, with special attention to
publicly listed companies. On the right-hand side are the requirements which apply to Central
Government (Departments, ALBs, other agencies) and companies which are wholly owned or
controlled by Government. The summary is further divided into the opening section which deals with
legal requirements, and the following section which deals with codes and guidance.




              Formal Leeal Requirements for                 Formal Lecal Requirements that would
                 Corporate Governance                      apply to Public Corporations / Companies
                                                                        in Government

          1998                                             1998

 1.0      Public Interest and Disclosure Act — the   2.0   Public Interest and Disclosure Act — the
          law that protects whistle blowers from           law that protects whistle blowers from
          negative treatment or unfair dismissal,          negative treatment or unfair dismissal.
          PIDA is part of the Employment Rights            PIDA is part of the Employment Rights Act
          Act (1996)                                       (1996)

          2006                                             2006

 1.1      Companies' Act 1985, 2006 -                2.1   Companies' Act 1985, 2006
          Legislation that has over 1300 sections          Covers companies in Government, i.e.
          and governs companies in the UK in most          incorporated companies in which
          aspects of how the company is run,               government is large or sole shareholder.
          covering public and private companies.
                                                           2006:Section 172, it is the Directors'
          The expected duties of company                   responsibility to act in good faith to promote
          directors' is laid out in a statutory            the success of the company for the benefit of
          statement as part of the Act, detailing          its shareholder as a whole, including
          seven general aspects. They are:                 interests of employees and how the company
                                                           effects customers, suppliers, community and
              a) To act within their powers as a           the environment.
                 company director
              b) To promote the success of the
                 company for the benefit of its
                 members as a whole
              c) To exercise independent
                 judgement
              d) To exercise reasonable care,
                 skill and diligence
              e) To avoid conflicts of interest

                                                                                          Page 93 of 133
                                                                                              EXP00000006
                                                                                          EXPG0000006




          f) To not accept benefits from third
             parties
          g) To declare interest in proposed
             arrangements or transactions
             with the company

      For public companies, there are additional
      requirements in respect of annual
      accounts and reports, such as
      environmental matters, social issues and
      any future development if the company is
      listed on the London Stock Exchange
      (LSE) and specific requirements to
      produce financial reports which are
      transparent, including disclosing any
      major acquisition.

      One of the most important sections of the
      2006 Act is Section 172, which covers
      how a company acts when promoting its
      success. It is the Directors' responsibility
      to act in good faith to promote the success
      of the company for the benefit of its
      shareholder as a whole, including
      interests of employees and how the
      company effects customers, suppliers,
      community and the environment.




        Corporate Codes and Guidance for             Codes and Guidance that might apply to
                  Corporations                       Public Corporations and Companies in
                                                     Government based on guidance to ALBs



      1992                                           1992

1.2   Cadbury Code: based on Report of the
      Committee on The Financial Aspects of
      Corporate Governance, (Cadbury,
      1992)

      Set up in response to investors' concerns
      at a string of scandals in listed companies.
      The resultant Cadbury Code, the first
      Corporate Governance code in the world,
      set out the basic principles of good
      corporate governance. Although the code
      wasn't mandatory the `comply or explain'
      principle, (the recommendation that
      companies state in their Annual Report
      and Accounts whether they have
      complied with the Code or explain why
      not) has proved enduring.




                                                                              Page 94 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




      It focused on the control and reporting
      functions of Boards, and the role of
      auditors. It set out good practice for the
      functioning of audit committees and the
      strengthening of internal controls.

      It included three recommendations which
      strengthen independent oversight of firm
      performance on behalf of the shareholder:

          a)    The positions of CEO and Chair
                should be separated.
           b) Boards should have at least three
                Non-Executive Directors
                (NEDs), who of whom should
                have no financial personal ties to
                the Executives.
           c) Each Board should have an audit
                committee, and this should be
                composed of NEDs.
      The Cadbury Report was first to
      recognise the importance and role of the
      institutional shareholders. It was noted
      that there is a need for greater director
      dialogue and engagement with this group.
      From this dialogue would emerge a
      greater understanding of the need to
      appreciate and respond to the needs of
      other stakeholders.



      1993                                                 1993



      1994                                                 1994



      1995                                                 1995

1.3   Greenbury Code, derived from Report            2.2   Nolan Principles, derived from Report of
      of the Study Group on Director's                     Committee on Standards in Public Life
      Remuneration (Greenbury, 1995)                       (Nolan, 1995)

      Amended Cadbury to include a                             I   Selflessness
      requirement for a Board to establish a                   2   Integrity
      Remuneration Committee for Executive                     3   Objectivity
      pay.                                                     4   Accountability
                                                               5   Openness
                                                               6   Honesty
                                                               7   Leadership

      1996                                                 1996



      1997                                                 1997



                                                                                      Page 95 of 133
                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                       EXPG0000006




       1998                                          1998

1.4a   The Hampel Report (Hampel, 1998)

       Reviewed Cadbury (111992) and
       Greenbury(1995) and evaluated their
       implementation. It advised against
       prescriptive 'box ticking' and
       recommended a single code incorporating
       much of Cadbury and Greenbury.
       Recommended the appointment of a
       Senior Independent Non-Executive
       Director (a SID).

       Combined Code of Corporate
       Governance (FRC, 1998)
1.4b
       Derived from the Hampel(1998),
       Cadbury(1992), and Greenbury(1995)
       Reports. The Combined Code is
       appended to the listing rules of the
       London Stock Exchange. As such,
       compliance with the code is mandatory
       for all listed companies in the UK As
       with previous codes it recognises the
       separation of management from
       shareholders and recommends a unitary
       Board comprised of independent NEDs
       and Executives. The principles support
       strong financial controls. Specific
       stipulations require the Board to maintain
       a sound system of internal control to
       safeguard shareholders' investments and
       the company's assets. The directors
       should at least annually, conduct a review
       of the effectiveness of the group's system
       of internal control. Specifically, the main
       principles cover:

       Section 1: The Board

       A.1: The Board: Every listed company
       should be headed by an effective Board
       which should lead and control the
       company

       A2: Chairman and CEO: There are two
       key tasks at the top of every public
       company — the running of the Board and
       the Executive responsibility for the
       running of the company's business. There
       should be a clear division of
       responsibilities at the head of the
       company which will ensure a balance of
       power and authority, such that no one



                                                            Page 96 of 133
                                                          EXP00000006
                                                       EXPG0000006




individual has unfettered powers of
decision making.

A3: Board balance: The Board should
include a balance of Executive and Non-
Executive Directors, such that no
individual or small group of individuals
can dominate the Board's decision
making.

A4: Supply of information: The Board
should be supplied in a timely manner
with information in a form and of a
quality appropriate to enable it to
discharge its duties.

A5: Appointments to the Board: There
should be a formal and transparent
procedure for the appointment of new
directors to the Board.

A6: Re-election: All directors should be
required to submit themselves for re-
        at regular intervals and at least
election




every three years.

B: Directors' Remuneration

Bl: Level and make up of
Remuneration: Levels of remuneration
should be sufficient to attract and retain
the directors needed to run the company
successfully, but companies should avoid
paying more than is necessary for this
purpose. A proportion should be
structured so as to link rewards to
corporate and individual performance.

B2: Procedure:Companies should
establish a formal and transparent
procedure for developing policy on
Executive remuneration and for fixing the
remuneration packages of individual
directors.
B3: Disclosure: The Company's Annual
Report should contain a statement of
remuneration policy and details of the
remuneration of each directors.

C: Relations with Shareholders

Cl: Dialogue with shareholders:
Companies should be ready, where
practicable, to enter into a dialogue with
institutional shareholders based on the
mutual understanding of objectives.

C2: Constructive use of AGM: Boards
should use the AGM to communicate


                                             Page 97 of 133
                                                                       EXP00000006
                                                                    EXPG0000006




      with private investors and encourage their
      participation.

      D: Accountability and Audit

      Dl: Financial reporting: The Board
      should present a balanced and
      understandable assessment of the
      company's position and prospects.

      D2: Internal Control: The Board should
      maintain a sound system of internal
      control to safeguard shareholders'
      investment and the company's assets.

      D3: Audit Committee and Auditors:
      The Board should establish formal and
      transparent arrangements for considering
      how they should apply the financial
      reporting and internal control principles
      and for maintaining an appropriate
      relationship with the company's auditors.

      Section 2— Institutional Shareholders

      El: Shareholder voting: Institutional
      shareholders have a responsibility to
      make considered use of their votes.

      E2: Dialogue with companies:
      Institutional shareholders should be
      ready, where practicable, to enter into a
      dialogue with companies based on the
      mutual understanding of objectives.

      E3: Evaluation of governance
      disclosures: When evaluating
      companies' governance arrangements,
      particularly those relating to Board
      structure and composition, institutional
      investors should give due weight to all
      relevant factors drawn to their attention

      1999                                         1999

1.5   Turnbull Guidance

      Set out best practice on internal controls
      and risk management and provided
      guidelines for directors on how to meet
      their obligations in the Combined Code
      (1998). It was updated in 2005 and
      superseded by the FRCs risk guidance in
      2014.

      2000                                         2000




                                                          Page 98 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




       2001                                               2001

1.6    Myners Code                                 2.2a   Management of Risk — A Strategic
                                                          Overview, rapidly became known as The
       Institutional investment and the                   Orange Book (HM Treasury 2001)
       importance of good shareholder relations
       and dialogue                                       The Orange Book, which is regularly
                                                          updated, outlines how risks should be
       Principle 6 deals with transparency and            managed in the public sector, it deals with
       reporting and outlines specific practical          the assessment of the risks to projects and
       guidelines for stakeholder, particularly           programmes, and considerations in securing
       shareholder communication:                         the effectiveness of the actions taken to
                                                          manage these risks. It frames risk and risk
           a) Maintain a communication
                                                          management for Accountable Officers in
              policy and strategy;
                                                          government as a requirement for the delivery
           b) Ensure all required strategies
                                                          of government objectives and sets risk
              and policies are published in a
              clear transparent manner; and               within established frameworks and guidance
           c) Annual reports are a                        for risk management and mitigation.
              demonstration of accountability
                                                          The Orange Book introduction states the
              to stakeholders and should be
                                                          need for greater risk management in central
              comprehensive and readily
              available,                                  government because: 'In successful
                                                          organisations risk management enhances
                                                          strategic planning and prioritisation'. It
                                                          encourages more managed risk taking and
                                                          guidance on risk control in government.

       2002                                               2002



       2003                                               2003

t.7a   Combined Code on Corporate
       Governance, FRC 2003 updating first
       Combined Code (1998), following and
       Review of audit committees by Sir Robert
       Smith, see 1.7b and Review of the role of
       NEDs by Higgs, see 1.7c
       Includes main and supporting principles
       and provisions:
           A. Companies:
           The Board
           Chairman and Chief Executive
           Board balance and independence
           Appointment to the Board
           Information and Professional
           Development
           Performance Evaluation
           Re-election
           B. Remuneration
           The level and make-up of
           remuneration
           Procedure
           C. Accountability and Audit
           Financial Reporting
           Internal Control
           Audit Committee and Auditors


                                                                                        Page 99 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




           D. Relations with shareholders
           Dialogue with Institutional
           Shareholders
           Constructive use of the AGM
           E. Institutional shareholders
           Dialogue with Companies
           Evaluations of Governance
           Disclosures
           Shareholder voting
       The 2003 code introduces a new
       provision that audit committees should
       keep under review the whistleblowing
       procedures in the organisation.
1.7b   Smith Guidance (Smith FRC 2003)

       Addressed auditor independence and
       clarified the role and responsibilities of
       audit committees. The committee
       developed guidance for directors on audit
       committees, updated in 2016.

1.7c   The Independent Review of Non
       Executive Directors by Derek Higgs

       Reviewed the role and effectiveness of
       NEDs, highlighting the importance of
       NED independence. The report
       influenced the Combined Code (2003)
       including the provision that at least half
       of the Board excluding the Chair should
       comprise independent NEDs. The
       FRC(2006) published good practice
       suggestions from the report since adapted
       into the Guidance on Board
       Effectiveness(FRC 2018)

       2004                                               2004



       2005                                               2005

1.8    Internal Control: Revised Guidance for       2.3   Corporate Governance Code in Central
       Directors on the Combined Code (FRC                Government departments — Code of Good
       2005)                                              practice (HM Treasury and Cabinet
                                                          Office, 2005)
       Updated the Turnbull Guidance (1999);
       Emphasised                                         The government `borrows' the principles of
          a) the importance of regular and                the corporate code, adapting them for the
               systematic assessment of the               first time in order to codify good practice for
               risks facing the business;                 Central Government Departments in relation
          b) The value of embedding risk                  to Governance, Board leadership, Board
               management and internal control
                                                          effectiveness and oversight of ALMs
               systems within business
               processes; and                             Main principles:
          c) The Board's responsibility to
               make sure this happens.                        1.   Parliamentary Accountability —
                                                                   the minister and the head of the
                                                                   department, its Accounting Officer


                                                                                        Page 100 of 133
                                              EXP00000006
                                         EXPG0000006




     (AO) are both responsible to
     Parliament.

2.   Supporting Provisions: roles and
     responsibilities including
     confirmation of AO role. The AO
     should establish a clear allocation
     of responsibilities. He or she retains
     personal responsibility and
     accountability to Parliament for:

          a) Propriety and regularity;
          b) Prudent and economical
              administration;
          c) Avoidance of waste and
              extravagance;
          d) Efficient and effective use
              of resources;
          e) The organisation, staffing
              and management of the
              department; and
          f) The deployment of Public
              Money and consideration
              of value for money
3.   The Board — Chaired by or under
     the direction of the Minister.
     Reminder of the need to act in
     keeping with Nolan principles.

4.   Skills — a balance of skills and
     experience relevant to directing the
     business of the department.

5.   Independent Non-Executives —
     should be appointed by the head of
     department to whom they are
     accountable for their performance,
     following ratification of the
     selection by the Board as whole.

d) On appointment an INED should
   be provided with written terms of
   reference including the
   specification of his or her role, line
   of accountability and terms of
   appointment, informed of how his
   or her performance will be
   appraised and given an induction
   program.

6.   Internal Controls

e) An audit committee Chaired by an
   INED.

f)   An internal audit service.

g) ALBs — there should be robust
   governance arrangements in place
   with each ALB Board.

                          Page 101 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




                                                       Working relationships with ALBs should be
                                                       based on good transparent relationships,
                                                       good governance and shared interests in
                                                       respect of value for money obligations. This
                                                       reflects the spirit of transparency with
                                                       shareholder communication in the combined
                                                       code (2003).

1.9a     Guidance on Whistleblowing (FCA
         latest version a)

         Sets out the requirements on UK firms in
         relation to the adoption, and
         communication to UK based employees
         of appropriate internal procedures for
         handling reportable concerns made by
         whistleblowers as part of an effective risk
         management systems. It sets out the role
         of whistleblowers' champions.

         2006                                          2006

1.9b
         Suggestions for good practice from the
         Higgs Report (FRC 2006)
         Included greater independence of the
         Board, and that at least half of the Board,
         excluding the Chair, should comprise
         independent NEDs.

         2007                                          2007



         2008                                          2008

I.I      Combined Code on Corporate
         Governance (FRC 2008)

         Changes to the 2003 Combined Code
         included: removal of restrictions on
         Chairs Chairing more than I FTSE100;
         and for smaller companies, Chairman can
         be a member of the Audit Committee so
         long as s/he was considered independent
         on appointment.

         2009                                          2009

1.11 a   Walker Review (2009) of the banking
         crisis proposed changes to the Combined
         Code to strengthen the principles of
         stewardship and greater challenge in
         financial services, which were taken on
         by other sectors. Proposals for all large
         listed companies included:

         Embedding 'a culture of challenge'
         into Boardroom behaviour


                                                                                   Page 102 of 133
                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                       EXPG0000006




             a)   Paying attention to Boardroom
                  composition to gain industry
                  expertise and independence;
             b) Providing adequate support for
                  NEDs typically from the CoSec;
             c) Highlighting the key role of the
                  Chairman and the time
                  commitment and leadership
                  required; and
             d) Professional training of
                  Directors and evaluation of the
                  Board effectiveness
         The risk oversight role of the Board
         through the establishment of a Board Risk
         Committee

         Shareholders' engagement with Boards
         should be strengthened, particularly in
         Remuneration processes and outcomes


1.1 lb   Going Concern and Liquidity Risk:
         Guidance for Directors of UK
         Companies (FRC 2009)

         One of the most important issues in
         companies is the concept of `going
         concern'. This guidance brings together
         the requirements of the Companies Act
         2006, accounting standards and the
         Listing Rules on going concerns and
         guidance for their application.

         2010                                        2010

1.12     Revised Combined Code of Corporate
         Governance (FRC 2010)

         The code was strengthened in two areas:

             a) Board diversity to encourage
                Boards to be well balanced and
                avoid `group think'. New
                principles on Board composition
                and selection were added,
                including the need to appoint
                directors on merit, against
                objective criteria and with due
                regard to the benefits of
                diversity, including gender.
             b) Risk recommendations were
                made against the backdrop of
                Walker Review (2009) and
                Banking Crisis, financiall
                economic crisis, including that
                the Board should be responsible
                for determining the nature and
                extent of the significant risks it
                is willing to take and a
                requirement to present thinking
                on of concern.

                                                            Page 103 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




       2011                                           2011

                                                2.4   Corporate Governance Code Central
                                                      Govt Departments — Code of Good
                                                      Practice (HM Treasury and Cabinet
                                                      Office, 2011)
                                                      The 2005 version of the Code was revised
                                                      by Francis Maude, then Minister for the
                                                      Cabinet Office, with the aim to 'make the
                                                      government operate in a more business-like
                                                      manner' by bringing in senior and
                                                      experienced leaders from across the private,
                                                      public and not-for-profit sectors. It focuses
                                                      on the role of Boards for Central
                                                      Government Departments which should be
                                                      Chaired by the Secretary of State (no longer
                                                      the permanent secretary) and be balanced,
                                                      with equal numbers of Ministers, civil
                                                      servants and Non-Executives from outside
                                                      government. Main principles:
                                                      Parliamentary Accountability;
                                                      The role of the Board;
                                                      Board Composition;
                                                      Board Effectiveness;
                                                      Risk Management.

       2012                                           2012

1.13   Update to the Corporate                  2.5   Managing Public Money (HM Treasury
       Governance Code (FRC 2012)                     2012)

       Expects Companies to explain and               Describes the Essential Duties of the
       report on progress with their policies         Accounting Officer. Guidance on the proper
                                                      handling of all public funds. Public servants
       on Boardroom diversity. Genuine
                                                      have a demanding fiduciary duty to use
       diversity in the boardroom is
                                                      public money responsibly. Accounting
       considered important for Board                 Officer functions (Chapter 3 of the
       effectiveness, reducing `group think',         publication) sets out the role of the
       Other changes include:                         Accounting Officer (AO) (3.1 below), the
                                                      appointment of accounting officers (3.2
       - Audit Committees are to provide to           below) and special responsibilities of
       shareholders information on how they           accounting officers (3.3 below)
       have has carried out their
       responsibilities, including how they           3.1— Each organisation in central
       have assessed the effectiveness of the         government (department, agency, trading
       external audit process;                        fund, NHS body, NDPB or ALB) must have
       - Boards are to confirm that the               an AO. This person is usually its senior
       annual report and accounts taken as a          official. The accounting officer in an
       whole are fair, balanced and                   organisation should be supported by a Board
       understandable, to ensure that the             structure in line with the Corporate
       narrative sections of the report are           Governance Code.
       consistent with the financial
                                                      Formally the AO can be called by
       statements and accurately reflect the
                                                      Parliament to account for the stewardship of
       company's performance;                         the resources. The AO is expected to assure


                                                                                   Page 104 of 133
                                                                                                         EXP00000006
                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




       - Companies are to explain, and                   Parliament and the public of high standards
       report on progress with, their policies           of probity.
       on boardroom diversity. This change
                                                         3.2 — The Treasury appoints the permanent
       was first announced in October 2011,
                                                         head of each Central Government
       but its implementation was deferred
                                                         department to be AO, or PAO if that AO
       to avoid piecemeal changes to the
                                                         appoints the permanent heads of its
       Code
                                                         executive agencies or ALBs to be AOs for
       - Companies are to provide fuller
                                                         their particular bodies for which the PAO
       explanations to shareholders as to                has responsibility
       why they choose not to follow a
       provision of the Code.                            3.3 — Each AO takes personal responsibility
                                                         for ensuring that the organisation he or she
                                                         manages delivers the standards of probity, in
                                                         particular they must personally sign

                                                             a) The accounts;
                                                             b) The annual report; and
                                                             c) The governance statement.


                                                         They must approve:

                                                             a) Voted budget limits; and
                                                             b) The associated Estimates
                                                                Memorandum


                                                         Section 4 Governance and Management,
                                                         identifies best practice for Boards as
                                                         deciding risk appetite, monitoring emerging
                                                         threats and opportunities, and maintaining
                                                         the risk register.

       2013                                              2013

                                                   2.6   Orange Book Management of Risk
                                                         Principles and Concepts (HM Treasury
                                                         2013)

                                                         Updated earlier guidance on the main and
                                                         supporting principles for risk
                                                         management in government. The main
                                                         principles are mandatory requirements. They
                                                         provide the "what" and the "why", not the
                                                         "how", for the design, operation, and
                                                         maintenance of an effective risk
                                                         management framework.

       2014                                              2014

1.14   Revised Combined Code (FRC 2014b)

       Code is amended and incorporates
       revised guidance on risk management,
       internal control and financial and
       business risk reporting described in 1.15
       (FRC 2014a)




                                                                                     Page 105 of 133
                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




L15
      Guidance on risk management,
      internal control and financial and
      business reporting: The Risk Guidance
      (FRC2014a)
      Brings together elements of best practice
      for      management; prompts Boards to
         ri




              sk




      consider how to discharge their
      responsibilities in relation to the existing
      and emerging principal risks faced by the
      company; reflects sound business
      practice, whereby        management and
                         ri




                              sk




      internal control are embedded in the
      business process by which a company
      pursues its objectives; and highlights
      related reporting responsibilities.

      It is primarily directed at companies
      subject to the UK Corporate Governance
      Code
      2015                                                 2015

                                                     2.7   Accounting Officer Survival Guide,
                                                           (HM Treasury December 2015)

                                                           Based on 2012 guidance for AOs in 2.5
                                                           above Managing Public Money (HM
                                                           Treasury 2012) the guide restates essential
                                                           duties for AOs covering:

                                                               a) Governance;
                                                               b) Decision making; and
                                                               c) Financial management


                                                           Specifically, it draws attention to inherent
                                                           tensions in the role of AOs especially in
                                                           Companies in Government, offers guidance
                                                           around conflicts of interest in balancing
                                                           fiduciary duties and government objectives
                                                           with strategic goals of government owned
                                                           companies or ALBs. Specific guidance
                                                           includes:

                                                               a)   When parliament calls a public
                                                                    sector organisation to account, it is
                                                                    the accounting officer who gives
                                                                    evidence, others in the organisation
                                                                    account for their own performance
                                                                    to the accounting officer in line
                                                                    with delegated powers_

                                                               b) The accounting officer of a public
                                                                  sector organisation is usually its
                                                                  permanent secretary or Chief
                                                                  Executive Officer, who manages
                                                                  the business day to day. The post
                                                                  carries personal responsibilities to
                                                                  manage the organisation efficiently

                                                                                        Page 106 of 133
                                                       EXP00000006
                                                     EXPG0000006




                and effectively and to report to
                parliament accurately,
                meaningfully and without
                misleading.

           c) The accounting officer's touchstone
              in assessing any course of action
              should simply be: whether the
              activity can be justified adequately
              if parliament calls it to account i.e.
              it meets parliament's expectations
              of handling public funds.

           d) The accounting officer should
              assess each initiative through the
              accounting officer lens to see
              whether it meets the four essential
              accounting officer standards set out
              in 2.5 Managing Public Money
              (HM Treasury 2012): regularity,
              propriety, value for money and
              feasibility expected by parliament
              and the public for use of public
              resources.

           e)   Each public sector organisation is
                led by a Board ... normally the
                accounting officer's duties,
                priorities and objectives align with
                the Boards. On the rare occasions
                where they do not, the AO should
                take the distinct and separate view
                in line with the AO standards. They
                should never act in a way which is
                incompatible with legal obligations.


2.8a   Whistleblowing Guidance and Code of
       Practice, from Department for Business and
       Skills (DBIS 2015)

       Recommends good practice for employers
       including having the right culture, written
       policies, training and support, quick
       responses, and effective processes.

       Reminds that Whistleblowing law is
       governed by the 1996 Employment Rights
       Act (amended by the 1998 Public Interest
       Disclosure Act). To be covered by
       whistleblowing law, employees must believe
       they are acting in the public interest in
       disclosing past, current or likely future:

       Criminal offences (this may include, for
       example, types of financial impropriety such
       as fraud);
       Failure to comply with an obligation set out
       in law;
       Miscarriages of justice;

                                    Page 107 of 133
                                                                                                             EXP00000006
                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




                                                            Endangering of someone's health and safety;
                                                            Damage to the environment; and
                                                            Covering up wrongdoing in the above
                                                            categories.

       2016                                                 2016

1.16   Corporate Culture and the Role of the         2.8b   The HM Treasury Audit and Risk
       Board (FRC July 2016c)                               Assurance Committee Handbook 2016

       Provides guidance on the Board's role in             It reflects developing best practice in
       corporate culture; states that a Culture of          governance and to support the provisions of
       integrity and diversity are central to the           the Corporate Governance in Central
       Corporate Governance Code. Principle B               Government Departments and associated
       requires Boards to establish a corporate             assurance needs in the governance of
       purpose, values and business strategy and            government organisations.
       ensure they are aligned with culture.
       Boards are also urged to regularly assess
       and monitor culture and ensure greater
       alignment of executive incentives and
       rewards with corporate culture.

       New rules on whistleblowing require
       affected firms to have assigned
       responsibilities to a NED to be a whistle-
       blower and offers guidance to non-
       affected firms FCA regulates (FCA,
       2016).

1.17   Revised Code on Corporate                     2.9    Ministerial Code (Cabinet Office 2016a)
       Governance (FRC April 2016a)
                                                            The Ministerial code was first published in
       It includes amendments on the                        2010 and is updated from time to time. It sits
       functioning of Audit Committees:                     against the background of the over-arching
                                                            duties of Ministers to comply with the law
       The head of internal audit should be                 and protect the integrity of public life.
       (expected to be) invited regularly to
       attend meetings of the audit committee               They are expected to observe the 7 Nolan
       (joining the fmance director and the                 (1995) Principles of Public Life. It sets out
       external audit partner as expected                   the relationship Ministers are expected to
       invitees).                                           have with civil servants and the collective
                                                            responsibility they have for being as helpful
           a) If     management and internal                as possible in providing accurate, truthful
                  ri




                       sk




              control responsibilities are
                                                            and full information to Parliament.
              delegated to different
              committees the Board should                   Guidance to the effect that Central
              consider the impact of splitting              Government Departments should have
              those responsibilities.                       Boards, chaired by Secretaries of State.
                                                            Policy should be decided by Ministers.
           b) A responsibility to consider the
                                                            Boards bring strategic clarity, commercial
              clarity of audit committee
              reporting and to be prepared to               sense, talented people, results focus, and
              meet investors, as a basis for                management information.
              ensuring that shareholder
              interests are properly protected
              in relation to financial reporting
              and internal control.




                                                                                         Page 108 of 133
                                                                                                  EXP00000006
                                                                                             EXPG0000006




    c)   There are additional reporting
         requirements for the audit
         committee to explain in its
         report how the audit committee
         composition requirements have
         been addressed and also how the
         audit committee has assessed the
         effectiveness of internal audit.


Revised ethical standards on auditing.

                                            2.10   Governance Code for Public
                                                   Appointments (Cabinet Office 2016b)

                                                   This was published following a review of
                                                   public appointments and sets out the process
                                                   and principles that should underpin all
                                                   public appointments. The principles that
                                                   should underpin all appointments are:

                                                      a) Ministerial responsibility — the
                                                         ultimate responsibility for
                                                         appointments rests with Ministers;
                                                      b) Selflessness — Ministers when
                                                         making appointments should act
                                                         solely in terms of the public
                                                         interest;
                                                      c) Integrity — Ministers when making
                                                         appointments must avoid placing
                                                         themselves under any obligation to
                                                         people or organisations that might
                                                         try inappropriately to influence
                                                         them in their work;
                                                      d) Merit — All public appointments
                                                         should be governed by the principle
                                                         of appointment on merit;
                                                      e) Openness — processes for making
                                                         public appointments should be open
                                                         and transparent;
                                                      f) Diversity — public appointments
                                                         should reflect the diversity of the
                                                         society in which we live;
                                                      g) Assurance — There should be
                                                         established assurance processes
                                                         with appropriate checks and
                                                         balances; and
                                                      h) Fairness — selection processes
                                                         should be fair and impartial
2017                                               2017

                                            2.11   Corporate Governance in Central
                                                   Government Departments Code of Good
                                                   Practice (HM Treasury and Cabinet
                                                   Office, 2017)

                                                   This updated code of good practice builds on
                                                   the 2011 code. `Since 2011, there has been a
                                                   step change in the governance of central
                                                   government departments. Secretaries of


                                                                               Page 109 of 133
                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                      EXPG0000006




                                                           state now Chair departmental Boards,
                                                           bringing a high level offocus on issues such
                                                           as performance, risk management, talent
                                                           and the challenge and scrutiny of major
                                                           projects. This departmental Board model is
                                                           now embedded as a key element of thefabric
                                                           of corporate governance across central
                                                           government departments'.

                                                           The Board may choose to delegate to its
                                                           committees. As a minimum, there should be
                                                           committees responsible for audit and risk
                                                           assurance (the responsibilities of which will
                                                           include reviewing the comprehensiveness of
                                                           assurances and integrity of financial
                                                           statements), and nominations.

       2018                                                2018

1.18   Revised Code and Guidance on Board           2.12   Managing Public Money (HM Treasury
       effectiveness (FRC 2018)                            2018)

       This was to stimulate Boards' thinking on           Updated 2012 version and aims to provide a
       how they can carry out their role and               comprehensive overview of the key
       encourage them to focus on continually              requirements of HM Treasury in the
       improving their effectiveness with a                stewardship of public funds.
       particular focus on:

           a) Board leadership and company
              purpose;
           b) Division of Responsibilities;
           c) Composition, Succession and
              Evaluation;
           d) Audit, Risk and Internal Control;
           e) Remuneration
       2019                                                2019

1.19   The Brydon Review by Sir Donald              2.13   Code of Conduct for Board Members of
       Brydon                                              Public Bodies (Cabinet Office 2019)

                                                           Replaces the 2011code of conduct. Forms
       Reviews the quality and effectiveness of
                                                           part of the Terms of Appointment for NEDs
       audit makes 65 recommendations, many
                                                           of public bodies. Includes new provisions
       relating to the part played by others in
                                                           including that bullying, harassment, or other
       relation to the audit. Some are applicable
                                                           discriminatory behaviour will not be
       only to the FTSE 350 including:
                                                           tolerated, that conflicts of interest must be
                                                           declared and managed, that boards have
           a) The extension of the concept of
                                                           responsibilities towards employees; on the
              auditing to areas beyond
                                                           use of social media; and responsibilities for
              financial statements;
           b) Mechanisms to encourage                      raising concerns.
              greater engagement of
              shareholders with audit and
              auditors;
           c) Suggestions to inform the work
              of BEIS on internal controls and
              improve clarity on capital
              maintenance;
           d) A package of measures around
              fraud detection and prevention;

                                                                                        Page 110 of 133
                                                                                               EXP00000006
                                                                                            EXPG0000006




           e) Improved auditor
              communication and
              transparency;
           f) Obligations to acknowledge
              external signals of concern;

1.20   The FRC's Ethical Standard (2019)          2.14   Orange Book — from Government
                                                         Finance Function and HM Treasury
       UK governance relies on the maintenance           (updated) 2019
       of high ethical standards in audit firms
                                                         Updates 2013 guidance
       which are necessary to support trust and
       confidence in UK corporate reporting and
       audit. This FRC standard applies in the
       audit of financial statements and other
       public interest assurance engagements in
       both the private and public sectors.




                                                                                 Page 111 of 133
                                                                                                                                                                               EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




                                                                                       ANNEX B

             CHRONOLOGY OF OWNERSHIP AND GOVERNANCE OF THE POST OFFICE BUSINESS (POB)
                                           1999-2020.
       This Annex has been produced according to our current understanding on the basis ofinformation currently known to the experts or which has been made
       available to them. It is not an authoritative or complete schedule.

                               Level 1                                        Level 2                                        Level 3                               Level 4
Date             POB             POB           POB             OPOB             OPOB          OPOB         AGS Active           AGS         AGS Chair      Sponsoring      SoS and if
                                Senior         Chair          Ownership         Senior        Chair           Govt             Senior                     Government        shown
                               Executiv                        of POB         Executive                    Shareholder       Executive                    Department"        (POB
                                  e                                                                                                                                        Minister)
Phasel: 1999-2000
1999     Post Office           Stuart      None             The Post                                      None                                            DTI                The Right
         Counters Ltd 72       Sweetm                       Office                                                                                                           Honourable
         (Co. No.              an                           Authority                                                                                                        Stephen
         02154540)             (in post                     Statutory                                                                                                        Byers MP
         Incorporated          since                        corporation
         as POC Ltd, a         1996)                        'with powers
         subsidiary of                                      to issue
         the Post Office                                    directions to
         Authority                                          POCL'
Date          POB                POB           POB               OPOB          OPOB           OPOB         AGS Active          AGS          AGS Chair      Sponsoring         SoS and if
                                Senior         Chair         Ownership         Senior         Chair           Govt            Senior                      Government           shown
                               Executiv                         of POB        Executive                    Shareholder       Executive                    Department73          (POB
                                  e                                                                                                                                           Minister)


       71Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.
       72POCL and POL is classified as a Public Non-Financial Corporation ('Public Corporation') by the Office for National Statistics. Designed to operate at arm's length from
       Ministers and government with accountability placed with their own board and executive team, accountable to the SoS as sole shareholder. POLs Chief Executive is
       designated as Accountable Officer [WITN11020100].
       " Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.

                                                                                                                                                                 Page 112 of 133
                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                    EXPG0000006




2000   Post Office    Stuart   None   The Post        Dr Neville   None   DTI            The Right
       Counters Ltd   Sweetm          Office          Bain                               Honourable
       (Co. No.       an              Authority                                          Stephen
       02154540)                                                                         Byers MP
                                      Became
       Wholly owned                                                                      (The Right
       by POA then                    Expand                                             Honourable
       RMG plc                        Reserve                                            Alan
                                      Public                                             Johnson
                                      Limited                                            MP PO
                                      Company                                            Minister)

                                      Became

                                      Post Office
                                      Group plc.

                                      became

                                      Consignia plc




                                                                                Page 113 of 133
                                                                                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




Phase 2 :2001-2012
Date           POB              POB           POB            OPOB            OPOB          OPOB         AGS Active         AGS         AGS Chair      Sponsoring           SoS and if
                               Senior         Chair         Ownership        Senior        Chair          Govt            Senior                     Government             shown
                              Executiv                       of POB         Executive                  Shareholder       Executive                   DepartmentJ9            (POB
                                 e                                                                                                                                         Minister)
2001        Post Office Ltd   Stuart      None             Consignia plc   John          Dr Neville   None                                          DTI owned             The Right
            (Co. No.          Sweetm                                       Roberts       Bain                                                       majority              Honourable
            02154540)         an                           Became                                                                                   shares in The         Patricia
                                                                                                                                                    Holding Co.           Hewitt MP
            Wholly owned                                   Consignia                                                                                with a small
            by RMG plc                                     Holdings plc.                                                                            shareholding          (The Right
                                                                                                                                                    (1 ordinary           Honourable
                                                           Known as                                                                                 share) held by        Alan
                                                                                                                                                    Treasury's            Johnson
                                                          The Holding                                                                                                     MP PO
                                                          Company                                                                                                         Minister)
                                                          (Co. No.
                                                          04074919)

                                                           Wholly
                                                           owned

                                                           Royal Mail
                                                           Group plc




       '4Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.
        Indirect powers over POL (with direct powers over Holdings Company). Indirect powers were in relation to POLs Board, to amend POLs Articles of Association (the
       'S
       Articles) and policy oversight. In 2017 government gained direct powers over POL [WITN11020100].

                                                                                                                                                            Page 114 of 133
                                                                                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                            EXPG0000006




Date             POB            POB         POB            OPOB           OPOB          OPOB         AGS Active        AGS         AGS Chair     Sponsoring       SoS and if
                               Senior       Chair         Ownership       Senior        Chair          Govt           Senior                    Government         shown
                              Executiv                     of POB        Executive                  Shareholder      Executive                  DepartmentJ6        (POB
                                  e                                                                                                                               Minister)
2002        Post Office Ltd   David      Allan           The Holding     John         Allan        None                                        DTI owned         The Right
            (Co. No.          Mills      Leighton        Company         Roberts      Leighton                                                 majority          Honourable
            02154540)                                    (Now Royal                                                                            shares in The     Patricia
                                                         Mail                                                                                  Holding Co.       Hewitt MP
            Wholly owned                                 Holdings plc)   Adam                                                                  with a small
            by RMG plc                                   Owned           Crozier                                                               shareholding
                                                         Royal Mail                                                                            (1 ordinary
                                                         Group plc                                                                             share) held by
                                                                                                                                               Treasury
2003        Post Office Ltd   David      Sir Mike        The Royal       Adam         Allan        ShEx                                        DTI owned         The Right
            (Co. No.          Mills      Hodgkinson      Mail            Crozier      Leighton                                                 majority          Honourable
            02154540)                    Non-            Holdings plc                                                                          shares in The     Patricia
                                         Executive       "                                                                                     Holding Co.       Hewitt MP
            Wholly owned                 Chair                                                                                                 with a small
            by RMG plc                                   Owned                                                                                 shareholding
                                                         Royal Mail                                                                            (1 ordinary
                                                         Group Ltd                                                                             share) held by
                                                         plc                                                                                   Treasury
2004        Post Office Ltd   David      Sir Mike        The Royal       Adam         Allan        ShEx                                        DTI owned         The Right
            (Co. No.          Mills      Hodgkinson      Mail            Crozier      Leighton                                                 majority          Honourable
            02154540)                                    Holdings plc                                                                          shares in The     Patricia
                                          Joined by                                                                                            Holding Co.       Hewitt MP
            Wholly owned                 first NED       Owned                                                                                 with a small
            by RMG plc                                                                                                                         shareholding
                                                                                                                                               (1 ordinary


       16
         Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.
         From February 2003 until March 2012 the board of the Holding Company had oversight and key decision-making responsibility for RMG (The Holding Company was
       described as the main plc board for RMG), with the RMG board only meeting for statutory purposes during that period [WITN11030100].

                                                                                                                                                       Page 115 of 133
                                                                                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




                                                           Royal Mail                                                                     share) held by
                                                           Group plc                                                                      Treasury

Date             POB            POB           POB             OPOB            OPOB        OPOB      AGS Active      AGS       AGS Chair    Sponsoring       SoS and if
                               Senior         Chair          Ownership        Senior      Chair        Govt        Senior                 Government         shown
                              Executiv                        of POB         Executive              Shareholder   Executive               Department's        (POB
                                  e                                                                                                                         Minister)
2005       Post Office Ltd    David       Sir Mike         The Royal        Adam         Allan      ShEx                                  DTI owned        The Right
           (Co. No.           Mills       Hodgkinson       Mail             Crozier      Leighton                                         majority         Honourable
           02154540)                                       Holdings plc                                                                   shares in The    Alan
                                                                                                                                          Holding Co.      Johnson
           Wholly owned       (from                        Owned                                                                          with a small     MP
           by RMG plc         March)                                                                                                      shareholding
                              Alan                         Royal Mail                                                                     (1 ordinary
                              Cook                         Group plc                                                                      share) held by
                                                                                                                                          Treasury

2006       Post Office Ltd    David       Sir Mike         The Royal        Adam         Allan      ShEx                                  DTI owned        The Right
           (Co. No.           Mills /     Hodgkinson       Mail             Crozier      Leighton                                         majority         Honourable
           02154540)          Alan                         Holdings plc                                                                   shares in The    Alistair
                              Cook                                                                                                        Holding Co.      Darling MP
           Wholly owned                                    Owned                                                                          with a small
           by RMG plc                                                                                                                     shareholding
                                                           Royal Mail                                                                     (1 ordinary
                                                           Group plc                                                                      share) held by
                                                                                                                                          Treasury
2007       Post Office Ltd    Alan        Sir Mike         The Royal        Adam         Allan      ShEx                                  DTI / BERR       The Right
           (Co. No.           Cook        Hodgkinson       Mail             Crozier      Leighton                                         owned            Honourable
           02154540)                                       Holdings plc                                                                   majority         John
                                                           Owned                                                                          shares in The    Hutton MP
                                                                                                                                          Holding Co.


       '$ Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.

                                                                                                                                                Page 116 of 133
                                                                                                                                                              EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




              Wholly owned                                   Royal Mail                                                                     with a small
              by RMG Ltd                                     Group Ltd                                                                      shareholding
                                                                                                                                            (1 ordinary
                                                                                                                                            share) held by
                                                                                                                                            Treasury
Date                POB            POB           POB            OPOB            OPOB        OPOB      AGS Active      AGS       AGS Chair     Sponsoring      SoS and if
                                  Senior         Chair         Ownership        Senior      Chair        Govt        Senior                  Government        shown
                                 Executiv                       of POB         Executive              Shareholder   Executive                Department19       (POB
                                    e                                                                                                                         Minister)
2008          Post Office Ltd    Alan                        The Royal         Adam        Allan      ShEx                                  DTI / BERR       The Right
              (Co. No.           Cook                        Mail              Crozier     Leighton                                         owned            Honourable
              02154540)                                      Holdings plc                                                                   majority         Peter
                                                                                                                                            shares in The    Mandelson
              Wholly owned                                    Owned                                                                         Holding Co.      MP
              by RMG Ltd                                                                                                                    with a small
                                                             Royal Mail                                                                     shareholding
                                                             Group Ltd                                                                      (1 ordinary
                                                                                                                                            share) held by
                                                                                                                                            Treasury
2009          Post Office Ltd    Alan       Donald           The               Adam        Allan      ShEx                                  BIS owned        The Right
              (Co. No.           Cook       Brydon           Royal Mail        Crozier     Leighton                                         majority         Honourable
              02154540)                                      Holdings plc                                                                   shares in The    Peter
                                                                                           Donald                                           Holding Co.      Mandelson
              Wholly owned                                    Owned                        Brydon                                           with a small     MP
              by RMG Ltd                                                                                                                    shareholding
                                                             Royal Mail                                                                     (1 ordinary
                                                             Group Ltd                                                                      share) held by
                                                                                                                                            Treasury




       '9   Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 117 of 133
                                                                                                                                                                EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                         EXPG0000006




2010       Post Office Ltd    David       Donald           The Royal         Adam          Donald       ShEx                                  BIS owned        The Right
           (Co. No.           Smith       Brydon           Mail              Crozier       Brydon                                             majority         Honourable
           02154540)                                       Holdings plc                                                                       shares in The    Vince Cable
                              Paula                                          Moya                                                             Holding Co.      MP
           Wholly owned       Vennells                      Owned            Green                                                            with a small
           by RMG Ltd                                                                                                                         shareholding
                                                           Royal Mail                                                                         (1 ordinary
                                                           Group Ltd                                                                          share) held by
                                                                                                                                              Treasury
Date             POB            POB            POB            OPOB            OPOB              OPOB    AGS Active      AGS       AGS Chair     Sponsoring      SoS and if
                               Senior          Chair         Ownership        Senior            Chair      Govt        Senior                  Government         shown
                              Executiv                        of POB         Executive                  Shareholder   Executive                Department80        (POB
                                 e                                                                                                                              Minister)
2011       Post Office Ltd    Paula       Donald           The Royal         Moya          Donald       ShEx                                  BIS owned        The Right
           (POL) (Co. No.     Vennells    Brydon           Mail              Greene        Brydon                                             majority         Honourable
           02154540)                                       Holdings plc                                                                       shares in The    Vince Cable
                                          Alice Perkins                                                                                       Holding Co.      MP
           Wholly owned                                     Owned                                                                             with a small
           by RMG Ltd                                                                                                                         shareholding
                                                           Royal Mail                                                                         (1 ordinary
                                                           Group Ltd                                                                          share) held by
                                                                                                                                              Treasury
2012       Post Office Ltd    Paula       Alice Perkins    The Royal         Moya          Donald       ShEx 81                               BIS owned        The Right
           POL (co. no.       Vennells                     Mail              Greene        Brydon                                             majority         Honourable
           02154540)                                       Holdings plc                                                                       shares in The    Vince Cable
           A Public                                        (co.no.                                                                            Holding Co.      MP
           Corporation                                     04074919)                                                                          with a small
           with own BOD                                                                                                                       shareholding
           and Articles of                                                                                                                    (1 ordinary
           Association


        ° Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.
       $' Shareholder NED appointed to POL Board, continues to the end of the relevant period

                                                                                                                                                     Page 118 of 133
                                                                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                    EXPG0000006




              Change in                                                                                                                  share) held by
              corporate                                                                                                                  Treasury
              structure, POL
              now same
              level as RMG,
              reporting to
              The Royal
              Mail Holdings
              plc

Phase 3:2013-2019
Date          POB                  POB           POB            OPOB            OPOB       OPOB    AGS Active      AGS       AGS Chair    Sponsoring       SoS and if
                                  Senior         Chair         Ownership        Senior     Chair      Govt        Senior                 Government          shown
                                 Executiv                       of POB         Executive           Shareholder   Executive               Department82         (POB
                                    e                                                                                                                      Minister)
2013          Post Office Ltd    Paula      Alice Perkins    The Royal                             ShEx                                  BIS sole         The Right
              POL                Vennells                    Mail                                                                        shareholder      Honourable
                                                             Holdings plc                                                                on behalf of     Vince Cable
              A Public                                                                                                                   Government,      MP
              Corporation                                     Became                                                                     Sept 2013
              with own
              board and                                      Postal
              Articles                                       Services
                                                             Holding
                                                             Company ltd
                                                             (PSHCL)

2014          Post Office        Paula      Alice Perkins    Postal                                ShEx                                  BIS Sole         The Right
              Ltd. POL           Vennells                    Services                                                                    Shareholder      Honourable
                                                             Holding                                                                     on behalf of     Vince Cable
                                                                                                                                         Government       MP


       32
            Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.

                                                                                                                                                Page 119 of 133
                                                                                                                                                           EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                     EXPG0000006




              A Public                                        Company Ltd
              Corporation                                     (PSHCL)
              with own
              board and
              Articles




Date                POB            POB           POB            OPOB            OPOB       OPOB     AGS Active      AGS       AGS Chair    Sponsoring     SoS and if
                                  Senior         Chair         Ownership        Senior     Chair      Govt         Senior                 Government       shown
                                 Executiv                       of POB         Executive           Shareholder    Executive               Department63       (POB
                                    e                                                                                                                     Minister)
2015          Post Office Ltd    Paula       Alice Perkins    Postal                               ShEx                                   BIS Sole       The Right
              POL                Vennells    /                Services                                                                    shareholder    Honourable
                                             Tim Parker       Holding                                                                     on behalf of   Sajid Javid
              A Public                                        Company Ltd                                                                 Government     MP
              Corporation                                     (PSHCL)
              with own
              board and
              Articles
2016          Post Office Ltd    Paula       Tim Parker       Postal                               UKGI                       Robert      BIS Sole       The Right
              POL                Vennells                     Services                             (ALB)                      Swannell    shareholder    Honourable
                                                              Holding                                                                     on behalf of   Sajid Javid
              A Public                                        Company Ltd                                                                 Govt           MP /The
              Corporation                                     (PSHCL)                                                                                    Right
              with own                                                                                                                                   Honourable
              board and                                                                                                                                  Gregg Clark
              Articles                                                                                                                                   MP
2017          Post Office Ltd    Paula       Tim Parker       Postal                               UKGI          Mark         Robert      BEIS Sole      The Right
              POL                Vennells                     Services                             (ALB)         Russell      Swannell    shareholder    Honourable

       83
            Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.

                                                                                                                                                Page 120 of 133
                                                                                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                                                                              EXPG0000006




                                                           Holding                                                                                 on behalf of    Gregg Clark
           A Public                                        Company Ltd                                                                             Govt with       MP
           Corporation                                     (PSHC)                                                                                  direct powers
           with own                                                                                                                                over POL
           board and                                       Shares
           Articles                                        transferred
                                                           to

                                                           SoS




Date             POB            POB           POB             OPOB            OPOB           OPOB        AGS Active          AGS       AGS Chair    Sponsoring      SoS and if
                               Senior         Chair          Ownership        Senior         Chair          Govt            Senior                 Government        shown
                              Executiv                        of POB         Executive                   Shareholder       Executive               Department84       (POB
                                 e                                                                                                                                  Minister)
2018       Post Office Ltd    Paula       Tim Parker                                                    UKGI             Mark          Robert      BEIS Sole       The Right
           POL                Vennells                                                                  (ALB)85          Russell       Swannell    shareholder     Honourable
                                                                                                                                                   on behalf of    Greg Clark
           A Public                                                                                                                                Govt            MP
           Corporation                                                                                                                                             (Andrew
           with own                                                                                                                                                Griffith
           board and                                                                                                                                               PO
           Articles                                                                                                                                                Minister)
2019       Post Office Ltd    Nick        Tim Parker                                                    UKGI             Mark          Robert      BEIS Sole       The Right
           POL                Read                                                                      (ALB)            Russell       Swannell    shareholder     Honourable
                                                                                                                                                   on behalf of    Greg Clark
           A Public                                                                                                                                Govt            MP /The
           Corporation                                                                                                                                             Right
           with own                                                                                                                                                Honourable


       84 Provisions in POLs Articles conferring rights and powers on Government.
       ss BEIS acts as POLs policy sponsor, UKGI corporate governance / shareholder sponsor, with its own Board of Directors

                                                                                                                                                         Page 121 of 133
                                                                                            EXP00000006
                                                                                     EXPG0000006




       board and                                                                          Andrea
       Articles                                                                           Leadsom
                                                                                          MP
2020   Post Office Ltd   Nick   Tim Parker   UKGI    Charles   Robert     BEIS            The Right
       POL               Read                (ALB)   Donald    Swannell                   Honourable
                                                                                          Alok
       A Public                                                                           Sharma MP
       Corporation
       with own
       board and
       Articles




                                                                                 Page 122 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                EXPG0000006




ANNEX C
                                        GLOSSARY

 Board

 The highest level of governance of a company.

     A Unitary Board of a listed company would normally include a Chair (independent on
     appointment), Non-Executive Independent Directors, possible Non-Executive Non-
     Independent directors, and at least one Executive director (normally the CEO).

     An Executive Board of a non-listed company may have a Chair (Executive from within the
     company or independent on appointment) and Executive Directors. They may choose to have
     Non-Executive Directors

     A board of a subsidiary (wholly owned) company will have the structure determined by the
     parent and by regulation (as in UK banks). It may, or may not, include a Chair (independent
     on appointment), Non-Executive Independent Directors, Non-Executive & Non-Independent
     directors appointed by the parent and at least one Executive director (normally the CEO)
     A Board of a government owned company may have an Accounting Officer, if the PAO in
     the sponsoring department chooses to appoint an AO in the government owned business. In
     such cases the AO would normally be the Chief Executive or the person responsible for the
     day-to-day running of the company. They may also have independent governance
     arrangements for example, a Board made up of a majority of independent Non-Executive
     Directors from outside government.


 Culture

 The prevailing attitudes, values and beliefs as experienced by people within the company and
 stakeholders who interact with the company.


 Executive

 The senior people, often called Directors or Chief Officers or Senior Executives in any company,
 usually referring to the CEO and their most senior leadership team, usually their direct reports,
 often including CFO, CRO, COO, HRD. Together the CEO may constitute them as an Executive
 Committee


 Governance

 Structures and systems by which the company is governed and the mechanisms by which it and its
 Executive is held to account by the owners of the company.


 Internal Controls

 Systems designed to ensure that information, concerning compliance with applicable laws,
 regulations, contracts, policies and procedures, is reliable, accurate and timely.


                                                                                   Page 123 of 133
                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




Leadership

Two meanings, both used in this report:

    a) Used in this report to describe the people who are in Senior Positions in a company, also
       referred to as the Executive;

    b) Used to describe the practices of those who lead others, not directly related to senior
       position. Occasionally it is used in this meaning in this report.



Management

Two meanings, both used in this report:

    a) The processes and structures through which the company is run;

    b) The people in the organisation who have `positions as `managers' but are not the most
       senior who are referenced as `Executives'.


Structure

The roles and reporting relationships which are specified within the company.




                                                                                   Page 124 of 133
                                                                               EXP00000006
                                                                            EXPG0000006




ANNEX D

                         ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS
AGM    Annual General Meeting

ALB    Arm's Length Body

AGS    Active Government Shareholder

AO     Accounting Officer or Accountable Officer

ARA    Annual Report and Accounts

ARAC Audit Risk and Assurance Committee

BAC    Board Audit Committee

CoSec Company Secretary

BERR Department of Business, Enterprise, and Regulatory Reform

BEIS   Department of Business, Energy, and Industrial Strategy

BIS    Department of Business and Industrial Strategy

BRC    Board Risk Committee

BRemC Board Remuneration Committee

CEO    Chief Executive Officer

CFO    Chief Finance Officer

COO     Chief Operating Officer

CTO    Chief Technology Officer

DTI    Department of Trade and Industry

EGM    Extraordinary General Meeting

ESG    Environmental, Social and Governance

EA     External Audit

FCA    Financial Conduct Authority

FRC    Financial Reporting Council

FSA    Financial Conduct Authority

GRC    Governance Risk and Compliance

HRD    Human Resources Director

IA     Internal Audit

INED   Independent Non-Executive Director

MD     Managing Director


                                                                 Page 125 of 133
                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                EXPG0000006




NAO    National Audit Office

NED     Non-Executive Director

NINED Non-Independent Non-Executive Director

OPOB Ownership/Oversight of Post Office Business

PAC    Public Accounts Committee

PAO    Principal Accounting Officer

POB    Post Office Business

POC    Post Office Counters ltd

POC/L Post office Counters ltd and Post Office Ltd

POL    Post Office ltd

POHI Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry

PIDA   Public Interest and Disclosure Act

RMG    Royal Mail Group

RMH    Royal Mail Holdings

ShEx    Shareholder Executive

SoS     Secretary of State

UKGI UK Government Investments




                                                     Page 126 of 133
                                                                                                     EXP00000006
                                                                                                   EXPG0000006




ANNEX E


                                        SOURCES

Bachrach, P and Baratz, MS (1963), `Decisions andNon-Decisions: An Analytical Framework',
American Political Science Review, Vol 57, No 3, September 1963.

Brydon, D (2019), 'Assess, Assure and Inform: Improving Audit Quality and Effectiveness', "The
Brydon Review", December 2019.

Cabinet Office (2011), Code of Conduct for Board Members of Public Bodies

Cabinet Office (2016a), Ministerial Code.

Cabinet Office (2016b), Governance Code for Public Appointments.

Cabinet Office (2019), Code of Conduct for Board Members of Public Bodies

Cadbury, A (1992), 'The Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance, Report of the
Committee', "The Cadbury Code", December 1992.

Companies' Act 1985.

Companies' Act 2006.

Dawson, S (1991), `Managing Safety Offshore' in Bufton, Evripidou and Williams (eds.) Offshore
Operations post Piper Alpha: IMaRE/RINA Joint Offshore Group International Conference, 6-8
February 1991, London, England, Institute of Marine Engineers.

Dawson, S (1986), Analysing Organisations, Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK.

Department for Business Innovation and Skills (2015), `Whistleblowing: Guidance for Employers and
Code of Practice' March 2015.

Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2020), Post Office Limited: Shareholder
Relationship Framework Document, March 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5e74feO4e9OeO73e313755cc/postoffice-limited-
shareholder-relationship-framework-part- l .pdf

Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2022), `Restoring Trust in Audit and
Corporate Governance', May 2022.

Durrant, T (2020), `Government Departments' Boards and Non-Executive Directors', Institute for
Government , May 2020, https://www.instituteforgovemment.org.uk/explainer/government
departments-boards-non-executive-directors (Accessed 10/01/24).

Employment Rights Act 1996.

Financial Conduct Authority (2016), PS15/24: Whistleblowing in deposit-takers, PRA-designated
investment firms and insurers https://www.fca.org.uk/publications/policy-statements/ps 15-24-
whistleblowine-deposit-takers-nra-desi mated-investment-firms

Financial Conduct Authority Handbook (latest version a), SYSC 4.2 Whistleblowing Practical
Measures shows guidance available for firms (02/04/2005)


                                                                                     Page 127 of 133
                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




https://www.handbook.fca.org.uk/handbook/SYSC/4/'?date=2005-04-02&view=chapter (accessed
25/03/2024)

Financial Conduct Authority Handbook (latest version b), SYSC 4.2 Whistleblowing Practical
Measures shows guidance available for firms, (30/08/2006)
https://www.handbook. fca.org.uk/handbook/SYSC/4/2.html?date-2006-08-3 0#D36

Financial Reporting Council (1998), The Combined Code: the Principles of Good Corporate and Code
of Best Practice' Derived by the Committee on Corporate Governance, May 1998.
https://media.frc.org.uk/documents/Combined_Code_June_1998.pdf

Financial Reporting Council (2003), 'The Combined Code on Corporate Governance' July 2003.

Financial Reporting Council (2005), `Internal Control: Revised Guidance for Directors on the
Combined Code' October 2005.

Financial Reporting Council (2006), 'Good Practice Suggestions from the Higgs Report'June 2006.

Financial Reporting Council (2008), 'The Combined Code on Corporate Governance' June 2008.

Financial Reporting Council (2009), `Going Concern and Liquidity Risk: Guidance for Directors of
UK Companies', October 2009.

Financial Reporting Council (2010), `Revised Combined Code of Corporate Governance', May 2009.

Financial Reporting Council (2012), `Revised UK Corporate Governance Code', September 2012.

Financial Reporting Council (2014a), `Guidance on Risk Management, Internal Control and Related
Financial and Business Reporting', September 2014.

Financial Reporting Council (2014b), `Revised UK Corporate Governance Code', September 2014.

Financial Reporting Council (2016a), `Revised UK Corporate Governance Code', April 2016.

Financial Reporting Council (2016b), `Guidance on the going concern basis of accounting and
reporting on solvency and liquidity risks'.

Financial Reporting Council (2016c), `Corporate Culture and the Role of Boards', July 2016.

Financial Reporting Council (2018), `Revised Code and Guidance on Board Effectiveness', July
2018.

Financial Reporting Council (2019), `Revised Ethical Standard', December 2019.

Financial Services Authority (2003), `Operational Risk Systems and Control'FSA Consultation Paper
142.

Gill, M and Dalton, G (2022), `Public Bodies: Scrutiny and Accountability', Institute for Government
December 2022. Accessible https://www.instituteforgovemment.org.uk/article/explainer/public,
bodies-scrutiny-accountability (Accessed 10/01/24).

Government Finance Function and HM Treasury (2013), 'The Orange Book', May 2013.
Government Finance Function and HM Treasury (2019), `Updated Orange Book', July 2013.




                                                                                    Page 128 of 133
                                                                                                    EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




Greenbury, R (1995), `Report of the Study Group on Directors' Remuneration', "The Greenbury
Code", July 1995

Hampel, R (1998), Final Report, 'The Committee on Corporate Governance', "The Hampel Report",
January1998.
Hazell, R, Cogbill, A, Owen, D, Webber H, and Chebib, L(201 8), `Critical Friends? The Role of Non-
Executives on Whitehall Boards', The Constitution Unit, University College London, January 2018.

Higgs, D (2003), `Review of the Role and Effectiveness of Non-Executive Directors', "The Higgs
Report", January 2003.
https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ukgwa/20121212135622/http:/www.bis.gov.uk/files/file23
012.pdf

HM Government (2012), 'The Civil Service Reform Plan', June 2012.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a7e4e3c40f0b62305b82231/CivilService-Reform-
Plan-final.pdf

HM Treasury, (2001), Management of Risk — A Strategic Overview.

HM Treasury (2004), `Management of Risk: Principles and Concepts, "The Orange Book", October
2004.

HM Treasury and Cabinet Office (2005), `Corporate Governance Code in Central Government
Departments: Code of Good Practice', July 2005.
HM Treasury and the Cabinet Office (2011), `Corporate Governance in Central Government
Departments: Code of Good Practice', July 2011.

HM Treasury (2012), `Managing Public Money' May 2012.

HM Treasury (2013), Orange Book — Management of Risk, Principles and Concepts.

HM Treasury (2015), 'The Accounting Officer's Survival Guide', December 2015.

HM Treasury (2016), `Audit and Risk Assurance Committee Handbook', March 2016.

HM Treasury and the Cabinet Office (2017), `Corporate Governance in Central Government
Departments: Code of Good Practice'.

HM Treasury (2018), `Managing Public Money' (Revised), September 2018.

Institute of Directors (2018), 'The Role of the Company Secretary'
https://www. iod.com/resources/factsheets/company-structure/the-role-of-the-company-secretary/

Institute for Government (2022), `Public Bodies Scrutiny and Accountability'.

Myners, P (2001), `Institutional Investment in the United Kingdom: A Review' HM Treasury', "The
Myners Code", March 2001.

National Audit Office (2007) 'The Shareholder Executive and Public Sector Business', a Report —
Value for Money

National Audit Office (2015), `Companies in Government', Briefing Paper, December 2015.

National Audit Office (2016), `Accountability to Parliament for Taxpayers Money', Good Practice
Guides February (2016).



                                                                                   Page 129 of 133
                                                                                                      EXP00000006
                                                                                                  EXPG0000006




Nolan, M (1995), `First Report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life', "The Nolan
Principles", May 1995.

Post Office Limited: Shareholder Relationship Framework Document, 2022
https://www. izov.uk/government/publications/post-offic e-limited-shareholder-relationship-framework-
document

Power, M, Ashby, S, and Palermo, T (2013), 'Risk Culture in Financial Organisations: A Research
Report', London School of Economics.

Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Committee (House of Commons Committee) (2023),
'The Role of Non-Executive Directors in Government', Seventh Report of Session 2022-2023, June
2023.

Public Interest and Disclosure Act 1996.

Shareholder Executive (2015) Annual Review 2014 to 2015

Smith, R (2003), `Audit Committees Combined Code Guidance: a Report and Proposed Guidance by
an FRC-Appointed Group', "The Smith Guidance", Financial Reporting Council, January 2003.

The Cabinet Office (2016a), `Governance Code on Public Appointments', December 2016.

The Cabinet Office (2016b), 'The Ministerial Code' December 2016.

The Cabinet Office (2019), 'Code of Conduct for Board Members of Public Bodies', June 2019.

The Chartered Governance Institute UK and Ireland (2022a), `Guidance Note: Terms of Reference for
the Audit Committee', May 2022.

The Chartered Governance Institute UK and Ireland (2022b), `Guidance Note: Terms of Reference for
the Risk Committee', May 2022.

The Committee on Corporate Governance (1998), 'The Combined Code— Principles of Good
Governance and Code of Best Practice', June 1998.

The Institute of Internal Auditors (2013), 'The Three Lines of Defence in Effective Risk Management
and Control', IHA Position Paper January 2013.

Turnbull, N (1999), `Internal Control: Guidance for Directors of the Combined Code', "The Turnbull
Guidelines", The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (August 1999).

Turner, B (1976), 'The Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters',
Administrative Science Quarterly Vol 21, No 3, September 1976.

Turner, D (2022), `Three Lines of Defence — is it the Right Model?', Journal of Financial
Compliance, Vol 5, No, 3.

UKGI (2017), Annual Report and Accounts 2016-17

Walker, D (2009), 'A Review of Corporate Governance in UK Banks and other Financial Industry
Entities' "The Walker Review", November 2009




                                                                                     Page 130 of 133
                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                 EXPG0000006




ANNEX F

        QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERTISE OF DAME SANDRA
                DAWSON AND DR KATY STEWARD



Professor Sandra Dawson BA (Keele Univ.), MA (Univ. of Cambridge), Hon DSc (Keele Univ.),
DBE

Dame Sandra is Professor Emerita at the University of Cambridge. She was formerly Director of
Cambridge Judge Business School (1995-2006), Master of Sidney Sussex College (1999-2009) and
one of the Deputy Vice Chancellors of the University (2008-2012). Prior to moving to Cambridge, she
held academic positions in Imperial College, University of London.

She teaches, writes and consults on organizational behaviour, leadership and governance.

She was invested as a Dame Commander of the British Empire in recognition of her contribution to
higher education and management research.


She has wide practical experience as a Board member in the commercial, public and charitable
sectors. Former Board positions include: Chair, Riverside Mental Health NHS Trust (1992-1995);
Chair, Executive Committee, Social Science Research Council, USA (2009-2019);Trustee and
sometime Vice-Chair, Oxfam GB (2006-2012); Senior Independent Director and Chair of the
Remuneration Committee, TSB Bank (2014-2020); Non-Executive Director and sometime Senior
Independent Director and Chair of Remuneration Committee, Financial Services Authority(2010-
2013); Non-Executive Director and member of the Audit committee, Barclays plc(2003-2009), Non-
Executive Director and member of the Audit Committee, JPMorgan Claverhouse Investment Trust
(1996-2003); Chair, Remuneration Committee and member of the Audit and Ethics Committees, DRS
plc (2012-2016) ; Chair, ESRC Advanced Institute of Management Executive Steering Committee, 2007-12;
Member, Prime Minister's Council on Science and Technology (2011-2014); Member, Windrush
Lessons Learned Review Advisory Group (2017-2020); Member, Senior Salaries Review Body
(1996-2003), Trustee and sometime Chair of the Academic Affairs and Research Committee,
American University of Sharjah (2014-2023). She currently Chairs the Advisory Board of the
Cambridge Museum of Zoology and sits on the Advisory Board of Cambridge Judge Business School.



Dr Katy Steward MA (Univ of Cambridge), MBA (Imperial College, Univ of London), PhD (Imperial
College, Univ of London)

Dr Steward is currently a Visiting Scholar at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. In 2022-23 she was
a Visiting Fellow at Cambridge Judge Business School, University of Cambridge.

She has taught, advised, coached and consulted on leadership, organisation culture and governance for
the past 30 years. Her experience includes:

Head of National Culture and Leadership Program, NHS England, (2021-2022), including advising on
governance, leadership, culture change and whistle blowing.

The Kings Fund, Independent Health Think Tank, (2004-13), including advising and coaching various
CEOs of health and other organisations, Professions' regulators, an independent care provider and a

                                                                                     Page 131 of 133
                                                                                                   EXP00000006
                                                                                                EXPG0000006




large international development organisation, on leadership, governance, culture change and
organisation structure.

Monitor (Regulator of all NHS Foundation Trust Hospitals) (2003-04), including developing
frameworks for the evaluation of governance and culture.

Membership of Boards in the charity and public sectors, including Non Executive Director and
member Audit Committee and Nominations Committee UK UNHCR, (2021-date); Non- Executive
Director and Chair, Quality Committee & Board Culture Change Committee, Norfolk and Suffolk
NHS Mental Health Trust ( 2020-23); Trustee and sometime member of Safeguarding Committee,
Oxfam GB (2013-2020); Trustee, Amref,UK (2011-2014); Trustee, The Kaloko Trust (2006-2011).

Membership of various groups, including Member, National Guardians Office Roundtable on
Whistleblowing (2022); Member, NHS England Culture and Leadership Advisory Group (2019-21);
Member, Lord Carter Productivity Review of Ambulance Services and Mental Health (2016-17);
Director, National Foundation Trust Governors' Association, Advisory Group, Kings Fund (2005);
Chair, NHS Board Chairs Leadership Program Advisory Committee, Kings Fund (2005-13).




                                                                                     Page 132 of 133
                                                                                                          EXP00000006
                                                                                                       EXPG0000006




ANNEX G


Report to the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry by Dame Sandra Dawson and Dr Katy
Steward.


Declaration


We, Dame Sandra Dawson and Dr Katy Steward, declare that:

    1) We have been appointed jointly by the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry to act as expert
          witnesses on matters of governance, management, and leadership.

    2) We understand that our duty is to give an objective, unbiased opinion on matters within our
          expertise in order to help the Inquiry achieve its terms of reference. We have complied, and
          will continue to, comply with that duty.


    3) We know of no conflict of interest in undertaking this work.


    4) Annex F sets out our expertise and qualifications.


    5) We have endeavoured in our Report to be accurate. Any matters on which we have expressed
          an opinion lie within our field of expertise, and represent our true professional opinions on the
          matters to which they refer.

    6) This report is provided to those instructing us with the sole purpose of assisting the Inquiry. It
          may not be used for any other purpose without our express written permission.




Statement of Truth


The contents of this report are true to the best of our knowledge and belief.


Signed:                                              Signed:


          GRO
Date: 27th March 2024                      Date: 27' March 2024


Dame Sandra Dawson                         Dr Katy Steward


                                                                                          Page 133 of 133
