FUJ00156677
FUJ00156677

Rachael Panter|
Sent: Fri 30/11/2012 3:42:12 PM (UTC)
To: Jenkins Gareth G!

Ce: Andrew Bolc!

‘Jarnail A Singh'}”
Subject: FW: POL cases raising Horizon
Attachment: DIXON - Summary of facts.doc.
Attachment: DIXON- Indictment.doc
Attachment: ISHAQ - Summary of facts.doc
Attachment: ISHAQ - Indictment.doc
Attachment: SEFTON & NEILD - Summary of facts.doc
Attachment: SEFTON & NIELD - Indictment.doc.
Attachment: 01
Attachment:
Hello Gareth

Hope you are well. Further to my previous email, please could you consider the attached and provide a signed and dated report
which deals with each individual case. | would also like to update you on the developments on a couple of cases.

The most urgent case that we would need a report for is the Grant Allen case that is listed for the 10th December at Chester
Crown Court. You would not be required to attend on that date, the Plea and Case Management Hearing just deals with the
defendant entering a plea and preparing for trial.

{anonymity Order} am almost certain, (subject to confirmation from POL) that th i nonymity Order } trial will no longer be going ahead in
“y 7 | would just ask that you keep the date in your diary for now, and TWil ef You know the official position as soon as | have
received confirmation.

Wylie - This case has now been listed for a trial for the week commencing 4th March 2013. Having served your report on the
court and defence, the court put the trial back to next year to allow for the defence to instruct their own expert, a Mr Steve Mason -
| don't know if you have come across him before?

Please could you pencil in the week of the 4th March 2013 in to your diary.

The remaining cases of Grant Allen, Ishaq, Dixon and Sefton & Nield all require a report, with the most pressing one being Grant
Allen. | am hopeful that | can get a form from the court which will allow you to claim some of your expenses for attending to give
evidence, although this is more commonly used when acting from a defence perspective, so | do not anticipate receiving a
considerable sum.

| will forward to you a copy of the summary of facts, DCS and charges for the Grant Allen case shortly. From now on | will liaise
through the investigator and Fujitsu procedures to contact you in future. For the moment, we do not have any further requests for
a report, only the ones outlined above.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if you require any further information.
Kind regards

Rachael
FUJ00156677
FUJ00156677

From: Rachael Panter

Sent: 16 November 2012 11:30
To: ‘Jenkins Gareth GI'

Subject: POL cases raising Horizon

Dear Gareth

Re: Horizon expert report

As you may already be aware, your expert report detailing the reliability of the Horizon system has
been served as evidence in a number of Post Office cases that are at various stages of the court
process, most of which are listed for trial in the early part of next year.

It should be noted that to date, most, if not all cases raising the Horizon system as an issue, have
been unable/not willing to particularise what specific issues that they may have with the system,
and how that shapes the nature of their defence.

As we already have your detailed report, I would like to serve it in each case listed below. All of the
following cases have raised issues with the reliability of the Horizon system:

1, Jamie Dixon Trial date - TBC

2. Khayyam Ishaq 25th Feb 2013 trial at Bradford Crown Court

3. Angela Sefton & Anne Neild 21st Jan 2013 trial at Liverpool Crown Court
nq r a +

5. Kim Wylie 17th December 2012 trial al

6. Grant Allen 10th December 2012 for PCMH at Chester Crown Court

Your expert report has already been served in th ‘ase. I would like to serve your
report in the remaining cases and have attached a case summary of each case listed above so that you
may familiarise yourself with the facts of each case.

I would like to stress that I do not anticipate that all of the above cases will reach trial stage. Please
could you read the case summaries attached, and send 5 original signed and dated copies of your
report to me as soon as possible.

Iam conscious that there are a couple of cases coming up in December. In order for me to serve your
report in time, please could you either send the copies of your reports via special delivery and/or as
an email attachment.

If you have any queries please do not hesitate to contact me

Kind regards

Rachael
Rachael Panter

CartwrightKing

fm SOL CTT OR S em

Nottingham | Birmingham | Derby | Leicester | Sheffield | Newcastle Gateshead
Norwich Union House, South Parade, Old Market Square, Nottingham, NG1 2LH
www.cartwrightking.co.uk Wf @CartwrightKing

This message is confidential and may contain legally privileged information. If you have received this in error please delete
this message and let us know by email or telephone. A list of directors is available at each office. Authorised and regulated by
the Solicitors Regulation Authority No: 312459. VAT Registration No: 737837295.

FUJ00156677
FUJ00156677
