FUJ00094393

FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

RMGA HNG-X Counter Application Review

A review of the integrity of the HNG-X application relating capturing of sales and financial
transactions at the Counter

Reviewers: Alan D’Alvarez, RMGA Programme Director
Geoff Butts, HNG-X Programme Manager
Graham Allen, HNG-X Applications Engineering Manager
Andy Thomas, HNG-X Counter Architect
David Johns, Lead HNG-X Architect
Maz Kostuch, Director of Service Delivery and Projects, PSD
David Leask, Managing Customer Solution Architect, PSD

Authors: Paul Roberts, Applications Architect, AS
Stuart Rye, Managing Consultant, PSD

1 Introduction

1.1 Terms of Reference

Following the occurrence of a transaction being duplicated on the HNG-X Branch database, Stuart
Rye and Paul Roberts were asked to review the Counter Application architecture and design and
ensure that it fully supports the need to protect the integrity of financial transactions.

The scope is focused on the integrity of the Counter Application in relation to financial transactions
captured at the Counter. It does not extend to data migration or other transient issues caused by the
switch from Horizon to HNG-X.

This report reflects the findings from a visit by Paul Roberts and Stuart Rye on 4" February 2010 and
a follow up review with David Johns on 24" February.

1.2 Background

The objective of HNG-X programme is to develop a system with structural and operational
characteristics that substantially reduce ongoing support and maintenance costs with respect to the
current Horizon system. A key component of HNG-X is the Counter Application. In contrast to the
Horizon Counter Application, the HNG-X version retains operational data (e.g. Reference Data) and
business logic, but transactional information is stored directly in the Data Centre. The Counter side of
the new applications is based principally on Java technology. The Counter hardware is reused from
Horizon with the initial migration deploying the new application on the existing Windows NT 4.0
operating system. Where it has been feasible to reuse components from the existing Horizon
Counter, these have been carried forward into HNG-X

It was in pilot with 12 branches, when on 27" January 2010, the Data Reconciliation Service (DRS)
process detected an error in a banking transaction. Subsequent investigations revealed that the
Branch database had two transactions with different JSN's but the same SSN? for a specific Counter
on that day but the 3° Party banking system only had one transaction. The clerk did not know that a
duplicate transaction had been created.

There was one other occurrence, again at Derby, also a banking transaction. There was a concern
that dual settlement of transactions with no banking or card component and not subject to DRS.
actions might have occurred or occur in the future and would not be spotted. [Update: 22" February:
Searches of the database since pilot launch and being run daily revealed one further incident of a dual
settlement (this time without a banking transaction). There are over 100 branches live as of this date.]

* JSN — Journal Sequence Number - Used for audit purposes and must be unique without gaps per each Counter.
2 SSN — Session Sequence Number — Unique within the session and can be duplicated after a period of time

Page 1 of 14 Version 2.0
FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

The net effect would be that the Post Office and the Branch records would not match. Where this
happens, the Post Office investigates the branch and Postmaster, with a view to retraining or even
uncovering fraud.

The new Counter Application records all financial transaction data in the Data Centre. The PC in the
Branch runs the Counter Application (with other sub system components). It is critical that the central
database properly records the actions at the Counter and reliably reflects the actions of the clerk.

The development team concluded the failure was caused by a bug and a resolution has been
identified which includes further measures to remove the possibility of this occurring in the future.

The Counter development team were able to recreate the Derby error by heavily loading the
processor in a terminal and double keying the “settlement” action.

Further assurance is required that Fujitsu has got to the root cause and there are no other potential
issues with the integrity of the HNG-X as a system of record.

1.3 Approach to assurance

Paul Roberts and Stuart Rye joined the HNGX team on Thursday 4" February. We met with the
following people:

* David Johns — Lead architect — 4 hours

e Andy Thomas — Counter architect - 6 hours

e Steve Porter - Counter development team — specific questions

e Alan Holmes — Auditing - 15 minutes

The following documents were provided:

* _HNG-X_Solution_Architecture_Overview_2009-07-28.ppt
ARCSOLARC0001_v4.1_Draft Overall Solution Architecture.doc
ARCAPPARC0003 Counter Architecture.doc
ARCAPPARC0009 Counter Business Architecture.doc
REQCUSSTG0002 Branch Exception Handling Strategy.doc
DESAPPIFS0012 BAL Service Interface Specification.doc

eee ee

Our approach was to:

« Understand the business process — from the Counter to back end / 3 parties
Understand the business risks and controls
Understand the system architecture, risks and controls
Explore the specific failure in Derby and its resolution
Explore any other areas of risk where the Post Office and Branch could end up with a
variance due to a system error.

The review was conducted with the assumption that the HNG-X system was a technology upgrade
and not a business process reengineering project. Business requirements and controls in HNG-X
should be the same as the current Horizon platform. It was declared that the Counter Application has
been re-written based on Business specifications provided by the Post Office since the Horizon
Counter Application had been developed using a third party product.

2 ‘Findings

2.1 General

e The HNG-X system does represent a technology migration, with no material changes in business
function. However, the development team involved in the Counter Application was largely drawn
from people with no familiarity of the current platform, partly because the skills base is different
and partly due to the fact the Horizon Counter Application had been developed using a third party
product which would not feature in the HNG-X solution.

Page 2 of 14 Version 2.0
FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

« There are no material changes to business requirements. However, the adoption of a real time
transactional system has increased traffic to and from the remote database and therefore the
process time. Time at the counter is critical to the Post Office so a decision was made to find
efficiencies where possible. In particular, the settlement process for cash only payment was.
improved, with the removal of an extra button press previously required to complete settlement.
The Post Office also took the opportunity to make simple process changes..

2.2 Business Process (see Appendices)

« The business process is essentially the capture and settlement of a complex retail shopping
transaction. Customers can, inter alia, purchase stamps, mobile ‘phone top-ups, send
Moneygrams and withdraw cash using their Bank card. They can settle their basket with a range
of methods — cash, vouchers, cards.

e The clerk logs the customer's transactions in a basket (just like online shopping). These could be
a mix of all types of transactions. Each basket has an identifier called an SSN assigned when the
basket is opened. These are specific to the Counter and basket but not unique as the SSN is
reset to 0 after 999,999. A basket cannot be opened whilst another is open.

e Once complete, payment is taken for relevant items and/or cash paid out for a withdrawal and the
basket settled i.e. recorded on the central database and flushed from the Counter. Each basket
at the database is assigned a unique and auditable reference called a JSN. (A JSN is assigned to
any auditable data that is recorded at the data centre. Baskets represent 90%+ of these.)

« Banking transactions i.e. deposit, withdrawal relating to partner banks and withdrawal from other
banks against a debit card are processed at the time of presentation. Withdrawals are authorised
with the issuing bank directly or via VocaLink when the card is presented and the payment
processed immediately. Authorisation is a pre-requisite to the transaction being accepted and
added to the basket. A unique identifier is generated for the banking transaction at the point of
the authorisation request. If authorisation fails, a zero value (failed) Banking transaction is added
to the basket.

« Payment (or part payment) of a basket with a debit or credit card is handled through Streamline,
with the Post Office acting in the role of a merchant. Payment is pre-authorised and reserved via
Streamline when the card is presented. Authorisation is a pre-requisite to the basket being settled.
If authorisation fails, the basket cannot be settled and must be settled another way.

e Banking and card transactions are reconciled at the end of the day by the Data Reconciliation
Service (DRS) which reconciles the Counter and Bank views of what transactions have occurred.
A payment file is generated for the reserved card transactions which are processed in batch.

2.3. Settlement

The clerk indicates the transaction is settled in two ways: “Fast Cash” and “Settle”. There is a button
for each. Each triggers a process resulting in the basket being logged on the database.

« Fast Cash

o “Fast Cash’ in that the clerk has only one key to press. They can do this when the
transaction is settled by cash only.

© This places an entry for the cash amount in the basket which sets the total to nil and the
basket settles.

« Settle

o The clerk uses “settle” to bring up a menu of settlement options where the customer is
paying by means other than cash only. The clerk records the relevant settlement
methods and amounts. Each amount is logged in the basket. Once the basket reaches
“nil”, the basket settles.

co If the basket is already “nil”, the “settle” button goes straight to settlement.

When the basket settles, the Counter confirms with the Branch database that the basket is set to “nil”
i.e. all payment received / cash paid out. On receipt of confirmation from the database that the
basket has been properly captured and committed, the process of flushing the basket is started. In
some cases a receipt is printed and cached based on the basket details before it is flushed, in others

Page 3 of 14 Version 2.0
FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

the receipt is cached (usually for a banking only transaction, where the receipt is printed at the point
of authorisation and no other items are present). Once these procedures are complete, the basket is
flushed.

2.4 Reversal Settlement

This occurs when a customer returns due to some error being made. For example, | bought 2" class
stamps but | needed 1* class stamps or the customer was bought and/or sold the wrong item.

There are two different reversals that can be performed:
e Customer returns with receipt within a specific time window

o This initiates a reversal settlement process and is referred to as an “existing reversal”.
The process inserts a “reserve” transaction on the database before settling the reversal.
The clerk is guided through the reversal process. Where all the original basket content is
selected, the basket is auto settled and there is no opportunity for it to be submitted twice.
If only part of the original basket content is selected, the normal settlement screen is
displayed with the “settle” button disabled. This screen could potentially allow double
settlement but not by the same keystrokes that were use in the Derby case.

« Customer returns without receipt or with receipt outside the specific time window

© This will follow the same process as for a normal settlement and is known as a “new
reversal”. The financial amounts will be a different polarity. This process is protected by
the same controls as for a normal settlement.

2.5 Controls

« Control over the data capture process (for example, disabling input from peripherals such as the
touch screen, bar code, scales etc.) is supposed to be maintained and integrity provided by
ensuring the clerk or peripherals cannot initiate out of sequence events. (This control failed in
Derby.)

e Banking transactions have an end of day control run by the DRS which reconciles the intra-day
authorisations with the end of day settlement. This will alert duplicate or missing entries.
Banking transactions have a unique identifier. These cannot be duplicated.

e All other financially relevant 3° party interfaces (in particular Moneygram) have business logic
built into the process to prevent duplication or a loss of a transaction. With Moneygram, the clerk
is forced to acknowledge the point of financial settlement in the process and there is a specific
input button presented after this point to commit the funds. There is no opportunity for this to be
repeated or initiated by any other means.

«The JSN has a uniqueness constraint as it is used for auditing purposes. It is also “dense”
meaning that there should be no gaps for a given Counter. It is valid for a Counter to send
transactions with a duplicate JSN, for example during a retry process. In this scenario, if the
transaction is already stored in the Branch database, it will fail on the uniqueness constraint which
will force a comparison of the transaction to be stored and the transaction already stored. If they
are the same, the to-be stored transaction is discarded. A discrepancy in the transactions will
force an error to be raised and the Counter will be logged off.

« The SSN is not unique and is repeated after 1 million Baskets per Counter.

e Ifa basket is not successfully stored in the Branch database, the Counter performs a recovery
procedure which will involve retrying the basket. If this fails, then the clerk must perform a
rollback which clears the basket of non-recoverable transactions.

2.6 Spotting the duplicate Derby basket

«It was the end of day reconciliation of the banking transaction in the DRS that alerted Fujitsu to a
problem. Transaction settlement requests were presented for two transactions with the same
unique transaction identifier and the second one was rejected. This revealed the presence on the
HNG-X database of two duplicate, absolutely identical baskets with the same SSN and contents
but different JSNs. Essentially, the Counter had submitted the same basket twice to the Branch
database which had logged each as unique, with different assigned JSNs. Pre-authorisation only
happened once as this took place before the basket was settled.

Page 4 of 14 Version 2.0
FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

2.7 Cause of the duplicate basket

e In the old Horizon system, the clerk was required to press “Fast Cash” and then “Settle” to settle.
In the new system, they only need to press “Fast Cash”.

e In Derby, the clerks concerned adopted the old procedure and pressed “fast cash” (which
recorded the cash entry, set the basket total to “nil” and initiated the settlement process) and then
“settle”. The settle button should not have been enabled but it was. As the basket was now at
“nil’, the basket was settled again immediately.

e There is nothing particular about Derby identified that indicated a greater risk of double settlement
than any other location.

2.8 The Resolution

« The development team have developed and tested an immediate resolution within the Counter
Application and are considering possible solutions involving the Branch database (see
Appendices for process flows).

e The Counter Application:

o It was discovered that the peripheral input lock was released before the basket was
flushed and the “Settle” button enabled. This allowed the clerk to activate the “Settle”
button and because the basket was already set to nil, it was sent to the Branch database
and caused the duplicate. The ability to press the “Settle” button was due to timing
differences. The clerk was very efficient and following the old Horizon process. Windows
was servicing another process. The Counter Application code has now been modified to
flush the basket before the peripheral input lock has been released.

o The development team also found another scenario when this could occur and as well as
correcting this they have implemented additional code that highlights any further
scenarios that have not been discovered. The additional code ensures that the Counter
Application is in “Busy Wait’ state at the point the transaction is sent to the Branch
database. The code does this irrespective of whether the state is already correct. If the
state is not correct it produces an alert message on the Counter Application. This has
only been adopted for the Development and Test environments.

o A “flag” has been added to the basket that prevents duplicate settlement initiation. This is
a belts and braces approach since the previous code changes should not require this
functionality.

* The database solutions:
The solutions being considered are:

o Check for duplicate SSN on receipt of a basket. If this is done real time, it will place a
demanding overhead on the database.

o Check for duplicate SSNs as part of an audit process during the overnight period.

2.9 Stock check

e Stock checks will highlight differences between the Post Office records and Branch records.
Some post offices undertake daily checks, others weekly, others monthly.

3 Conclusions
Overall, the actions taken to redress the Derby issue are appropriate. We believe the Counter

Application with the identified fix fully supports the need to protect the integrity of financial
transactions.

Specific conclusions are detailed below.

Page 5 of 14 Version 2.0
FUJ00094393

FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.18

Business controls for banking transactions will alert duplicate baskets containing banking
transactions because of reconciliation checks in the DRS but there has not been a control for
baskets with no banking transaction — this is now being addressed.

Duplicate banking transactions with different identifiers cannot be created.

The duplicate could have happened anywhere, not just Derby; (performance monitoring not
enabled).

Baskets cannot be “lost”. The JSN and associated checks provide confirmation that all
transactions sent from the Counter are stored in the Branch database. Recovery procedures
built into the Counter Application and Business Processes ensure transactions are not lost.

Duplicate baskets cannot be created in the Counter Application and cannot be submitted to the
database more than once following the resolution taken by the development team. This was
less of a risk in the old technology but an increased risk with the adoption of the centralised
financial transaction approach and the real-time transmission to the database from the Counter
Application.

The business control intended at the Counter recognises that dual settlement risk is inherent by
having two buttons that could initiate settlement. The business requirement is that settlement
can be initiated only once i.e. the use of one button to submit a basked disables the other.
The implementation in the HNG-X Counter Application failed and enabled dual settlement.

The Counter Application design did not have sufficient controls to prevent duplicate basket
transmission (regardless of the control intended to limit initiation of settlement by different
buttons).

The peripheral input lock release occurred too soon in the process, and allowed “Settle” button
to be pressed.

The Counter Application fix adopts a belt and braces approach and is very strong.
The design of the basket flag control is a good one

The basket submission flag avoids the timing trap that the “Settle” button lock fell into and is
enabled at the correct point in the process, just before the transmission to the Branch database.

A basket cannot be flushed until confirmation is received that it has been properly committed
and logged at the database.

An SSN is associated with a basket. Per Counter, per day it can be used as check for
duplication (within a population of 1 million)

Given the strength of the implemented Counter Application controls a real-time check at the
database for duplicate SSN receipt should not be necessary and would potentially decrease
performance of the system

An end of day procedure to detect duplicate SSN is acceptable.

The “new reversal” process follows the settlement process but the transaction amounts have a
different polarity. The “existing reversal” process is a guided process and the clerk does not
have the opportunity to create duplicate transactions for full reversal. There may have been a
risk with partial reversal. This risk has been removed by the fix.

Other interactions do not create risk, e.g. post code look up, or have appropriate business and
technical controls in place.

It is unsure what testing has been performed to prove peripherals are disabled and enabled at
the correct point in the Business Process.

Page 6 of 14 Version 2.0
FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

The Counter Application is quirky when ordering quantities of stamps. For example, it is
possible for five stamps to be recorded as one stamp if the clerk does not interact with the
Counter Application correctly.

There is no practical control to stop under and overcharging for baskets caused by clerk error.
For example, the clerk my give the wrong number or denomination of stamps.

There seems to be no other risk of baskets undercharging.
There is a solution to detect incorrect busy-wait states in the development and test

environment which would be useful, with enhancement, in the live environment as an indicator
of failing code.

4 Recommendations

44

4.2

43

44

4.5

46

Implement the fix as developed and tested.

The “busy wait” check should be implemented in the Production environment but with an Error
message being written the Windows Event log in preference to the Alert message. This Error
message would be transmitted to the central database following the business as usual
processes for detecting errors on the Counter PC and appropriate procedures put in place

Do not implement the real time duplicate SSN check. Create an overnight batch report for
SSN duplicates with the same JSN on same day. This could be run on the BRSS database if
performance is an issue on the live database.

Review peripheral disablement and enablement testing and where appropriate undertake more
testing for specific use cases to check peripherals are in the correct state.

Incorporate a duplicate SSN check in the Audit Retrieval process.
Review and strengthen negative testing, if appropriate. The recent problems reflect the

asynchronous nature of the new application and traditional or historic test cases may not reflect
this.

Page 7 of 14 Version 2.0
HNG-X Counter Application Review

FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

25" February 2010

Appendices High Level Business Flows

1. Business Process -
No banking transaction

2. Business Process -
Banking transaction

Moneygram £100
© ‘ele sarys 20
1) Lidiass stamps £10

Balanco 140

Money

Balance

£100

1" class stamps £30
2° class stamps £10

update

Automatic basket

‘Automatic update
HNG-X database

Cash withdrawal — £100
‘Transaction 10: 000.0001

Balance £100
c4
toms
3" party systems:
‘Authorisation

‘Automatic update |__|
HNG-X database

Page 8 of 14
HNG-X Counter Application Review

FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

25" February 2010

3. Business Process — Card Settlement of Non-Banking Basket

Moneygram £100
class stamps £30

2” class stamps _£10
Balance £140

Moneygram — £100
1 class stamps £30
2 class stamps £10
Card payment _-£140
Balance £0
|, Automatic
‘Authorised? Yes” [basket update

»| Update HNG-x

database

Authorisation
request

Page 9 of 14
HNG-X Counter Application Review

FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

System Flows - Derby Issue

Banking Transaction — Derby Issue

Clerk performs banking

transaction

Ceynter

al \ oa

Basket balanoed so
need to selec settler
method

vent

Bank

3" Paty

3° Party
Database

£18
transaction

ing Tonearene ong Transaction:

DRS Recondlation Service

: Al Basket
Response ———p! Fast cash [ empty -
L NJ nofag
Peripheralnput
Relhee
Pr
Re
‘Store basket again
Store transaction ok
OK
Banking Transaction
Branch Database ranch Database
a
& £15 transacton
ASN123, SSN450
Response

=

Reconciliation failed
because 3" Party only has
fone £15 transaction

Page 10 of 14

25" February 2010

FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

System Flows — Derby Issue Fix

Banking Transaction — Derby Fix

Clerk performs banking

transaction The key citferences are:

1, Flag on basket to stop second submission
2. Peripheral input Lock Release occurs after basket is
eared down

3, The Busy/Wait function is executed before
‘Asynchronous Comms occurs. This is regardless of
whether Itwas already executing. It was not executing
an Alet is generated in the DEV and TEST
environments, but it is recommended an ERROR should
be wnitten to the Windows Event Log soit can be
detected at the Data Centre

4, Recommendation for a report to fook for transactions
wih same SSN, diflerent JSNs on the same day for the
‘same counter. This will detect duplicate retail onty (no
banking element) transactions

-Resporse————->|

Counter

Store transaction

Banking Transaction

Response

—Banking Transactions— 4

DRS Reconciliation Service

3" Party

Reconciliation OK

a

Page 11 of 14
HNG-X Counter Application Review

FUJ00094393

FUJ00094393

25" February 2010

System Flows — Post Fix Fast Cash

‘Cash Payment Transaction
Basket
a —> empty —
2 no flag
€
5 T
fo] |
= |
|
|
|
|
Store transaction
1 ii
T T
ox
<>
| Branch
| Database |
z £20
oO transaction
2
S
a
&

System Flows — Post Fix Chip & Pin Payment

Page 12 of 14
HNG-X Counter Application Review

FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

25" February 2010

Chip and Pin Payment Transaction

FT =

Counter

eaun|

steriation
Request
cars Transactions
|
|
ta
RS Reconcliaion Service
Pa
z Database
é £20
z, reservation

Reconciliation OK — all
transactions match

Page 13 of 14
FUJ00094393
FUJ00094393

HNG-X Counter Application Review 25" February 2010

System Flows — Post Fix Chip & Pin Payment - Comms Issue
Chip and Pin Payment Transaction — Comms Failure

i =

Basket
jae any
rottag

Counter

| —__—_~_feean

Store transaction

‘Authorisation {
Request is received by

3 Party but no response is
received by the Counter

4 en
Z
| z
— 8

3" Party

Z =
Possible £20

b Reconciliation OK
: se because it is possible to

the Branch database

Page 14 of 14
