FUJ00117478
FUJ00117478

Issue of Duplicate Settlements found at Derby

Ref: __ r:\hng plan x\architecture\end to end assurance\0129.dupsettle.doc
Author: Gareth I Jenkins
Date: 29/01/2010 16:46:00

1. Introduction

The purpose of this note is to describe the issues found at Derby this week with
Duplicate settlements and present options for fixing the defect.

2. The Problem

There have been two cases in Derby Post Office of a Basket being recorded twice in
the accounts. This is tracked via PEAK 193787.

The two cases occurred on different days (26/1 and 27/1) and at different counters and
with different Clerks. As in both cases the Baskets involved Banking transactions, the
issue was detected by the DRS Reconciliation reports. A check was carried out on
28/1 and at that time there were no other occurrences of the problem in Derby or any
of the other HNG-X Branches.

3. The Cause

The cause of the problem is down to a bug at the counter. What happened was the

following:

1) The Clerk Selected Fast Cash to Settle a Basket

2) The corresponding Cash Transaction was added to the Basket, and since this
resulted in a Balanced Basket, the Basket was sent to the Data Centre for
Settlement.

3) The BAL successfully stored the transactions associated with the Basket and
returned a response to the counter

4) The User pressed the Settlement Button (erroneously).

5) The Settlement component at the counter then called the Printer subsystem to
see if a receipt required to be printed.

The issue is down to steps 4) and 5). There is a small gap while one subsystem calls
another during which user interaction may be picked up, and the Settle Button was
pressed in this period. The Settlement function was then re-invoked and saw that
there was a Basket in existence and as there was and it was balanced, it sent it to the
BAL again.

The original Basket cannot be destroyed until after the Receipts have been printed and
so the basket had not yet been cleared down.

d:\profiles\dalvareza\local settings\temporary internet files\olk16e\0129 dupsettle.doc Printed at 8:14 AM on.
26/8/2022 Page | of 2
4,

41

42

FUJ00117478

FUJ00117478

Solution Options

A fix for the issue can be delivered two parts:
= Tactical solution implemented in the BAL
= Strategic fix implemented at the counter

These are detailed below.

Tactical solution

Three changes have been proposed for fixing this particular issue and it is
recommended that all 3 are implemented:

A check is put into the BAL that no records with the current basket’s SSN are held in
BRDB_RX_REP_SESSION_DATA for this counter and Branch. This will protect
against the current problem or any other related issues.

This does have a performance impact, although the current view is that until we hit a
significant number of branches [>2000] this will not cause any issues due to the
current performance of the system. As such it is recommended that this change is
removed before rollout. The fix has been designed so that it is controlled by an
Application.properties file and so removing the change can be done by OCP.

A plan for implementing this fix is being worked on and the team are looking to
understand whether this can be implemented into Live by 4" February.

Strategic solution

The strategic fix is to make a change to the main BLO Class from which many
business subsystems are derived. This change would ensure that whenever the
asynchronous call mechanisms are used between BLOs, then a block is put on any
user input between the calling BLO making the call and the receiving BLO receiving
the call.

The change is a straightforward code change to make. However, full regression
testing of the counter is recommended. The change will be available tomorrow for
testing in the development environment, running the automated regression test suite.

Confirmation of how this will be intercepted in a counter drop is currently being
considered, as is the suite of regression tests to be run in CIT and then the full test
environment. As part of this exercise we would also identify exactly which Business
Systems are affected to aid targeted testing. A full plan for deploying this into live
will be produced by COP 1* February.

d:\profiles\dalvareza\local settings\temporary internet files\olk16e\0129 dupsettle.doc Printed at 8:14 AM on.
26/8/2022 Page 2 of 2
