FUJ00152996
FUJ00152996

From: Jenkins Gareth GI
Sent: Fri 26/02/2010 12:59:13 PM (UTC)
To: Lillywhite Tome” “; Allen Graham
(BRAO1)f~
Ce: Thomas Peni Kirkham Suzie iH
Subject: od Be: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA =GUILDFORD CROWN COURT TRIAL - 15TH MARCH
1

Tom / Graham,

Following the email exchange below I've now had another call from POL's Prosecution Barrister (Warwick Tatford) asking
me to do some analysis of the various logs associated with this case.

He is going to arrange for me to be sent details of what has been alleged and also what has been admitted so that | can
identify some part of the logs to look through and discuss with the defence expert.

Even if we limit the scope this sounds like a very time consuming task. |I'm not sure | really want to be doing that and
need some guidance as to the priority of this compared with everything else.

Apparently the defence are saying it is too hard to get detailed info and therefore there can't possibly be a fair trial and
POL are clearly keen to counter that argument. Trial date is in two weeks time so this is likely to be urgent!

What do | do and who can sort out with POL what exactly we should and shouldn't be dong to support this?
Regards

Gareth

Gareth Jenkins

Distinguished Engineer

Applications Architect

Royal Mail Group Account

FUJITSU

Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berkshire, RG12 8SN
Tel:

Mobile:
email:
Web:

P Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?
Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 22 Baker Street, London, W1U 3BW

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a duty of confidence and may be
privileged. Fujitsu Services does not guarantee that this e-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is
virus-free.

4 Original Message-----

From: Thomas Penny

Sent: 26 February 2010 12:49

To: Jenkins Gareth GI

Subject: RE: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA GUILDFORD CROWN COURT TRIAL - 15TH MARCH 2010

Gareth, you have to stop pulling your punches and say it like it is!
FUJ00152996
FUJ00152996

-----Original Message-----
From: Jenkins Gareth GI
Sent: 26 February 2010 12:35
To: jarnail.a.sing|
Cc: Thomas Penny

Subject: RE: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA GUILDFORD CROWN COURT TRIAL - 15TH MARCH 2010

Jarnail,

I've no idea what it is that the defence is looking for in this case or exactly what is alleged to have happened. It is normal
to identify a specific time period of about a month to look for some specific fraudulent transactions. As I've no idea
exactly what is being alleged | can't really advise as to what evidence might be required either to support the prosecution
or the defence. POL's prosecution support team have formal mechanism to request logs for specific periods and there is
a process to do that. Although | have suggested for some time that these logs are requested, | understand that no such
request has been made to Fujitsu. Trying to analyse transactions over a period of 2 or 3 years is likely to take several
weeks or months of effort - especially if it is not clear what is being looked for - and | certainly cannot commit that amount
of time to it.

Although | spoke to the Defence Expert | have no direct contact details for him.

Trawling through logs to show that nothing has happened is next to impossible what we need to be looking for is
something specific and | have no idea what exactly is alleged to have happened. Therefore I'm not sure what | can do to
help.

Regards
Gareth

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer
Applications Architect
Royal Mail Group Account

FUJITSU
Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berkshire, RG12 8SN
Tel:

(Note new external number -
old number will not work after 31/12/2009)
i Inte I: {

Mobile:
email: L
Web: http://uk. fujitsu.com

P Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?
Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 22 Baker Street, London, W1U 3BW

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a duty of confidence and may be
privileged. Fujitsu Services does not guarantee that this e-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is
virus-free.

-----Original Message:
From: jarnail.a.singhé
Sent: 26 February 2010 12:
To: Jenkins Gareth GI

Subject: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA GUILDFORD CROWN COURT TRIAL - 15TH MARCH 2010

URGENT
Dear Gareth,

Thank you for your E-Mail of the 25th February 2010
| should be grateful if you would kindly please consider what logs you need
to look at and how long this exercise might take. | hope that this takes
only a relatively short period needs to be looked at, in light of the
Defendant's regular inflations. Perhaps you could consider that with the
Defence's Expert.. Could you then please kindly liaise with the Defence
Expert and hopefully you can do this exercise together and see if there is
any pattern of errors which might have been counterbalanced by the
Defendant's false accounting.

| am very anxious to get this matter concluded as soon as possible so that
we are ready for Trial at Guildford Crown Court on the 15th March 2010.

You can obviously speak to me direct o1 ‘or our Barrister
Warwick Tatford on his mobil

Many thanks.

Jarnail A Singh
Senior Lawyer
Criminal Law Team

PS _ Could you please let me have a signed copy of your two statements up
to date.

Royal Mail Group Limited registered in England and Wales registered number
4138203 registered office 3rd Floor, 100 Victoria Embankment, London, EC4Y
OHQ

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the
addressee only. If you are not the named recipient, you must not use,
disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication.
If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then
delete this email from your system.

FUJ00152996
FUJ00152996
