FUJ00121071

FUJ00121071
To: Jenkins Gareth GI[
Ce: ray.jacksoni
From: ian.oakleyé ke
Sent: Fri 2/16/2007 5:04:51 PM (UTC)
Subject: | RE: Fw: T30 Release - Impact on Stock Rems
Gareth
| think we are saying very similar things here Gareth. So no problem with
your reply. Should this action or additional resources be required I'm
sure this can be discussed with the appropriate people. I'm just please to
know that this information is available and may be able to help the current
situation.
Regards
lan Oakley
Project Manager
80 Old Street
London
EC1V 9NN
"Jenkins Gareth GI"
inking, To: — <ian.oal
cc: <ray.jacksoni Gary.blackburn& >, "Stewart

Mike" <Mike.Stewart 2
16/02/2007 15:01 Subject: RE: Fw: T30 Release - Impact on Stock Rems

lan,

| don't recall offering to keep an eye on these branches. What | said

was that there was data available that was passed to Post Offices Back
end system that would show such adjustments, and that we might be able
to intercept such data as it flowed through.

I'm not in a position to commit any resources to do additional
monitoring of such data on our side. That would need to be discussed
with our Operations people (Mike Stewart in the first instance).

Regards
Gareth

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer
Applications Architect
Post Office Account

FUJITSU
Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berkshire, RG12 8SN
Internal:

Internal:

Gareth.Jenkins;
http://uk.fujitsu.com

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered
Office 22 Baker Street, London, W1U 3BW.

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents
are subject to a duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu
Services does not guarantee that this e-mail has not been intercepted
and amended or that it is virus-free.

__dk; Jenkins Gareth GI
- Impact on Stock Rems

I've spoken to Gareth who has confirmed that it would be possible for
Fujitsu to keep an eye on the 570 branches for the next month or so , to
cover the balancing periods, to see if any of the branches adjust stock
in

a significant way that then leads to a significant loss. These could

then

be flagged up and contacted later to help them correct the problem.

Is this feasible or of any help?
Regards

lan Oakley
Project Manager
80 Old Street
London

EC1V 9NN

c
x.
Mobil

Gary Blackburn

o-TO%.W..... Dave

Hulberté_ GRO ndy Z McLean/elt:

Julie

Jackson/ef”

7} lan Oakley/et_

Subject: Fw: T30 Release
- Impact on Stock Rems

Dave , Andy
Bad news.

On further investigation today we have established that the POC file
actually matches POLFS. This means that we still don't know what value
stock has been returned by these 570 branches. Further more the only way

FUJ00121071
FUJ00121071
we

could find out would be for someone at Swindon to find the specific
pouches

and physically open each one and count the stock.

This rules out a proactive recovery plan.

| have ensured that both NBSC and HSD have scripts to deal with any
queries

relating to stock from these branches.

Each branch that is identified will be contacted by Paul Lebeter's team
and

a TC will be issued.

4 branches have already been identified through this process.

regards
Gary

Systems Live Service Manager
Post Office Ltd
Operations

1st Floor, Post Office Ltd, Cortonwood Business Park, Cortonwood Drive,
BARNSLEY, S73 0TB

STD Phon
|: N/A, Mobe:

External Email: gary.blackburr._,.
----- Forwarded by Gary Blackburn/e;

jon 16/02/2007 12:14 -----

Dave Hulbert
"Andy McLean"

cc: "Gary Blackburn"

ubject: Fw: T30 Release
- Impact on Stock Rems - Monday 12th February

Andy
See update below.

Not much progress to day. The dilemna for Gary is approaching branches
is

proactive but opens the risk of litigation in future ie we're telling

570

branches that horizon may have caused a discrepancy -low risk but a risk

being reactive doesn't feel right as we've caused the problem for
branches

but this may be the right option in this situation.

We'll update tomorrow.

Dave

From: Gary Blackburn
Sent: 15/02/2007 16:14

FUJ00121071
FUJ00121071
To: Paul Lebeter; Jane Smith

Cc: Dave Hulbert; Torstein Godeseth; Martin Box; Andrew Price; Ray
Jackson; lan Oakley; Julie Edgley; Antonio Jamasb

Subject: T30 Release - Impact on Stock Rems - Monday 12th February

Paul , Jane

Scenario:-

Whilst the T30 release was out in the branch network, Monday 12th Feb
only

for all bar 120 branches that were incommunicado during the initial
regression process. We have a potential situation whereby a branch
completing a stock rem out on that day could have a discrepancy due to
the

fact that not all stock physically returned by the branch may have been
deducted by Horizon from the stock on hand table, this despite the fact
that the rem slip produced matched the physical stock returned.

Latest position:-

We have a possible 570 branches that were affected by last weekends
T30

release, now regressed.

The pouch ID's have been identified by Fujitsu

The branches who sent those pouches have also been identified, and
the

value of the stock returned from each has been established from the
POC

file.

We still don't know which of these branches has actually got a

discrepancy due to the problem.

Next Steps:-

Identify which of those branches have a discrepancy between Horizon
and

the rem slip.- Options here are to contact the branches or wait and

react to calls made into NBSC,HSD. - | will arrange a conference call
to

discuss way forward tomorrow AM.

Process for issue of TC's to the branches affected to be agreed and
tied

in with communication ?

regards
Gary

Systems Live Service Manager
Post Office Ltd
Operations

1st Floor, Post Office Ltd, Cortonwood Business Park, Cortonwood Drive,
BARNSLEY, S73 0TB

Postline: STD Phon
, Fax: N/A, VoiceMail: N/A, Mobe:

External Email: gary.blackburn_

Royal Mail Group PLC registered in England and Wales registered number
4138203 registered office 148 Old Street London EC1V 9HQ

FUJ00121071
FUJ00121071
This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the
addressee only. If you are not the named recipient, you must not use,
disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this
communication.

If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then
delete this email from your system.

SARIS III ISO IO ISO I KO III II III III IIIA II ADI STIS IS ASI DSS AIS SOS OS SASSI I IA

Royal Mail Group PLC registered in England and Wales registered number
4138203 registered office 148 Old Street London EC1V 9HQ

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the
addressee only. If you are not the named recipient, you must not use,
disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication.
If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then
delete this email from your system.

FUJ00121071
FUJ00121071
