FUJ00153856
FUJ00153856

From: Thomas Penny[/O=EXCHANGE/OU=ADMINGROUP1/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=THOMASP]
Sent: Fri 16/11/2012 2:
To: Jenkins Gareth Gi

Cc: Davidson James[i
Subject: FW: POL cases raising Horizon
Gareth

I’ve spoken to Jane and she will respond to this note; | doubt very much we will be a party to it.

Kind regards
Penny

From: Rachael Panter [}
Sent: 16 November 2012 13:04

To: Davidson James; Jenkins Gareth GI
Cc: Jane M Owen; Thomas Penny
Subject: RE: POL cases raising Horizon

Dear Gareth and James

Apologies if | have approached this in an uncoventional way. As | provided a list of cases, rather than approach each
individual investigator for each case, to then pose the same question to you | thought it would save both time and
duplication of the same question. | apologise if this is incorrect. In the normal circumstances | would normally ask the
investigator to liaise with Fujitisu, and assure you that this is what | will do in the future.

In response to your email Gareth, | do intend to use the report that you have already provided. It doesn't matter that
you have not mentioned a specific case in your report, as there has not been any specific criticisms raised by any of
the defendants provided in my list of cases. It would be a different scenario if there had been specific criticisms made,
as your report would have to respond to that particular issue.

Although | intend to use the same report that you have provided, it would not be appropriate or right of me to serve
your report without consulting you and seeking your permission first. Furthermore, your signature is required for each
copy of the report that is served in each case.

As | mentioned in my earlier email, | do not anticipate that you will be required to give evidence in each case, as a
number of cases will probably not even reach trial stage.

What | propose to do is serve your statement on each defence solicitor so that the issue of Horizon is addressed. That
will then place the onus on the Defence to specify what if anything, they say, is wrong with the Horizon system. | do
not think they will be able to do this, but they still have the opportunity if they want a trial, to call you to give evidence.

This is why it is important for you to consider the case summaries that | have provided so that you are familiar with
each case. If you are happy to serve your statement, please could you email me a signed and dated (with preferably
today's date) identical copy of your report so that | can serve it on each defence solicitor. Could you also send me 5
copies of original signed statements so that they can be kept on each file, as the court can ask to see the originals.

In regards to commercial cover, the central funds do provide funding for experts giving evidence in trials. The reason
that central funds provide the cover is to ensure that the witnesses that are required to attend are reimbursed for their
time and reasonsable expenses. If they didn't do this, it would discourage witnesses to give evidence, and cases
would never be able to progress. | will find out what the rates are and email you a copy of the form once | have
obtained one from the court's legal advisor.

| hope this assists. | welcome any guidance on the process between ourselves, POL and Fujitsu, but recognise, and
think that | would normally liaise with the investigator in a particular case.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you need any further information.
Kind regards

Rachael

Rachael Panter

CartwrightKing

mm SO CTT Ok S ame

Nottingham | Birmingham | Derby | Leicester| Sheffield | Newcastle Gateshead
Norwich Union House, South Parade, Old Market Square, Nottingham, NGI 2LH
www.cartwrightking.co.uk W @CartwrightKing

This message is confidential and may contain legally privileged information. If you have received this in error please delete
this message and let us know by email or telephone. A list of directors is available at each office. Authorised and regulated by

the Solicitors Regulation Authority No: 312459. VAT Registration No: 737837295.

FUJ00153856
FUJ00153856

From: Davidson James | _
Sent: 16 November 2012 12:17
To: Jenkins Gareth GI; Rachael Panter
Cc: Jane M Owen; Thomas Penny
Subject: RE: POL cases raising Horizon

Rachel,

| am concerned at the engagement approach being taken here, we are fully on board to support but all approaches

must come through Post Office by the correct change process.
If this needs clarifying, please let me know and we can steer you to the right people.

Regards,

James Davidson
Delivery Executive
Post Office Account

Fujitsu

FUJ00153856
FUJ00153856

= Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?

From: Jenkins Gareth GI

Sent: 16 November 2012 11:42

To: Rachael Panter

Cc: Jane M Owen; Thomas Penny; Davidson James
Subject: RE: POL cases raising Horizon

Rachel,

Can’t you use the report | have already sent you? There is no mention of the case on the report.

You should really be addressing such requests through Post Office Ltd rather than directly to myself.

As far as | know there is no commercial cover in place for me to spend any time on such activities (and that includes
the case of Nemesh Patel).

Regards

Gareth

Gareth Jenkins

Distinguished Engineer
Business Applications Architect
Post Office Account

FUJITSU
ce Road, Byacknell, Rerkshire. RG12 8SN

| Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?

From: Rachael Panter j.. _
Sent: 16 November 2012 11:30
To: Jenkins Gareth GI

Subject: POL cases raising Horizon

Dear Gareth

Re: Horizon expert report

As you may already be aware, your expert report detailing the reliability of the Horizon system
has been served as evidence in a number of Post Office cases that are at various stages of the court
process, most of which are listed for trial in the early part of next year.

It should be noted that to date, most, if not all cases raising the Horizon system as an issue, have
been unable/not willing to particularise what specific issues that they may have with the system,

and how that shapes the nature of their defence.

As we already have your detailed report, I would like to serve it in each case listed below. All of
FUJ00153856

FUJ00153856

the following cases have raised issues with the reliability of the Horizon system:

1. Jamie Dixon Trial date - TBC

2. Khayyam Ishaq 25th Feb 2013 trial at Bradford Crown Court

3. Angela Sefton & Anne Neild 21st Jan 2013 trial at Liverpool Crown Court
4. Nemesh Patel 14th Jan 2013 trial at Peterborough Crown Court

5. Kim Wylie 17th December 2012 trial at Newcastle Crown Court

6. Grant Allen 10th December 2012 for PCMH at Chester Crown Court

Your expert report has already been served in the Nemesh Patel case. I would like to serve your
report in the remaining cases and have attached a case summary of each case listed above so that
you may familiarise yourself with the facts of each case.

I would like to stress that I do not anticipate that all of the above cases will reach trial stage.

Please could you read the case summaries attached, and send 5 original signed and dated copies of
your report to me as soon as possible.

Tam conscious that there are a couple of cases coming up in December. In order for me to serve
your report in time, please could you either send the copies of your reports via special delivery
and/or as an email attachment.

If you have any queries please do not hesitate to contact me

Kind regards

Rachael

Rachael Panter

| GRO

CartwrightKing

ms SOL CTY OR S mmm

Nottingham | Birmingham | Derby | Leicester| Sheffield | Newcastle Gateshead
Norwich Union House, South Parade, Old Market Square, Nottingham, NGI 2LH
www.cartwrightking.co.uk W G@CartwrightKing

This message is confidential and may contain legally privileged information. If you have received this in error please delete
this message and let us know by email or telephone. A list of directors is available at each office. Authorised and regulated by
the Solicitors Regulation Authority No: 312459, VAT Registration No: 737837295.
FUJ00153856
FUJ00153856

Unless otherwise stated, this email has been sent from Fujitsu Services Limited, from Fujitsu (FTS) Limited, or
from Fujitsu Telecommunications Europe Limited, together "Fujitsu".

This email is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a duty of confidence and may
be privileged. Fujitsu does not guarantee that this email has not been intercepted and amended or that it is
virus-free.

Fujitsu Services Limited, registered in England No 96056, registered office 22 Baker Street, London W1U
3BW.

Fujitsu (FTS) Limited, registered in England No 03808613, registered office 22 Baker Street, London W1U
3BW.

PFU Imaging Solutions Europe Limited, registered in England No 1578652, registered office Hayes Park
Central, Hayes End Road, Hayes, Middlesex, UB4 8FE.

Fujitsu Telecommunications Europe Limited, registered in England No 2548187, registered office Solihull
Parkway, Birmingham Business Park, Birmingham, B37 7YU.
