FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

Message

From: Jenkins Gareth Gl [/O=ICL/OU=ICL IT CONSULTANCY/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=GARETH.JENKINS]
Sent: 04/03/2004 10:34:50

To: Gurney Bob [/O=ICL/OU=UKSouth FELO1/cn=Recipients/cn=GurneyB]}

ce: Boardman Phil [/O=ICL/OU=EURO1/cn=Recipients/cn=BoardmanPK]

Subject: RE: Reporting Requirements

Bob,

I'm happy with the proposed response to Tony, however this raises some interesting questions:
Consider the following scenario:

A branch is considered by Tony to be "Dodgy" and he goes in there one week into a 5 week trading period (say period
2). They then roll the branch into period 3 which is a 4 week Trading Period. For the next 4 weeks, the new staff will get
awarning message at each logon indicating that they are running in the wrong Trading Period (is that acceptable?). At
the real end of the Trading Period, there is no need to roll over the branch since it is already in Period 3, this makes
Period 3 an 8 week Trading period. After 6 weeks we start losing Transactions!

With a one week CAP this is much less of an issue, in that having a 3 day followed by an 11 day Cash account is not
much of a problem, but 1 week followed by 8 weeks is a problem.

Is this one for Clive? (it clearly isn't one for Tony - unless we have to constrain what he does!)
Regards

Gareth

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are confidential and may be privileged. Fujitsu Services does not guarantee that this e-mail
has not been intercepted and amended or that itis virus-free.

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer
Applications TDA

Post Office Account

Fujitsu Services

From: Gurney Bob

Sent: 04 March 2004 10:06

To: Jenkins Gareth GI

Cc: Boardman Phil

Subject: FW: Reporting Requirements

Gareth
Please could you cast your eye over the following draft response to Tony U ....

"The production of the Branch Trading Statement takes place following successful completion of ail of the the
“end of trading period" activities required before the branch rolis-over to the next trading period, e.g. SU

FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

balancing activities, resolving variances, making good, clearing dockets, etc. On completion of the statement, all
trading across the branch is performed in the next trading period.

We had understood that Ben's requirement for an "interim" Branch Trading Statement was to obtain a local
branch management view of the branch trading position during a branch trading period, i.e. not to roll-over to the
next trading period. Currently the Office Snapshot Report is used for this purpose and there is no "interim" Cash
Account facility.

So, if | have understood your concern correctly, | suggest we need to consider what your current process

is. If you currently produce a Cash Account and roll the branch over to a new CAP, then you will be able to do
the equivalent with the Branch Trading Statement, i.e. this is not the situation that we had assumed was meant
by Ben's "interim" statement. If, however, you currently use the Office Snapshot to assess the branch position,
then you would continue to do so at S80.

So, in summary, | suspect that your requirement will be met through producing additional Branch Trading
Statements. This will have no effect on the back-end accounting system which will run from the daily trading
summaries produced by Horizon and not the trading statement which is different from the current situation where
CBDB is driven directly from the Cash Account. The daily trading summaries used by POL FS will include the
results of any changes needed to balance the branch, address variances, processing of Transaction Corrections,
ete.

| hope that this explanation has clarified things but let me know if there are any outstanding issues."
Regards

Bob Gurney
Fujitsu Services, Post Office Account

FUJITSU SERVICES
Forest Road, Feltham, Middx TW13 7EJ
Mob :
E-mai
Web: _<hitp:/uk.

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 26, Finsbury Square, London, EC2A 1SL

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu
Services does not guarantee that this e-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is virus-free.

Sent: 04 March 2004 09:15
To: Gurney Bob; john.duttor
Subject: RE: Reporting Requirements

Jam a little unsure about the query around interim trading statements.

In the case of an investigation, we would need to be able to go into an office and complete a full office
balance which in the absence of a cash account would mean a Trading Statement would be required to
provide a full office view.

If we then close the office down having removed an offender and the Retail Line replace the
subpostmaster and this happened mid period, then the office would need to produce another Trading
statement as usual at the end of the trading period.

I am not sure that the second Trading statement would need to have the data from the first included in
this case, but we would need to be able to produce two statements within the same period.

I believe we also discussed doing something similar for office where there was a large variance, in
order that the postmaster was able to get a view of his office situation after checking his stock and cash,
FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

but this could be achieved through balancing all of the individual stocks and then doing an office
snapshot presumably.

If 1am confused and have got this all wrong please let me know.

Regards
Tony Utting
(EGurney Bob <
Gurney Bob
01/03/2004 19:03
<ben.gildersleve¢ Jenkins
_Gareth GI
i GRO |
‘Subject7 RET Reporting Requirements ~~
John

Whilst Ben is on leave this week, I understand that the arrangements
are

that we should direct these IMPACT branch related requirement
questions to

you for guidance.

1. Horizon Events to be Accessible via POL Sales MIS

We are trying to tie down exactly which branch "events" Horizon needs
to

pass to the POL MI System for the purpose of central reporting (Item
3.1 on

the current Issues list). In the attached email, Gareth has
summarised:

* which events are currently passed to OPTip and which will therefore
be available to MI

* the events that Horizon currently records that aren't passed to
OPTip and which will therefore not be passed to MI unless there is a
specific requirement
FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

* new events associated with the IMPACT R3 requirement which it is
understood should be passed to MI

Please could you review the attached and confirm whether there is a
requirement to pass any additional events to MI other than those
indicated

above.

2. Branch Reporting
2.1 Reporting on "Previous" Trading Periods

Ben's email below confirms the requirement to be able to produce
reprints of
the following reports relating to the previous trading period:

Stock Unit Balance: Reprint

Cash Account: Reprint

Office Weekly Counters Revenue Schedule: Reprint

Office Weekly Inland Revenue Tax Credits P5589: Reprint
Office Weekly P&A P2311MA: Reprint

Office Weekly Redeemed Savings Stamps Summary: Reprint
Track and Trace Manifest: Reprint

Office Cash Variance Report: Reprint

te te FOF

We understand that these are the only reports that are required that
relate

to a "previous" trading period. We are currently investigating how we
can

cost effectively meet this requirement given that the underlying
transaction

data will no longer be available to re-create the reports. (Note for
David/Clive: The reprint for previous period facility was not
included in

our costing submission for the business case).

Ben added the Cash Variance Report to Gareth's list of existing
reports that

have the reprint option. Whereas the original list of reports seem to
relate to particular periods, the Cash Variance Report can be
produced at

any time and so the question of which report should be reprinted
arises.

Should it be the position at the end of the previous trading period?

The second question relates to the period which the original reports
relate

to. Once we move to a monthly Branch Trading Statement, what period
is

intended? Do the current weekly reports relate to a calendar, a Cash
Account week or, in the future, a Monthly Trading Period? If it's
weekly,

when should we assume the start of week occurs? Please clarify.
FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

2.2 Requirement to produce "Interim" Branch Trading Statement within
a
Trading Period

Ben has indicated that the requirement is to be able to produce an
interim

Branch Trading Statement at any time within a trading period. The
problem

is that the information from which the statement is produced and the
associated process assumes that the Stock Units have previously been
balanced. Currently there isn't a facility to produce an interim Cash
Account report and the Office Snapshot is provided for this purpose.
In

view of the complexities/practicalities of meeting this requirement,
please

could you consider whether the Office Snapshot report would provide
sufficient information to meet the intended requirement. If not, we
need

guidance on how an interim report should be constructed. Please
advise.

Regards

Bob Gurney
Fujitsu Services, Post Office Account

FUJITSU SERVICES

Forest Road, Feltham, Middx TW13 7EJ
Mob :} . .
E-mail: bob.gurneyt GRO i
Web: < http://uk.fujitsu.com <http://services.fujitsu.com/> >
Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered
Office

26, Finsbury Square, London, EC2A 1SL

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its
contents are

subject to a duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu
Services

does not guarantee that this e-mail has not been intercepted and
amended or

that it is virus-free.

Sitti Original Message-

: February
To: Jenkins Gareth GI

Cc: 'Ben Gildersleve (POL)'; Gurney Bob; 'Clive Read (POL)'; 'Dave
Parnell

(POL)'; Boardman Phil; 'Tony Utting (POL)';

john.dutton

FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

Subject: Re: Reporting Requirements

Gareth

My requirements are to keep all the reports below with re print
facilities,

except perhaps the redeemed savings stamps, depending on what happens
with

the remittance transaction for dockets and vouchers. Also, I assume
the Cash

Account reprint will become the Branch Trading statement reprint? I
would

also like copies of the Cash Variance report to be available as well.
You've

picked out the reports with reprint in their title, but are there any
others? I've checked with John and he can't think of any.

I would like reports to be available from Period 1, until the end of
Period

2. Then when the Branch rolls into Period 3, the reports for Period 1
become

unavailable.

I would like the reports to be available quickly and easily, so
whichever is

the best solution to do this is fine with me. If the idea of storing
the

report itself is the best for speed of production, but is hugely
expensive

then come back. I'm sure Dave and Clive will have a view on this.

If you want to check anything today come back to me, but next week
while I'm

off can direct your queries to John please.

Ben

Post Office Ltd

Registered in England and Wales number: 2154540 Registered Office:
80-86 Old

Street LONDON EC1V 9NN.

Inactive hide details for Jenkins Gareth GI "

src=" 75110518@01032004-207a" width=16>Jenkins Gareth GI

Jenkins Gareth GI |

FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

26/02/2004 16:28

To: "'Ben Gildersleve (POL) '" |

cc: Gurney Bob GRO

rnell (POL) '"
"'Clive Read (POL)'"
"'Tony Utting (POL) '"

“Subject: Reporting Requirements

Ben,
Following our conversation.

You have indicated that there is a requirement to reprint old
reports, so we

potentially need to either store the raw data for a sufficient time
to do

this, or change the mechanism by which we produce reprints such that
we

store the original report and reprint the report rather than
regenerate it.

It is proposed that we do the latter.

* Which reports need to support this? The following list gives all
the Horizon reports which have "reprint" in their title:

* Stock Unit Balance: Reprint

Cash Account: Reprint

Office Weekly Counters Revenue Schedule: Reprint

Office Weekly Inland Revenue Tax Credits P5589: Reprint

Office Weekly P&A P2311MA: Reprint

Office Weekly Redeemed Savings Stamps Summary: Reprint

Track and Trace Manifest: Reprint

* How long we need to maintain such reports (ie 1, 2 or 3 Branch
Trading periods or preferably number of days from when report first
produced)

te ee OF

I've copied this to Tony in case he has any input to the requirements
here
from the security viewpoint.

Note for Dave and Clive: No changes in this area were originally
forecast,
so these are all "extras".

Regards

Gareth

FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its
contents are

confidential and may be privileged. Fujitsu Services does not
guarantee

that this e-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is
virus-free.

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer
Applications TDA

Post Office Account

Fujitsu Services

Lovelace Road, Bracknell
Tel:
Mobile:{_
email: Gareth.Jenkin
Web: http://uk.fujitsu.com <http://uk.fujitsu.com>

Berkshire, RG12 8SN

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered
Office

26, Finsbury Square, London, EC2A 1SL

FEI IIS I IG I ISIC II II IIIS IC III III II II IC I I ok
* This

email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the
addressee

only. If you are not the named recipient, you must not use, disclose,
reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication. If
you

have received this in error, please contact the sender and then
delete this

email from your system.
FEI III IOI ISI ITI IOI TI I dO i kk

*

Message-ID: <753F1E41ACB9D51190C00090277218D802B66823@WWMESSD206>
From: Jenkins Gareth GI ~
To: "'Daniel Hawthorne
"'Clive Read (POL)'" 4
cer "'"Dave Parnell (Pi

, Gurney Bob

Subject: Horizon Events
Date: Fri, 27 Feb 2004 10:35:38 -0000
MIME-Version: 1.0

X-Mailer: Internet Mail Service (5.5.2653.19
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="----
FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

_= NextPart_002_01C3FFBF.E98BB730"
All,

I've put together a note on events generated within Horizon and those
currently sent to OPTIP.

<<events.doc>>

I'd appreciate some feedback as to what is required from the MIS
system for

inclusion in the CD so that we can include the necessary work in the
S80

developments.

Regards
Gareth

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its
contents are

confidential and may be privileged. Fujitsu Services does not
guarantee

that this e-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is
virus-free.

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer
Applications TDA

Post Office Account

Fujitsu Services
Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berkshire, RG12 8SN
Internal:

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered
Office
26, Finsbury Square, London, EC2A 1SL

>>>> C.htm attachment was removed from this email <<<<
>>>> graycol.gif attachment was removed from this email <<<<
>>>> ecblank.gif attachment was removed from this email <<<<

>>>> C1 .htm attachment was removed from this email <<<<
FUJ00126061
FUJ00126061

>>>> events.doc attachment was removed from this email <<<<

2 i Fe a FE RC 2 a a a 6 Fe 2 oe oe a a a aC a 2 fe oe fe oe 2a a a Fe fe fe 26 oe oe oe a a 8 i ae fe oie ofc oe ae ae a a ai a eC aie aie aie This email and
any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named
recipient, you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication.

If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then delete this email from your system.
JES OSG SEI OSORIO ORI CHIOKIOKIOR IO IS IGS RII IS ISIGCICRIR ICRI GKIGKIOK IORI IORI
