                                                                                                                                           FUJO0153157
                                                                                                                                       FUJO0153157

                                                                                                                                Page 1 of3



      Thomas Penny

      From:
      Sent:.
                   Thomas Penny
                   27 July 2010 14:40
                                                                                 II UISIIIV
      To:          'John Longman'
      Cc:          Jane M Owen
      Subject: RE: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA - GUILDFORD CROWN COURT - TRIAL

    John

    I've had a discussion with Gareth.

    It was agreed during the meeting between Gareth and Charles that Charles would provide notes reflecting the
     discussion; Gareth has not yet received these.

    His views on the email string are:-

        Access to system in Midlands: This was not something we discussed in detail. It would appear that
       Charles is aware of a Post Office which is having issues similar to those which have resulted in
       prosecution, but that there are currently no prosecutions in place. He would like to monitor exactly what
       happens in this branch (probably with a video camera) and compare that with the system logs (hoping to
       find a mismatch!). However the Postmaster is covered by confidentiality agreements, which mean that
       this cannot be done with out permission of POL. I assume that this is a request to be able to do this. I'm
       also assuming that help would be required from Fujitsu in retrieving logs from the system to compare with
       the video. NB this probably needs to be done quickly before migrating to HNG-X. Charles's first report
       refers to such a branch I believe. I've no idea where this postmaster would stand in respect of any
       problems that they have had but which are not yet visible to POL, or in respect of what they have already
       said to Charles.
    2. Access to Chesterfield: Charles is still of the opinion that understanding how P&BA operate and in
       particular how they identify errors and process them as Transaction Corrections may help his case• I've
       pointed out that anything in this area that could affect the accounts is already visible to him in the Horizon
       logs and so I don't see that this is likely to be of help to him. However he would still like to pursue this, line
       of exploration.
    3. System Change Requests: Basically, he was asking to look at all system faults. I suggested that as we
       kept all testing and Live faults in the same system and that there were around 200,000 of them, then this
       wasn't going to get him far. He then suggested looking at system changes and would like to see all
       changes that have happened to the system. Again, I don't think this will help and 1 don't know how
       practical it is for-Fujitsu's Release Management to provide that. I think all we can do is ask the question.

    My view is that Charles is `fishing" and I don't personally support any of these requests. However they seem
J   harmless — other than wasting a lot of people's time — and hence money.

    Kind regards
    Penny


     Penny Thomas
    'Security Analyst, Customer Services

    Fujitsu Services Retail & Royal Mail Group Account
    LovelaceRoad, Bracknell, Berks RG12'BSN

    Tel:                     ^O
    Mob:
    Fax:
                            G   K
                                                         - •-•-•-•-•-•-•-•-•-•
    E-Mail penny thomas         GRO
    Web: http://uk.fujitsu.coin
                               -•-•-._._




                                           '




                                               -•-._•-




    Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 22, Baker Street,.London W10 3BW
    This E-mail is only for the use of its Intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu
    Services does not guarantee that this E-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is vines-free.


    From: John Longman                                                     GRO
    Sent: 27 July 2010 11:25



    27/07/2010
                                                                                                               FUJO0153157
                                                                                                             FUJO0153157

                                                                                                       Page 2. of 3


To: Thomas Penny
Subject: FW: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA - GUILDFORD CROWN COURT - TRIAL

Penny

As discussed.

Could you ask Gareth to explain in more detail as to how the three points raised by Izzy Hogg below came
about. I would specifically like to know more details of the system in the midlands that is referred to in her first
point.

Regards

Jon Longman


From: Marilyn Benjamin On Behalf Of Jarnail A Singh
Sent: 27 July 2010 10:42
To: John Longman; Warwick Tatford
Subject: REGINA v SEEMA MISRA - GUILDFORD CROWN COURT - TRIAL

I enclose a copy of an E-Mail received from Issy Hogg, the Defence Solicitors of the 22°d July 2010, the
content of which is self explanatory. Could you please be kind enough_ to let me have your urgent
instructions as to the access and information she is requesting in respect of the system in the
Midlands and the operation at Chesterfield and the error logs. I will contact Gareth Jenkins to find
out what transpired at the meeting with Charles McLachlan.

I await to hear from you.

Jarnail Singh
Senior Lawyer
Criminal Law Division

TelNoi            GRO


From: Issy Hogg                      GRo
                     -
Sent: 22 July 2010 07:30
To: Jarnail A Singh
Subject: Misra


Jarnail,

As a result of the meeting that took place between Charles
McLachlan and Gareth Jenkins as directed by the judge, we now need
              -
     'have:
to




- access to the system in the Midlands where it appears there are
live,• reproducible errors.
- access to the operations at Chesterfield to understand how
reconciliation and transaction corrections are dealt with.
  access to the system changerequests, known error log and new
release documentation to understand what problems have had to be
fixed.




 27/07/2010
                                                                                                            FUJO0153157
                                                                                                         FUJO0153157

                                                                                                  , Page 3 of3


 Please can you contact me with regard to these issues. Please can
 you respond via hannah.ivory      GRO
                          GRO                       -- as I will be on
 holiday from  lunchtime. today until 16th August. Hannah  will ensure
 all your ema:ils are responded to.

 Regards,

 Issy




 Issy Hogg

 Coomber Rich Solicitors
 Yard House, Basingstoke; RG21 7NX
 SRA 308901
         E.........
 T.el..
 Mob!                 GRO
 Email issy. ho ggE------------------------.--------------- -------GRo
      GRO




  This e-mail, is confidential and intended solely for the use by the
  individual to whom it was addressed. If you are not the intended
  recipient, you are hereby notified that any using, printing,
  dissemination, distribution or copying of this e-mail orany part
  of it is strictly prohibited. Please delete all physical and
  electronic copies you may have. Any views expressed in this 'message
• may    those of the individual sender and may not necessarily
  represent the views of Coomber Rich Solicitors.


 (See attached file: C. htin)




                                                                 Royal Mail Group Limited registered. in England
 and Wales registered number 4138203 registered office 3rd Floor, 100 Victoria, Embankment, London, EC4Y
 OHQ This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the
 named recipient, you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication.
 If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then delete this email from your system,




 27/07/2010
