FUJ00155767
FUJ00155767

From: Pinder Brian[/O=EXCHANGE/OU=ADMINGROUP1/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=PINDERB]
Sent: Wed 01/11/2006 12:21:36 PM (UTC)
To: Jenkins Gareth GIf.

Ce: Sewell Peter (FELO1)ff
Subject: | FW: Post Office Limited -v- Lee Castleton
Gareth

Please see below from Stephen Dilley.

| have asked Mik Peach to look into this for me and awaiting his response but is it an issue do you think or is it something which
can be neatly explained?

Regds Brian

From: Pinder Brian

Sent: 01 November 2006 11:35
To: ‘Stephen Dilley’
Cc: Tom Beeze!
martyn.mitchelf
Subject: RE: Post

Stephen ci rest

| appreciate the urgency and reasoning around your email and | do not wish to appear negative but usually if a problem occurs
with the system it would be reported to the helpdesk and a proper and logical investigation would take place. Your email does
not indicate if Mr Booth has reported this and if not it may make it difficult to identify the exact cause, particularly if we

need further clarification on any mater. However | will look into this, and keep you informed of any progress.

Kind Regards Brian

From: Stephen Dilley [mailto:
Sent: 31 October 2006 16:04
To: Pinder Brian

Cc: Tom Beeze!

ichard Morgan; graham.c.war< -

Importance: High

Dear Brian,

One of the witnesses in the Castleton case is Greg Booth who was the temporary sub-postmaster at Marine
Drive branch from 21 April to 28 May 2004. Greg is currently the manager of the Newbury Post office branch,
401 Scalby Road, Scarborough, YO12 6TQ.

Greg spoke to me last week and reported that his computer froze on Wed 25 or Thurs 26 October 2006 (I will
clarify which day) whilst he was serving a customer and part way through a transaction. The transaction had
not been settled. It related to a postage label. When he logged back in again, the computer had lost the
transaction of £1.27. The computer did not prompt him to try to recover it. Greg is away this week, but I will
be contacting him upon his return to obtain a supplemental witness statement about this point. Prior to then,
Greg's evidence was that he had never know the system to lose a transaction. In this particular case, Greg
was £1.27 up because he had taken money from a customer. However, I anticipate the reverse would have
happened if he had been paying money out.

Although this is for a small amount, the principle on the face of it seems concerning because it suggests that
the Horizon system can, (albeit rarely), lose transactions. Castleton's solicitors will try to exploit any
FUJ00155767
FUJ00155767

weakness and we must be prepared for a possible attack on this point.
Our Counsel has requested that Fujitsu review the Newbury Post Office's Horizon data for those days period to
see if you can tell whether the system froze and lost the transaction and what the explanation may be.

We have to serve Witness Statements very shortly. I will have to prepare a supplemental Witness Statement
for Greg Booth dealing with this and may possibly need to take a further Witness Statement from somebody at
Fujitsu, depending on your explanation. Accordingly, I would be grateful if you could look into this and come
back to me as a matter of urgency.

Kind regards.
Yours sincerely

Stephen Dilley
Solicitor
for and_on behalf of Bond Pearce LLP

www.bondpearce.com

The information in this e-mail and any attachments are confidential and may be legally privileged and protected
by law. The intended recipient only is authorised to access this e-mail and any attachments. If you are not the
intended recipient, please notify the sender as soon as possible and delete any copies. Unauthorised use,
dissemination, distribution, publication or copying of this communication is prohibited.

Any files attached to this e-mail will have been checked by us with virus detection software before transmission.
You should carry out your own virus checks before opening any attachment. Bond Pearce LLP accepts no
liability for any loss or damage which may be caused by software viruses.

Bond Pearce LLP is a Limited Liability Partnership registered in England and Wales number OC311430.
Registered Office: 3 Temple Quay, Temple Back East, Bristol, BS1 6DZ.

A list of Members is available from our registered office. Any reference to a Partner in relation to Bond Pearce
LLP means a Member of Bond Pearce LLP. Bond Pearce LLP is regulated by the Law Society.
