FUJ00123982
FUJ00123982

Message

From: Sharron L Jennings ii

Sent: 05/10/2012 11:17:33

To: martin smith ; Jenkins Gareth GI
[/O=EXCHANGE/OU=AdminGroup1/cn=Recipients/cn=Gareth.Jenkins]; Jarnail A Singh
i,

cc: Rachael Panter

Subject: RE: HORIZON FUJITSU REPORT VERY URGENT

Attachments: JENKINS Gareth witness statement.doc

Dear all

Please find attached the s.9 witness statement. It was not as simple as
just cutting and pasting I'm afraid as it did not copy across exactly as
presented. Please check carefully before signing to ensure you are happy.

Regards
Sharron Jennings

Post Office Limited
Security Manager

Midway House

Admin Section

1 Elliott Way
irmingham

Bé 7AP

Confidential Information: This e-ma sage is for the sole use of the i ed recipient (s) and may contain
nfidential and privileged inforn Any unauthori review, use, 4 ure or distribution is

E bited.

If you are not the intended recipient, please contact me by reply e-mail and destroy all copies of the original

message.

From: martin smith
Sent: 05 October 2

FUJ00123982
FUJ00123982

To: ‘Jenkins Gareth GI'; Jarnail A Singh
Cc: Sharron L Jennings; Rachael Panter
Subject: RE: HORIZON FUJITSU REPORT VERY URGENT

Gareth,

Please find attached a copy of your statement with the first paragraph of Section 3 re-written so that it
refers to the documents as exhibits.

I will ask Sharron Jennings to insert your statement into a Post Office Section 9 Statement and e-mail
it to you. I would be grateful if you could then sign it in the spaces provided, but given the shortness
of time could I ask you please to scan the signed copy to me before returning the original in the post.
Please also label the top right hand corner of the first pages of the documents referred to in paragraph
three with their respective exhibit numbers and scan the whole of each document to me as separate
attachments. This will enable us to serve copies of your statement and the exhibits electronically
today.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any questions.

Kind regards,

Martin.

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named recipient,
you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication. If you have received this in
error, please contact the sender and then delete this email from your system.

ROYAL MAIL GROUP LIMITED registered in England and Wales at 100 VICTORIA EMBANKMENT, LONDON EC4Y
OHQ with the registered company number 04138203

POST OFFICE LIMITED registered in England and Wales at 148 OLD STREET, LONDON EC1V 9HQ with the registered
company number 02154540
