FUJ00153881
FUJ00153881
De]

From: Jenkins Gareth Gl[/o=Exchange/ou=AdminGroup1/cn=Recipients/cn=Gareth.Jenkins]
Sent: Wed 05/12/2012 2:00:52 PM (UTC)

To: ‘Andrew Bolc't”

Ce: Thomas Pennyf GRO
Subject: | RE: Post Office Limited v Grant Allen
Andrew,

OK, I'll put together some general comments later this week.

A look at the non-poll report shows that the branch was offline for 12 days, assuming it was OK after the last entry.

The data should have been fully recovered assuming base units were swapped correctly and I'll cover that in what | say.
Yes, all data up to 7 years is freely available.

2 days of my time costs around £2K - £2.5K.

Regards
Gareth

Gareth Jenkins

Distinguished Engineer
Business Applications Architect
Post Office Account

FUJITSU
Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berkshit
Tel: H
Mobile:
email:
Web:

Fujitsu is proud to partner with Shelter, the housing and homeless charity
Reshaping ICT, Reshaping Business in partnership with FT.com
?Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?

= Original Message-
From: Andrew Bolc \..
Sent: 05 December 2012 13:54

To: Jenkins Gareth GI

Subject: RE: Post Office Limited v Grant Allen

Gareth,

thank you for considering the position so promptly. i can now confirm that the case has been put back to the 24th January
2012. | would appreciate if you could add your general comments at this stage regarding the safeguards in place for
comms problems to your statement,and send this to me as before and i will refer back to the Post Office to consider
whether we go on to request the retrieval of data for your further analysis.i say so on the assumption that the data is
available for 7 years. an idea of what 2 days analysis would cost would assist in that decision. with regard to Help Desk
calls i also assume that this is information available freely to POL and therefore would request that enquiry is carried out.
i attach the Horizon non polling report obtained by the investigator in this case previously.
FUJ00153881
FUJ00153881

Regards

Andrew

From: Jenkins Gareth Gl}
Sent: 05 December 2012 12:
To: Andrew Bolc

Cc: Thomas Penny

Subject: RE: Post Office Limited v Grant Allen

Andrew,

I've had a look at the statement here and | think it might be helpful to have a dig as to exactly what went on in the Branch
at the time of the initial loss. | think | understand what he is claiming. However where there are comms problems it is
normal to recover any missing data once the comms are sorted out (provided it is within 35 days), so this shouldn't be a
reason for a loss. Also there are processes in place to retrieve outstanding data where there are extended comms issues
lasting more than 7 days, so as to meet contractual obligations regarding passing all data to Post Office Ltd's clients
within 10 days.

| could just make a general statement relating to that or if we retrieved the data from the time | could check out exactly
what happened in this case.

I've checked with Penny in our prosecution support team and Post Office Ltd have not requested any audit data relating
to this case (she's checked back as far as April 2010), nor have we been asked about Help Desk calls (which would
probably have occurred if there were comms issues).

Is it worth asking Post Office Ltd to request such data for me to examine before putting together a specific statement for
this, or is a simple generic one sufficient?

Note that the data retrieval is part of the standard service that Fujitsu provides to Post Office Ltd, but any time | spend
examining the data (say a couple of days) would be chargeable to Post Office Ltd and so there are commercial
considerations for you or Post Office Ltd to consider. As we are nearing the Christmas break, | can't commit to doing any
such analysis before the New Year.

Regards

Gareth

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer

Business Applications Architect
Post Office Account

FUJITSU

Lovelace Road G12 BSN oe
Tel: Internal: | }
Mobile: Internal: GRO |
email: i

Web: http://uk.fujitsu.com

Fujitsu is proud to partner with Shelter, the housing and homeless charity Reshaping ICT, Reshaping Business in
partnership with FT.com P Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?

riginal Message-
From: Andrew Bolc [
Sent: 04 December 2012 10:10

FUJ00153881
FUJ00153881

To: Jenkins Gareth GI
Subject: Post Office Limited v Grant Allen

Dear Gareth,

| have just spoken to the solicitor for grant allen.
she is going to ask the court to relist the hearing currently on the 10th December 2012 until Jan next year which should
take the pressure off on this case.

i attach an extract from mr Allen's interview. as in the case summary i sent you he is trying to suggest that an inital loss
of £3000 is attributable to lost data which has not reached head office because of installation problems. are you able to
comment on this scenario at all? ultimately we would need to discredit this as an explanation that holds any water. he
denies stealing the subsequent losses and therefore by implication may be seeking to blame the system for these lossses
as well.

Regards

Andrew Bolc

-----Original Messa
From: leicsterscan{
Sent: 04 December 2012 09:38
To: Andrew Bolc

Subject:

TASKalfa 4201
[00: 6:89]

Unless otherwise stated, this email has been sent from Fujitsu Services Limited, from Fujitsu (FTS) Limited, or from
Fujitsu Telecommunications Europe Limited, together "Fujitsu".

This email is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a duty of confidence and may be
privileged. Fujitsu does not guarantee that this email has not been intercepted and amended or that it is virus-free.

Fujitsu Services Limited, registered in England No 96056, registered office 22 Baker Street, London W1U 3BW.
Fujitsu (FTS) Limited, registered in England No 03808613, registered office 22 Baker Street, London W1U 3BW.

PFU Imaging Solutions Europe Limited, registered in England No 1578652, registered office Hayes Park Central, Hayes
End Road, Hayes, Middlesex, UB4 8FE.

Fujitsu Telecommunications Europe Limited, registered in England No 2548187, registered office Solihull Parkway,
Birmingham Business Park, Birmingham, B37 7YU.
