FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

From: Membery Bill

Sent: Thur 18/02/2010 11:27:47 AM (UTC)
To: Lillywhite Tom|

Subject: RE: Track II - list of questions
Attachment: Membery Bill.vcf

Hi Tom

Answers are:

8.

(a) What are the current security measures in place to prevent access to
the Track II data?

[GIJ] Best for Tom to answer, but basically there is very limited access to the Audit
Servers and presumably such access is itself audited.

(b) How easy or difficult could those measures be to breach (is there an
objective measure/standard) ?

[GIJ] Again one for Tom

(c) Could they be improved and if so, how?

[GIJ] Again one for Tom

a. This depends on which part of the system, the Live systems, the Test systems or the audit systems. Within the
live estate defence in depth exists with ACLs, Firewalls, IDS, Obfuscation in Code, Clearances of staff, role
management, etc.

b. Within Audit control is role based with limited access to audit servers and only limited key staff permitted to
extract the data as part of the audit process, the severs are data centre based and the clients in a secure room
with limited access

c. Support systems and Test systems is an area | am not certain about need to talk to Debbie Richardson Test and
to Program, | believe JS ensured that development in India was not able to review, but not certain that Peak and
TFS have controls in, needs an audit in this area

d. Currently there are no measures only tests are Pen Tests could do with a physical attempt to Breach by another
Fujitsu Security Team member of staff.

e. Yes whole area could be improved use of ikey tokens, update of support systems and Test systems to specific
test rigs for PCI.

Kind Regards
Bill

From: Lillywhite Tom

Sent: 18 February 2010 10:57

To: Membery Bill

Subject: FW: Track II - list of questions

Bill

See question 8 below...can you answer it?

From: Jenkins Gareth GI

Sent: 17 February 2010 09:54

To: Butts Geoff; Lillywhite Tom; Kirkham Suzie
Cc: D'Alvarez Alan; Welsh Graham; Clark Jason
Subject: RE: Track II - list of questions
FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

Geoff / Suzie,

My suggested answers to most of the questions below prefixed [GIJ] in bold italics lower
down in the email trail.

There's a few that I think Tom needs to answer, and others may want to correct some of the
detail as I was not involved in the proposal that Jim and Jason have put together, though
I understand what it is actually proposing and how it should work (I have some detailed
comments on that, but that can be resolved if we really do progress with this).

Note that I'm now coming to the conclusion that we probably can technically put together a
robust mechanism to remove the T2 Data. However it would be difficult to prove that it is
robust and even harder to provide a simple explanation of it in a witness statement or in
court, and so I would still recommend that we do not tamper with the audit trail.

Regards

Gareth

Gareth Jenkins
Distinguished Engineer

Applications Architect
Royal Mail Group Account

FUJITSU
Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berkshire, RG12 8SN
Tel: i Internal:

(Wote new external number -

old numb: ill t. k after 31/12/2009
Mobile: i:
email:
Web: http: //uk

P Please consider the environment - do you really need to print this email?

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 22 Baker
Street, London, W1U 3BW

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a
duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu Services does not guarantee that this
e-mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is virus-free.

----- Original Message-----

From: Butts Geoff

Sent: 16 February 2010 18:40

To: Lillywhite Tom; Welsh Graham; Clark Jason; Jenkins Gareth GI
Cc: Kirkham Suzie; D'Alvarez Alan

Subject: FW: Track II - list of questions

Importance: High

All,

FYI - some detailed questions from Hugh Flemington following on from the discussion
yesterday. I will be on leave on Thursday and Friday this week. Can you send Suzie any
responses to the questions by close of play Thursday so that she can collate these and
send to the respective legal teams. If the timescales are too tight, please let Suzie
know so that expectations can be set with POL.

Thanks.

Regards,
Geoff

Geoff Butts,

Programme Manager, HNG-X Release 1,
Royal Mail Account

Practitioner, P&PM Academy

FUJITSU

E-mail: wu
Web: http://uk.fu

FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 22 Baker

Street, London, W1U 3BW

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient.

Its contents are subject to a

duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu Services does not guarantee that this e-

mail has not been intercepted and amended or that it is virus-free.

-----' Original Message-----
From: Kirkham Suzie

Sent: 16 February 2010 15:57

To: Butts Geoff

Subject: FW: Track II - list of questions
Importance: High

Geoff

PSB - please can you circulate to the team who will compile the response.

response by Friday

Kind regards

Suzie

Suzie Kirkham

Account Manager

Royal Mail Group

FUJITSU

Lovelace Road, Bracknell, Berks RG12 8SN

They want a
FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

Internal:

| Internal

E-mail: suzie.kirkhamf_

Web: <http

/ak.fujitsu.com>

Fujitsu Services Limited, Registered in England no 96056, Registered Office 22 Baker
Street, London, W1U 3BW

This e-mail is only for the use of its intended recipient. Its contents are subject to a
duty of confidence and may be privileged. Fujitsu does not guarantee that this e-mail has
not been intercepted and amended or that it is virus-free

----- Original Message-----

From: Prenovost Jean-Philippe

Sent: 16 February 2010 14:18

To: Kirkham Suzie

Subject: FW: Track II - list of questions

Hot off the press.

Let's discuss once you have had a chance to review.

Kind regards

JP

----- Original Message
From: hugh. flemingtorf
Sent: Monday, February 15, 2010 5748 bi
To: Prenovost, Jean-Philippe

Subject: Re: Track II - list of questions

Hi JP.

Below is the magic list of questions compiled from a few people today since
our call this morning. Would Fujitsu be able to get us reponses by close
of play on Friday plse?

It looks like a long list, but we want to get as full a picture as possible
before any decision about deletion is taken within Pol about whether to
press for a compromise from the PCI or go for simple deletion of T2 data.
Pol need to understand what Fujistu would be able to say if necessary in a
witness statement that could be used in evidence in criminal or civil
litigation. Your responses will also help build any submission to PCI (can
you tell which way I think Pol will go!). To that end it would be helpful
if Fujitsu could indicate the certainty of your answer in each case. If it
is not possible to answer any of the questions, please say so too.

Questions:
FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

1. Before Track II data is deleted, would Fujitsu be able to say precisely

what impact the deletion would have eg what additional data would also be

deleted or amended and if so, how it would be amended.

[GIJ] The intention is that Track 2 data would be obfuscated as would any corresponding
Digital signatures and Checksums since they would no longer be relevant. Also the PAN
would be obfuscated by replacing it with a "hashed" PAN (as is done in HNG-X). We would
also add in an Encrypted version of the PAN so that if necessary the original PAN could be
recovered (again this is similar to what is done on HNG-X). Although not included in the
current study report, I would also recommend that any ICC Data (ie data generated by the
Chip on the Card) is also obfuscated. The result of this is that the Audit of the
original message would be changed and it would no longer be possible to assert it has not
been changed since originally recorded. Also the revised audit file would need to be re-
sealed again indicating that it has not be tampered with since the time of the "official"
change.

2. We are trying to understand how quick and easy it would be to assess the
impact of the deletion. After the deletion:

(a) would Fujitsu be able to say precisely what additional data had in fact

been deleted or amended, how it had be amended and precisely what affect

this has on the Horizon system?

[GIJ] We would be able to say what sort of data has been deleted / amended, but clearly
would not be able to say what the original data was!

(b) to accurately answer 2(a) would it be necessary for Fujitsu to consider
the impact of the deletion on the data submitted by each Post Office
branch, or would the answer be apparent at a macro level?

[GIJ] This would be apparent at a Macro level

(c) Would the amendment or corruption of other data be reversible?

[GIJ] Not clear what is meant by "other data". The intention is to only amend Track 2
data and related signatures / checksums (and possibly ICC Data). Non Track 2 data would
not be changed. However the integrity controls that are normally checked when generating
evidence would no longer be valid. It is intended that the changed data would be signed
at the time it is changed to enable it to be asserted that it has not been corrupted after
the removal of the Track 2 data.

(a) Would any amendment or corruption non Track II data other data be a one

off event ie due to Track II data, or is there a risk that the deletion

sets in motion a chain reaction leading to further amendments or corruption

in the future?

[GIJ] For any audit file, it would be a one off event. However there are many audit files
generated each day on Horizon and it is likely that a considerable period of time would be
required to alter all the necessary Audit files so different files would be amended /
corrupted at different times. I would not expect any chain reaction for a specific file
though.

(e) How long would it take and how much would it cost to assess the full

impact of deletion?

[GIJ] I've not seen any costs. Can someone else answer this. However I would not expect
this to be Cheap!

(£) Would it be possible to illustrate to, for example, a court, what

precisely has been done to establish continuity?

[GIJ] It might be possible. However it is normally a non-technical person that provides
evidence in court and it would be difficulty to provide a simple description of what has
been done that can be easily understood and would not cause a distraction from the main
evidence.

3. After the deletion, what would Fujitsu be prepared to say generically
about the integrity and accuracy of the remaining data on the Horizon
system? How certain could Fujitsu be of that integrity and accuracy,
please?
FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

[GIJ] We could describe the process and indicate that the data was correct from the time
it was generated until the T2 data was removed and also that it had not been corrupted
since that time. What would be hard would be to show that the tools used to remove the T2
data had not inadvertently corrupted other data as a side effect since it is all in the
same basic message.

4.

(a) Precisely how would the deletion of the Track II data change

transaction and events logs?

[GIJ] There is a single log produced by Horizon which includes both Transaction details
and Event information (and a whole load of other information which is not usually used in
evidence). All messages in this log that include Track 2 data would be altered by the
tools. This would affect some Transactions (and in particular any that relate to Banking,
Credit / Debit card and perhaps E-Top Ups (depending on detailed design). The tool is
unlikely to alter and messages relating to Events since they don't include Sensitive data.
However the audit file that contains the events would have been altered.

(b) would its deletion only corrupt rows on those logs which relate to

credit card transactions, or would it affect other rows too and if so, how?

[GIJ] It would also affect rows containing Debit card and banking Transactions and perhaps
E Top-Ups as well. Other rows are unlikely to be affected (but it may be difficult to
prove that).

(c) how would credit card transactions after the Track II deletion appear

in events and transaction logs?

[GIJ] Where data has been altered, then it is expected that the original data would be
replaced by a standard character (probably an asterisk). However PANs would be replaced
by Hashed PANs and each message would be extended to include details of the Encrypted PAN
to allow the original PAN to be retrieved.

(d) After the deletion, would POL be able to definitively prove the amount

of each credit card transaction, whether it took place and when it took

place and if so, how would it prove this?

[GIJ] This is the key issue. The tool would be designed such that financial amounts would
not be changed. However being able to prove that this had not happened inadvertently
would be difficult.

(e) Would we still be able to trace a transaction?
[GIJ] Yes.

5. What is the probability that the deletion would affect the data

contained in the following? (Especially its reliability and accuracy). If
it would affect such data, please describe the potential and likely
affects:

(a) branch trading statements;

[GIJ] Not applicable. We do not provide BTS as part of the formal audit evidence. (We
have been able to do so in some cases from Horizon, but it is not part of the contractual
service we provide.)

(b) Transaction correction notices (formerly called error notices ie charge

or credit errors);

[GIJ] Such transactions are unlikely to contain data that would result in them being
altered. However it might be difficult to prove that.

(c) Data relating to cash and stock remittances to a branch;

[GIJ] Such transactions are unlikely to contain data that would result in them being
altered. However it might be difficult to prove that.

(d) Data relating to cash receipts from a branch;

[GIJ] Such transactions are unlikely to contain data that would result in them being
altered. However it might be difficult to prove that.

(e) Data relating to transactions (eg sales) performed at a branch;

[GIJ] These may be affected if they are card related.

(£) Cash declarations;
FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908

[GIJ] Not applicable. We do not provide Cash Declarations as part of the formal audit
evidence. (We have been able to do so in some cases from Horizon, but it is not part of
the contractual service we provide.)

(g) Balance snapshots;

[GIJ] Not applicable. We do not provide Balance Snapshots as part of the formal audit
evidence. (We have been able to do so in some cases from Horizon, but it is not part of
the contractual service we provide.)

(h) NBSC or HSH telephone call logs; and

[GIJ] These are held in separate logs and aren't affected. (I'm not familiar with what is
and is not held, but such logs are unchanged.)

(i) Data relating to any IT problems experienced at a branch.

[GIJ] I assume that this relates to event logs etc, so again these are held is separate
logs which are unaffected.

If the deletion would not affect the above data, how certain could Fujitsu
be of that, please?

6. In your own words, please can you describe the full effect that the
deletion of the Track II data is likely to have on the Horizon system and
how certain you can be of that.

[GIJ] Not sure what else to add to the detailed answers above

7.

(a) Would the encryption of the PAN cause any issues?

[GIJ] This requires the original message to be increased in size and so we would be unable
to assert that nothing had been added to the original audit data.

(b) And what about it's subsequent de-encryption to produce as evidence in

any cases? Will we still be able to access it?

[GIJ] My understanding of the proposed solution is that this would be possible. Note that
the way in which it is encrypted would be different from "normal" encrypted PANs so new
tools would be required to decrypt the data.

Finally
8.
(a) What are the current security measures in place to prevent access to

the Track II data?

[GIJ] Best for Tom to answer, but basically there is very limited access to the Audit
Servers and presumably such access is itself audited.

(b) How easy or difficult could those measures be to breach (is there an

objective measure/standard) ?

[GIJ] Again one for Tom

(c) Could they be improved and if so, how?

[GIJ] Again one for Tom

Kind regards,
hugh

JOS IIS IIS ISI ISI IGS IIS IGT ISI ICI SSI ISS IOI IETS IOI IOI I I II
Royal Mail Group Limited registered in England and Wales registered number
4138203 registered office 3rd Floor, 100 Victoria Embankment, London, EC4Y
oH

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the
addressee only. If you are not the named recipient, you must not use,
disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication.
If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then

delete this email from your system.
JOSE ES EGOS ISCO G CISC SC IGG IOG EI ISG ICG IC ICC ISG I IOI TO I II Ie
FUJ00230908
FUJ00230908
