WITNO1200101

Good morning

Not sure if it still happens but there was an auto acknowledgement when the original
applications were done. Having spoken to them last week | know they have had it
and itis being assessed. We have been told this may take up to 6 weeks but be
assured we are keeping an eye on yours and the other late submissions

Regards

= Keith Richards
riNFSP . +
y og Compliance and Network Support Advisor

The National Federation of SubPostmasters

Evelyn House, 22 Windlesham Gardens
Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex BN43 5AZ

wa | Ba
NIE ME NE

This email (and any attachment) is confidential, may be legally privileged and is
intended for the addressee only. If you have received it in error please inform us
immediately by email responding to the sender and then delete this message. Please
do not copy it, disclose its contents to any other person or use it for any purpose.
Thank you for your cooperation.

We have taken reasonable precautions to ensure that this email and any attachments
have been scanned for software viruses. We cannot accept liability for any damage
sustained as a result of software viruses and would advise you to carry out your own
virus checks before opening any attachment.

You can view our privacy policy online at www.nfsp.org.uk/privacy,

National Federation of SubPostmasters is a company limited by guarantee
(incorporated in England, company number 9771284)

From: myraphilp
Sent: 19 May 2021 06:28
To: Keith Richards:
Subject: RE: FW:

istoric Shortfall Scheme

WITNO1200101

Hi,

Just wondering if hearing nothing from these people is normal?
Not even an aknowledgement?

Thanks

M

Sent from my Galaxy

——— Original message —
From: Keith Richard:
Date: 10/05/2021 09:27 (GMT+00:00)
To: myraphilpf

Sharon Merryweather

Ok thanks. Keep us in the loop if you hear anything
Regards

Keith Richards

INFSP I :
wa og Compliance and Network Support Advisor

The National Federation of SubPostmasters

Evelyn House, 22 Windlesham Gardens
Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex BN43 5AZ

W: ww

Pom on
This email (and any attachment) is confidential, may be legally privileged and is
intended for the addressee only. If you have received it in error please inform us
immediately by email responding to the sender and then delete this message. Please
do not copy it, disclose its contents to any other person or use it for any purpose.
Thank you for your cooperation.
We have taken reasonable precautions to ensure that this email and any attachments
have been scanned for software viruses. We cannot accept liability for any damage
sustained as a result of software viruses and would advise you to carry out your own
virus checks before opening any attachment.

You can view our privacy policy online at www.nfsp.org.uk/privacy,

National Federation of SubPostmasters is a company limited by guarantee
(incorporated in England, company number 9771284)

From: myraphilp
Sent: 10 May 2021 09:27

To: Sharon Merryweather!
Cc: Keith Richards |”
Subject: RE: FW: Historic Shortfall Scheme

Thank you. | have completed and sent the Federation form and made the his toric
shortfall applicatiion.

Mary Philp

Sent from my Galaxy

Original message —
From: Sharon Merryweathe:
Date: 05/05/2021 15:46 (G
To: myraphi
Cc: Keith Richards
Subject: FW: Historic Shortfall Scheme

Dear Myra

Further to your conversation with Keith Richards, | attach all the application forms,
etc. for you to complete asap.

Postmaster Name: Mary Philp

Branch: Auchtermuchty

FAD:

Contact number:

Dear Deepak

WITNO1200101
WITNO1200101

Attached is the information you need to make a claim. You just have to do the best
you can and if you have any dates and amounts, that is a good start, the more
information you can provide the better. The closing date was 14 August so you need
to get your claim sent to Post Office as soon as possible. Below and attached are the
forms to enable you need to make your application electronically rather than on
paper. There is also a link to an NFSP form which, if completed, will allow us to assist
you as your application progresses The period covered by the scheme is 1 J anuary
2000 through to 31 December 2017.

The information is either attached or below.

Post Office have set up the Historic Shortfall Scheme to deal with such matters and
you would need to formally make a claim. Information and instructions are included.

Instructions and guidance are attached but can also be found at:

http://onepostoffice.co.uk/scheme

To make your claim, you can either print off the application form and post it to: Post
Office Historical Shortfall Scheme, PO Box 76882, London, E1W ORR or submit it
digitally to the following email address: his toricals hortfalls cheme@postoffice.co.uk
with as much information and evidence that you can provide.

Please send copies of the documents, not original documents.

To allow us to be able to support you, please also fill out the NFSP form below. All
information will be treated in the strictest confidence.
https://forms .office.com/Pages/Res pons ePage.as px?

id=9hP ujXH_FEWTFHahTqb8!s BQ0313N1J OpZeUM1WEss 1UMDZMREcyVTY4UERVT
khP RTM4TVpNUDMSNS4u

As the deadline to qualify was the 14 August 2020, please submit your claim even if
you don’t have all the information to hand. Post Office will write to you for further
information to progress the claim. As your claim will be late, please make the point in
Question 31 that you have only just become aware of the scheme. .

If you need help or guidance, please do not hesitate to contact us.

Many thanks and regards,

Sharon
XXX

Sharon Merryweather
Personal Assistant to CEO
The National Federation of SubPostmasters
WITNO1200101

eS Evelyn House, 22 Windlesham Gardens
Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex BN43 5AZ

GRO

W: www.nfsp.org.uk

This email (and any attachment) is confidential, may be legally privileged and is intended for
the addressee only. If you have received it in error please inform us immediately by email
res ponding to the sender and then delete this message. Please do not copy it, disclose its
contents to any other person or use it for any purpose. Thank you for your cooperation.

We have taken reasonable precautions to ensure that this email and any attachments have
been scanned for software viruses. We cannot accept liability for any damage sustained as a
result of software viruses and would advise you to carry out your own virus checks before
opening any attachment.

You can view our privacy policy online at www.nfsp.org.uk/privacy,

National Federation of SubPostmasters is a company limited by guarantee (incorporated in
England, company number 9771284)
