NFSP00000471

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

FOR USE OF NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OFFICERS ONLY

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF SUB-POSTMASTERS

REPORT OF A MEETING

of the

NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL

held on

21st, 22nd and 23rd JUNE 1999

at i

THE ABBEY HOTEL
GREAT MALVERN

NFSP00000471
«

a,
A/L

A/3

AGENDA

JUNE 1999

REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS of the

Executive Council Meeting, held on 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th March 1999;
Special Executive Council Meeting held on 16th May 1999;

Post Conference Meeting held on 19th May 1999

Special Executive Council Meeting held on 19th June 1999*

MATTERS ARISING FROM THE REPORTS

REPORT OF THE NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE

The following reports refer:- NC 25/26 Feb 1999
NC 27 April 1999

POST OFFICE GROUP
1. Post Office Board
(a) Shaping up for Competitive Success... PO PD 03

(b) Top Management Programme...........:c.ccsesseesescesseeereee PO BD.

2. Government Affairs

The Post Office Inquiry - Trade and Industry Committee .... PO PZ.

3. Post Office Counters

(a) Post Office Counters Board «PO PC 02

(b) Organisation Development ........c.cccceccescessestsseseeeeseees PO PC 03

Revised 18.6,1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

NFSP00000471

NC

NC

NFSP00000471

«

4. Off-Shore Islands

(a) Guernsey .... NC
(b) Isle of Man . NC
(c) Jersey... NC
POST OFFICE COUNTERS LIMITED
5. Commercial o.....ccceccceceeccsesceseseenenseenenesseenssenseeenenenenengenes PC CM NC
6. Euro Programme
Euro Programme and European Monetary Union .......000PC EU 01 NC
7. Human Resources ¢
a) 0) Transactional Knowledge Review..........0:0 PC HR 04
b) (2) HIRSAPS oonssseeseeeecessssssreseeensssneeeennnneeenemencssesennnssans PC HR 06
8. Mailwork
Mailwork Review ....cscswssssssssseseccsssnsestseeestessseieesssseuneeeses PC MP 04 NC
9. Network
(a) Network Forums .....sccecsseessseerseesneececneneeseretsnneeentes PC NW O01
(b) Consultation on Network Issues ........-sccsieeeeeensseesees PC NW 02 q
(c) Counter Automation - BA/POCL ... ..PC NW 06 01
(d) Cash and Stock Resourcing and Distribution... PC NW 09
- Internal Logistics Review
- Procedure for Discrepancies in Remittances
(e) Shortage of £20 notes secrissnietaiessiesssstitenretesnieseeessesssees PC NW 09 03
10. Security
(a) POCL/NESP Meetings .....scsssessssssssssssseeeesnnnesssnnssssesessies PC NW 1101
(b) Regional Security FOrUms ........ccssssneeceesseserstessnsee PCNW 1101 NC

Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda
11.

12.

13.

14,

7
(©) Bravery Awards .......cscseccssssssssessssssessecesseeessecsscessseeeae PC NW 11 Ok

(d) Equipment
- Security Capitalisation and Screen 2000
- Access Doors
-  Anti-intruder Alarm Grants
- Trial of Remote Alarm Signalling

(e) Trauma Care Programme ........cccscsssessseeesecssseessessseense PC NW 1103 NC
Product Range oo....cecccccccssesssesseesseseestesseestesseesessesseese PC PR NC
Quality

Sales Initiative Meeting oo... .escscesseesssesstesssesteestecsessesaseeses PC QY 01

Subpostmasters Contract

(a) Standards at Post Offices 0... -PC SC 03
(b) Introductory Payment ..0.....eceescsseescseecsseessseesseeesveeeees PC SC 04
(c) Loss of Office (Compensation Agreement) ..............0. PC SC 12

(d) Paypoint .. PC SC 21 01

(e) Counter Losses and Gains Policy ..... PC SC 27

CF) NEPOC occ cceeccseecsseneesecssnseeessnnnecstieessnnteennneeessnnes PC SC 28

Subpostmasters Pay

(a) Pay Review
- Identifying costs of running an office

(b) Pay Claim 1998 oo....cccccccccsssssssesesssecsenersnsssenvsssneenses PC SP/1998
(c) Pay Claim 1999 oo....ccccccccssesssssssseseesseeseesnssnervseseneees PC SP/1999
(d) Payment Rates oo... ecccccsssesssessecsssesseesesseessessecsneaceeses PC SP 01

- Bill Payment
- RPP Parcels - Annually Revised Offices
- Revision of Postage Stamp Unit Credit

3

Revised 18,6,1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

PC NW 11 02

NFSP00000471

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21,

22.

(e) Intermittent Allowances . PC SP 02 03

(f) New/Changed Products PC SP 02 08

(g) Pay Advice PC SP 08

POCL CLIENTS

Benefits Agency

Pensions .... see CL BA 03
- BES - ‘Casual’ Agents

- All Benefits at One Post Office

British Gas oo... cscs sees eeescsesseceeeeeeerseseseesereneeeenenenseeges CLBG

British Telecom

(a) BT Payment Cards ... CL BT 04
(b) BT Global Calling Cards ..........sceestesecrsnseesenees CLBT 05
Electricity Boards ........cccscccsecsecceeeeesseresssenesesnaeenetseenieses CLEB
Foreign Exchange ......s..cccccseccseseerseesieeseeennetenneesseneineate CLFX
Girobank

(a) Girobank/NFSP Quality Forum .......-s serene CL GB 01
(b) Giro Business Deposits..........cssscseerieeeseesssseescssniees CL GB 08 07

(c) Winter Fuel Payments

(d) Corporate Deposits .......ssssseescssssssreeesseessssnnncceenies
TMSUPANCE occ ce cccceseeseeseseseecaeeseseneseceerensseatsnesenenerennaneneenens CLIN
Local Authorities .....c.ccccceccsseseeeeessecrsereeeseneeierenenneens CLLA

NFSP00000471

NC
NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

NC

Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda
23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

NFSP00000471

Lotteries

National Lottery... .ccscccscssesssessnsceeseccssseesseccnsvecsnnecnees CLLO 01

- LSN’s

- Prize Payments

- Lottery Sales under 16’s

- Millennium Dome Entrance Tickets

Mercury Communications

Pre-Pay VOUChETS .0......seccsscescesssesestestennessessessesseeseeseescses CL MC

National Savings

(a) NFSP/DNS Trade Union meeting ............cceseseeee CL NS 01 NC
(b) Marketing CL NS 03 NC
(C) TSA eesceccscccsseessseesssecsenessueesntscesueeesnecsesneeesscesnaeesneeese CL NS 07 08
Personal Banking

Personal Banking Services .

Payment Collection Services

CL PB

CL PC NC

Parcelforce
(a) Alternative Delivery Trial oo...0...ccccccscesessessesseseesresees CL PF 05 01
(b) RPP Parcels . CL PF 05 02

Royal Mail

(a)
()
©)
(d)

New Sales Posts for Royal Mail ...........cscseseeeeees CL RM NC
Format Based Pricing .... .. CL RM 04

Priority Services oo... ccesessesseecseesteesseessesseeneese CL RM 0502 NC
Do Not Redirect 0c cicccecsessesssesseeeesteeteaeeseeneevenees CL RM 0507 NC

Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Utidities ooo eects eee ceecseeeeneeeeeseseneeeessneeteesnenereeeenenre® CL UT
DVLA
Motor Vehicle Licences .........cccscccccsseeseeeteseeseeneseseeneeteneenes CL VL 04 02

- Proposed Changes
- Graduated Vehicle Excise Licence
- Motor Vehicle Licences - Northern Ireland

Water Authorities 0.0.0... eteeceeseeseeeetenseeneneneneens CL WA

Organisations

POUNC

Conference Resolutions Prior 1999

97/7 . Annual Revisions: 364 Day Year
98/2: Royal Mail Activities

98/24.. Cash & Stock Responsibilities
98/4 . Family Transfers

98/69, .Helping Police with Enquiries

A/4. SPARE HEADING

A/S SUB-COMMITTEE REPORTS

A)

PUBLICITY AND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

PUBLICITY AND DEVEL EE r—E

1. REPORT PREVIOUS MEETINGS
P & D MEETING - 19-20 April 1999

2. FEDERATION MEMBERSHIP

(a) FEDERATION ANNUAL CONFERENCE FM AC
Annual Conference - 1999 FM AC 1999
Conference Arrangements
Annual Conference - 2001 FM AC 2001

6

NFSP00000471

|
—

NC
NC
NC
¢
¢

Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda
(b)

©

(a)

©

5.

A/6

MEMBERSHIP
Membership Recruitment
Training Branch Secretaries
Membership Types

FEDERATION PUBLICATIONS

FEDERATION PROMOTION & PUBLICITY
Sub Post Office Exhibition Doncaster
Federation Posters

FEDERATION PUBLIC RELATIONS

CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS

FUTURE DATES & VENUES OF EC MEETINGS

October 1999 Monday 18 - Wednesday 20 October

January 2000 — Sunday 9 - Tuesday 11 January
March 2000 Sunday 19- Wednesday 22 March
June 2000 Monday 19 - Wednesday 21 June
October 2000 Monday 16 - Wednesday 18 October

ANY OTHER MATTERS

B) FEDERATION TRUSTEES REPORT
C) BOARD OF BENEVOLENCE REPORT
D) CENTENARY CHARITIES
SPECIAL MATTERS

A) MEMBERSHIP

(i) Membership Statistics

7

FM MS 03
FM MS 04

FMPB

FM PP
FM PP 01
FM PP 02

FM PR

Malvern

Kensington Moat House
TBC

TBC

TBC

Revised 18.6.1999

* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

NFSP00000471

A/7

A/8

A/S

B)

1)

D)

FINANCE

@

Treasurer’s Report . FI AC 02

(ii) | Outstanding Branch Accounts . FI AC 02

Gii) Audit of Branch Accounts ... . FI AC 02

(iv) VAT Registration -FIAC 13

(v) Union Facilities... . PC HR 03
JOURNAL

@ Editor's Report ....c.cccccccesscessssseessescsesesesessrssseesssnseeseenaees FM PB 01
TRADING

(i) Eagle Star Scheme .........cccesccessesesesesssrseeeecsneeeteneeneseneneenes FIES

CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS PRIOR 1999

98/37...
98/88...

Introductory Payment
Environmental Policy

CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS 1999

MOTIONS TO THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL

Michael Darvill:

That Standing Orders for the EC be amended as follows

add

No EC member shall be entitled to put his name down to stand
on more than one Committee.

8
Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

NFSP00000471

a
|
NFSP00000471

A/10 DEPARTMENTAL CORRESPONDENCE

(A) FOR DISCUSSION

POST OFFICE COUNTERS LIMITED

Network

1. (a) Initial Distribution of New Definitive Stamps .............. PC NW 09 06 |
(b) SSL Trail for Handling External Customer Calls ......... PC NW 10 |
(c) Emergency Cascades by Telephone ...........cccccsesseees PC NW 10

POCL CLIENTS |
Insurance

2. (a) PO Travel Insurance - Product Extension ...........c00 CLIN O01 i
(b) General Insurance... ccceccseesseeseessesssesseessecssessveenee CL IN 02 * |
Personal Banking

Ch OB

3. (a) Personal Banking and POPOS

(b) Lloyds/TSB Personal Banking - Extension of Service Ch P® O24

Parcelforce

|

!
4. Parcelforce Worldwide and Royal Mail Tariff Changes ....... CL PF 04

Royal Mail Bs
5S. (a) Tariff Changes oo. ceeccseessecssseeceeecnseesnseessnecenee

(b) Millennium Products......

DVLA
6. (a) Rates of Motor Vehicle Licence Duty ..........ccccsesen CL VL 04 02
(b) Photocard Driving Licence Applications - Trial............ CL VL 04 03

9
Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

NFSP00000471

A/10 (B) FORINFORMATION
Commercial

«PC CM 02

1, (a) Market Research ..

(b) Advertising... cece ccseneeeeiessseseesseeeeerseressseeessense PC CM 03

Sub-Postmasters Pay

2. Withdrawal of the Ideas Scheme .........c.cccccccsessesseseeseeseeee PC SP

Euro Programme

3. — Preparation for EMU ........cc.cccccccccessesseecieseseesesseeeeesseeneenecnens PCEU 01

POCL CLIENTS

National Lottery

4. New National Lottery On-line Game wo... cece rereeees CLLO 01

Network
5. (a) Centralisation of Vouchers ........c.cecesceseeesnesenseesens PC NW 08 01
(b) New Variant £20 Banknote .........cccccccceeseeseesseeseeeseees PC NW 0903 *

(c) Integration of Helpline (Market Research)...........000 PC NW 10

om

Benefits Agenc

6. Benefits Distribution Team Update... cceseneeeeneneeees CLBAO1

Foreign Exchange
7. Foreign Exchange Update............ccccccesesssesseseeesneeeseeseeees CL FX 02

Royal Mail
8. (a) New Salesforce Posts ..........cccccccssesciesseseesessenseesseaneesse CLRM *

(b) Briefing Meeting .. CLRM 01

10

Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda
A/IL

A/12

A/I3

A/14

A/15

A/16

REPORT ON CENTRAL APPEALS

GENERAL SECRETARY'S REPORT

NFSP TRADING LIMITED

EXECUTIVE OFFICER'S REPORTS

MATTERS RECEIVED TOO LATE FOR INCLUSION ON AGENDA

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

VW
Revised 18.6.1999
* indicates alteration or addition to previously circulated Agenda

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471
REPORT OF A MEETING OF THE

NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
held on 21st, 22nd and 23rd JUNE 1999
at the ABBEY HOTEL, MALVERN

Present: Mrs J Kendall National President and Chairman
Mr | Abernethy Mrs P M Jenkins
Mr J E M Burford Mrs P Jervis
Mr A M Burrows Mr C Jones
Mr AR Butlin Miss C A Lindon
Mr M Challinor Mr D F Marshall
Mr M Darvill Mr H Morgan-Jones
Mr R Edmondson Mr J Peberdy
Mr B Ingham Mr J Willshaw
Mr J Jannetta

Apologies: | Mr N Bradbrook

Mr J Walsh

In attendance:Mr C Baker
Mr K Davis
Mr P Heasman

(Expected Tues 22nd)

General Secretary
Assistant General Secretary
Assistant General Secretary

When opening the meeting and greeting all those present THE CHAIRMAN
extended a personal welcome to Mr Burrows for his final Executive Council
meeting, expressing her wish that he enjoys this meeting as much as he did
his first meeting many years ago.

THE CHAIRMAN also advised the meeting that MR PEBERDY and the
GENERAL SECRETARY would be absent from a good proportion of
Tuesday's meeting to attend a Government Working Group for Horizon in
London. It was hoped there would be sufficient time on their return for all
present to receive a report on that day.

In view of this unaccustomed departure from procedure there may be one or
two adjustments to the order in which the Agenda is taken in particular
reference to items under A3.

Minutes from the Executive Council Meeting held on 21st, 22nd and 23rd
March were only available from Item A4 onwards, due to the abrupt departure
of the staff member who recorded the minutes of the A1, A2 and A3 parts of
the meeting.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 1

NFSP00000471

THE NATIONAL PRESIDENT informed everyone present that she intended
the meeting to have structured debate. Executive Officers were requested to
clearly indicate their desire to speak and to wait to be requested to do so.

Ali. REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS

Executive Council Meeting held on 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th March 1999.
Special Executive Council Meeting held on 16th May 1999.

Post Conference Meeting held on 19th May 1999.

Special Executive Council Meeting held on 11th June 1999.

These reports, with the exception of the Special Executive Council Meeting
held on the 16th May, were approved and signed as circulated. Due to the
unforeseen clerical difficulties which had arisen at Federation headquarters,
no action points or resolutions were captured from the Executive Council
Meeting held in March.

A/2. MATTERS ARISING FROM THE REPORTS

There were no matters arising from the approved and signed reports.
However, MR BURROWS pointed out that his announcement during the pre-
Conference Executive Council meeting on the 16th May, of his intention to
resign his position on the Executive Council after the June Meeting, had been
omitted completely from the report. MR BURROWS expressed his belief that
the minutes/reports of the Executive Council Meetings represented the
history of the Federation and, in view of his own history with the Federation, it
was difficult to understand how this statement could have been omitted. MR
MR PEBERDY concurred with MR BURROWS view and it was generally
agreed that the notes of that meeting would be rewritten to include MR
BURROWS’ announcement and recirculated.

In the light of the lack of action points and resolutions under A/3 from the
March Executive Council Meeting, the NATIONAL PRESIDENT encouraged
delegates to speak up if they recalled any action which had been proposed,
seconded and approved so the actions could be captured.

AI3. REPORTS OF MEETINGS OF THE NEGOTIATING
COMMITTEE.

Giving his first full report as Chairman of the Negotiating Committee MR
PEBERDY referred to the minutes of the Negotiating Committee Meetings of
the 25th/26th February 1999 and 27th April 1999 which had been circulated.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 2

NFSP00000471
MR PEBERDY also referred to the difficult time experienced by headquarters
at Shoreham with the arrival and training of new staff and the advent of the
Horizon situation. He assured those present of his confidence that by the
October Executive Council Meeting, the worst of the difficulties would be
over,

1. POST OFFICE GROUP.

1(a) Shaping up for Competitive Success. PO BD 03,

The GENERAL SECRETARY reported that he had attended a meeting of the
full Post Office Board and, although fairly brief, he was now able to see the
way in which this initiative was evolving - right or wrong. The various sectors
of POCL will be organised into business units. A black and white map had
been circulated showing the new areas. There will be a considerable
reorganisation of staff and a number of new appointments. Cash handling
and distribution for the new organisation is scheduled to “go live” on 27th
September, and Business and Consumer Markets and Stamps and
Collectibles on 19th July. The first phase for Royal Mail Service is due to
commence 28th June, the second phase in late September/early October and
the 3rd and final phase should proceed in April 2000.

MR EDMONDSON expressed concern about the amount of money the
reorganisation was costing and referred to the fact that Subpostmasters were
having to absorb the changes but were not receiving any financial assistance.
MR PEBERDY responded that we do not have a direct impact on what POCL
pay their staff, but all the peripheral information, including a reputed £46m
saving, will give us good ammunition when stating the case for improving
subpostmasters’ revenue.

1(b) Top Management Programme. PO BD.

A report had been circulated and no further action was required. It was
agreed unanimously that this item should be discharged from the Agenda.

2. GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS. PO PZ.

The Post Office Inquiry - Trade and Industry Committee.

There was no correspondence or discussion on this item.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 3

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471
. |
, an

3. POST OFFICE COUNTERS

3(a) Post Office Counters Board PO PC 02.

There was no new correspondence on this subject. Referring back to the
SCS initiative, MR PEBERDY advised that the Federation was waiting to see
who was appointed to the POCL Board, who the new regional directors and
territorial managers were and who would be appointed as the Horizon
Director.

3(b) Organisation and Development PO PC 03.

A sizeable amount of correspondence had been circulated, including a black

and white map showing the three new HORN areas and new geographical
boundaries for POCL. Coloured maps would be made available shortly, C
showing the territories more clearly. A considerable amount of discussion

ensued regarding the size of the areas, the new boundaries and the
administrative difficulties which are likely to be encountered with such a

tadical change. These territories will be established in the next few months

and the Federation must consider how we will co-ordinate representation

over the next 18 months and how it will fit into POCL’s future plans for the

network,

Examination of the maps provoked severe concerns from the meeting

regarding the viability of the areas depicted. Some of the areas very close to

London and within the M25 appear to fall into the territory with Bristol as the
Headquarters and other amendments to regional boundaries appeared totally
impractical. It was generally agreed that some changes to the boundaries

were essential if the project was to work. Subpostmasters need ‘local’

people, who understand their area and its specific characteristics, to deal with

their day to day problems and will have no confidence in people who are ¢
based far away from their community and are unfamiliar with their specific
difficulties.

The GENERAL SECRETARY advised the meeting that at the present time
there is not enough knowledge available to us. Although we have to consider
the future on behalf of our members, we must have more details - accurate
confirmed information before we can formulate a plan of action. This will not
be permitted to slip down the leg side, and when more information is
available it will be brought to the Executive Council for discussion. What we
must ensure is that the three Territorial Managers run their territories on the
same lines and the RNMs within each territory are applying the same
parameters.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING ~ JUNE 1999 pace 4

NFSP00000471

4. OFFSHORE ISLANDS.

4(a) Guernsey Ol GY.
Copy of a letter from Guernsey Post Office, dated 11th June was circulated DECISION

immediately prior to the meeting. The letter confirmed their agreement fo an
increase of 2.1% to the unit scale, plus 1% based on the Guernsey RPI to
March 1999. At their meeting the previous day the Negotiating Committee
had considered the proposal and recommend acceptance. The offer was
accepted.

4(b) Isle of Man. Ol IM.

Although there was no correspondence under this item, there was an
unresolved action concerning the outstanding pa’ issues which
had not been dealt with in Mr Davis’ absenc MR DAVIS
agreed to pick up and deal with this in the next few moi

4(c) Jersey. Ol JY.
No correspondence. The position here is the same as with the Isle of Man.

The outstanding pay and contract issue will be addressed in the coming
months.

POST OFFICE COUNTERS LIMITED

5. COMMERCIAL. PC CM.

No correspondence and no action required.

6. EURO PROGRAMME. PC EU 01.

Correspondence relating to this matter had been circulated under A/10(B) ref:
PC EU 01. This is a subject everyone is very conscious of. It will be closely
monitored and the Executive Council kept informed.

7. HUMAN RESOURCES.

7(a) HRSAPS. PC HR 06.

The Federation's requirements have been incorporated into the new product
pay advice which will be extremely helpful in that subpostmasters will be able

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 5

to clearly see what they are being paid for. Commencement of the new
system had been delayed until 28th June. Copies of the new Pay Advice and
accompanying leaflets have been circulated.

It will be possible in future for subpostmasters to have these expense
payments made into a bank account other than the one their remuneration is
paid into.

MR WILLSHAW asked if the payments would appear on the remuneration
payslip for tax and NHI purposes and asked how long payments would take to
materialise into bank accounts as processing was notoriously long. MR
DAVIS confirmed that there would be a separate advice sheet and these
payments would not count for tax or NHI. MR DAVIS said that BACS
payments were very much quicker than the former method of payment, but
now that the system has been established HRSAPS must be told that long
delays in payment are not acceptable and a shorter period for payment of
claims must be agreed. The Service Level Agreement for processing times
for HRSAPS must not be confused with the time required by BACS. It had
not been possible to address the processing time until they were ready to go
ahead.

MR PEBERDY confirmed that the collection of Federation subscriptions had
been delayed. MR EDMONDSON said he had been told by Mr Tom Coleman
that it is most likely to be August.

MR DARVILL expressed disappointment that collection of subpostmasters'
subscriptions could not be achieved unti! August, but POCL had been able to
manage it for their own staff.

7(b) Transactional Knowledge Review. PC HR 04.

MR PEBERDY advised that the Midlands’ trial of the Transactional
Knowledge Review is about to be rolled out region by region. MR
MARSHALL asked if this was another POCL ploy to avoid paying for training.
For those people who were unable to attend the TK. evenings laid on by
POCL there was an opportunity to receive training in their own premises from
RNMs. Several had attended TK. evenings and were disgusted with the
quality and content. They did not cover anything in detail nor anything which
had not already been covered in basic training or could be looked up in the
Operations Manual. In general, their efforts to attend were considered a
complete waste of time and a waste of POCL’s money. The in-house training
was said to be equally ineffective and time consuming. MRS JERVIS
confirmed she would write a letter to Mr Davis, outlining her personal
experience, so that he could follow this through with POCL.

Several delegates pointed out that subpostmasters were expected to attend
the transaction awareness meetings every month. RNMs, unqualified in
training techniques, are being used to give the training, which is unproductive

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 6

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

and unsatisfactory. Subpostmasters are being intimidated into attending the
meetings in their own time but are deriving no benefit from them. Current
training is inadequate and costs the subpostmaster time and/or money. What
is needed is a more informed training programme

It was believed that enforced attendances for training were being written into
Letters of Appointment so that new subpostmasters will not be in a position to
excuse themselves in the future. MR PEBERDY requested MR INGRAM to
obtain a copy of such a letter of appointment if he could, as nothing could be
challenged without evidence.

Delegates pointed out that what they needed most from the training meetings
was sales information, opportunities to learn about the products such as the
Insurance programme. POCL were considered to be generally selective in
which offices did what. On one occasion a 300 mile trip was made to train a
Subpostmaster and his staff and then no publicity or posters were available to
publicise the existence of the new service.

MR PEBERDY said that a meeting with POCL should be arranged in order to i
send a strong signal of dissatisfaction to make sure these problems are

addressed properly and mutual agreement reached about method and

content of training.

Item 3 of the Contract was referred to by MR INGHAM where it says “to
attend subpostmaster training services as required”.

8. MAILWORK. PC MP 04.

No correspondence. Very favourable comments on the Mailwork Pay Review
had been received. Not one complaint had been received. A focus group, to
explore the requirement for van supervision at Mailwork sub-offices has been
formed between Royal Mail’s POCL Account Managers, POCL’s Royal Mail
Account Managers, members of the Network Directorate and two members of
the Mailwork Sub-committee.

MR PEBERDY confirmed that there will be a secure payment for vans. MR
WILLSHAW had recently attended a meeting where he was given a report.
This report will be studied as a group and progressed from there.

9. NETWORK.

9(a) Network Forums = - PC NW 01.

MR PEBERDY pointed out to the meeting that Network Forums had become
a catchall for many discussions with Counters Business and a some items
had become slightly cross-referenced. He assured the meeting that he was
currently working to clarify the various actions necessary, return them to their

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 7
respective headings, and pursue any outstanding issues with the Counters
Business.

MR CYRIL JONES stated that he had been advised by telephone that the
Daily Mail had indicated that the Treasury were at odds with points in the
White Paper. which is about to be produced. It is apparently hinted that they
advocate the return of EFL. MR PEBERDY advised that this item would be
discussed under Item (c).

Item 4 (ISIS Installation and Funding) in previously circulated Outputs from a
Network Forum meeting held on the 12th March was referred to by MR
EDMONDSON. A letter had been directed to the GENERAL SECRETARY
requesting that the Federation make a case for ISIS to be held in abeyance
until an agreement had been finally signed. It was agreed that this item
would be dealt with under Item 10, Security.

9(b) Consultation on Network Issues. PC NW 02.

MR PEBERDY informed the meeting that written evidence had been
submitted to the Select Committee Trade & Industry and verbal evidence was
given on Monday 14th June. The written evidence was circulated as a
Branch Secretaries’ Circular, BSC12 and the report of the verbal evidence
was circulated on the delegates’ arrival at the hotel MR PEBERDY
continued by assuring the meeting that the Federation were building on the
decisions made by the Executive Council following the meetings with Mr
Stephen Byers, the Horizon Working Group and the Executive Council
meeting attended by Mr Stuart Sweetman and Mr Dave Miller. He confirmed
that a communication process with Branch Secretaries had now commenced.

The next meeting of the Horizon Working Group was taking place the next
day and he and the GENERAL SECRETARY would be attending. At this
point MR PEBERDY extended apologies for his and the General Secretary's
absence from the Executive Council Meeting during that time.

Q(c) Counter Automation - BA/POCL. PN NW 06 01.

This item was left open and would be resumed on the return of MR
PEBERDY and the GENERAL SECRETARY from the Horizon Working Group
meeting.

Whilst addressing the meeting, MR PEBERDY stated that he had an “in
confidence” document which is restricted, and which cannot be circulated.
The main thing is it clearly states the GENERAL SECRETARY'S view about
terms of reference for the future of the Post Office. Their job now was to
secure success. At the moment it is early days - later we will have an
opportunity to say what we want. There is no information at the moment on
the stage of the contract negotiations between ICL Pathway and BA, but more

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 8

NFSP00000471
would be evident on the 17th July. The NATIONAL PRESIDENT said that the
papers would be debated first, and then any concerns on how we move
forward would be addressed. The NATIONAL PRESIDENT was sure the
GENERAL SECRETARY and CHAIRMAN of the NEGOTIATING
COMMITTEE would welcome the Executive Council members thoughts after
having had two weeks to reflect everything they hear at this meeting on the
matter.

The GENERAL SECRETARY described an excellent radio interview
broadcast on the Jimmy Young show, Radio 2, with himself and the Labour
spokesman Mr Martin O'Neil. The Select Committee meeting he had
attended with MR PEBERDY had gone very well. They appeared to be given
longer to speak than anybody else and he felt they had given a very good
account of themselves. The Select Committee seemed very much in favour
of sub post offices.

The possibility of cash machines in post offices was raised by MRS JERVIS.
The GENERAL SECRETARY confirmed that this aspect was raised with Mr
John Roberts who gave assurances that they were working towards having
cash machines outside post offices. The NATIONAL PRESIDENT also said
that Mr Martin O'Neill. who is on the Select Committee also confirmed they
were looking into this question.

Current counter automation and current roll out came under discussion. The
actual power and scope of the Select Committee were queried by MR
EDMONDSON, who also asked how far we could go.

There was general discussion on the severe difficulties being experienced by
subpostmasters who are already running an automated system. Seven
sheets of comments from the North East had been passed to Mr Dave Miller.
The difficulties and trauma being experienced by some subpostmasters were
giving rise to concerns for their health and emotional well-being. It was felt
by some that a tragedy was not far away if something was not altered soon.
The software was considered to be poor quality and not intended to run such
a huge network. The system is based on ECCO which was originally written
for a network of 700 - not 15,500.

Although there may be improvements to the general system, most members
present wanted to know if the Committee had the power to say that the
current system is obviously not working and instruct ICL and the Post Office
to review or re-start with more “subpostmaster friendly” software.

The GENERAL SECRETARY and MR PEBERDY confirmed that Mr Bruce
McNiven is not accepting that it is satisfactory and there are also reports of
problems with hardware.

MR MARSHALL reported that it took two hours for his printer to come back up
and since then, after printers on different counters had gone down, it has
taken at least two hours for each to become operational again. Re-booting

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 9

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471

the system takes at least 12 minutes and, taking into account all the time
spent on the telephone with the helpline, it takes many hours to balance on
Wednesday afternoon. There have been reports of subpostmasters working
until 10.00 / 10.30pm which is not only stressful, but eroding their free time.

MR JANNETTA said that he and others of his colleagues would have to rely
on those subpostmasters in the North East and South West who currently
have this system in place, to make sure their voices are heard with their
problems and to ensure that all the difficulties encountered are satisfactorily
overcome. The point must be clearly made to the Business that this
automation is not going to do the job, that subpostmasters have learned
enough to know it will not work satisfactorily and that it must not be rolled out
to an excess of fifteen thousand sub post offices until all the problems had
been overcome.

The Richard Jackson automated system was considered by both MR

MARSHALL and MR DARVILL to be an easier to use, preferable, alternative ¢
to the present system. MR DARVILL wanted to know if the lawyers had some “
hold on the Horizon system for some reason, that it could not be changed.

The GENERAL SECRETARY assured the meeting that Mr David Miller had
been informed of the difficulties in no uncertain terms. MR BUTLIN said we
must insist access to ICL Pathway so that we can tell them what we would
like to see. It is not difficult and does not take long to rewrite software. The
problems must be resolved with Pathway and they must sort it out with POCL.
We cannot continue to have experienced subpostmasters/mistresses in
distress on the telephone, struggling until all hours to balance. These
situations must not be permitted to arise. It was pointed out that if the
Lottery offices had to deal with this situation it would not be tolerated.

Responding to a suggestion that balancing could be carried out on Thursday

morning, MR MARSHALL agreed that offices with four or more positions

could probably manage this, but it would not be practical for anoffice with (
only two positions as the cash balancing would take one position out of
commission, for a whole morning or more if there were difficulties in
balancing. Thursday morning is also a particularly busy time.

Added to the above, the NATIONAL PRESIDENT pointed out that printing out
takes approximately 45 minutes and during that time the position cannot be
used for serving customers.

MR EDMONDSON felt that, in general, most of subpostmasters’ difficulties
and complaints about the system were being largely ignored. He believes
that we need someone with “clout” to speak up on subpostmasters’ behalf.
Mr Edmondson stressed that we cannot tell people strongly enough or often
enough of the distressing problems which are being experienced. The
majority of offices do not balance until between 10.30pm and midnight. All
the problems must be sorted out before roll-out.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 10

NFSP00000471

MISS LINDON commented that this seemed to be a typical Post Office
Counters situation and felt that ICL could not be blamed for the problems.
Letters of concern should have been published in last month’s Subpostmaster
but had to be cut. It is also too easy to blame subpostmasters. Miss. Lindon
made a suggestion which she felt would be controversial. Pointing out that it
is now three years since the project was first mooted, which is a very long
time in the technological world, she suggested that a different system be
tried, smaller and less complicated, which would be of greater benefit to the
smaller offices and probably be a good deal cheaper and easier to operate.
POCL seem to be attempting to build an audit system into the project, making
the whole thing far to big, too cumbersome and too complicated.

MR BURROWS commented that roll-out was due to commence in 10 weeks.
If the lessons of the trial had not been properly learned or heeded there
would be mega-problems throughout the network. How quickly can this
situation be resolved?

As no-one appeared to be listening to, or acting upon, the problems being
experienced by subpostmasters, MR INGHAM suggested the Federation take
the bull by the horns and write to whoever is Bruce McNiven’s senior, stating
that we have lost confidence in the system. The NATIONAL PRESIDENT
confirmed that this protest had already been made to David Miller and we
must now wait to see what they come back with.

MR JANNETTA felt that POCL saw the problems as “people” problems ‘not
system inadequacies, believing that people were not operating the equipment
properly rather than the software/hardware being unsatisfactory. He believes
that POCL are convinced there is nothing wrong with the system and
maintain that it is the operators who fall short, and will therefore do little to
overcome the difficulties subpostmasters are experiencing. Mr Jannetta feels
we should insist the software is inadequate and that POCL take another view.

MR DARVILL maintained that any counter system should be simple and easy
to use. He recalled the very old style system worked perfectly well without
any real training being required, but feels the new system is far too complex
with programmes which do not fit requirements.

MR PEBERDY thanked the Council for their information. These were exactly
the problems expressed to Dave Miller at their meeting on the 11th June.
The NATIONAL PRESIDENT had taken 7 pages of faults and other things the
Federation knew to be wrong, including the fact that some faults dated back
to January 1997, since when POCL have not addressed the problems, only
been fire-fighting. Clearly we cannot accept something which keeps people
at work until after 10.00pm at night. .

Referring to the Working Party which is being set up to reorganise
automation as a result of the withdrawal of the Benefits Agency payments,
MR PEBERDY confirmed that the group is empowered to call in whoever they
want to gather information to aid their decision on the way forward. There are

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING ~ JUNE 1999 Pace 11

NFSP00000471
|
* {

three meetings before the end of July and the meeting scheduled for
tomorrow may well be a prime opportunity to advise them in depth about the
shortcomings of the system. Subpostmasters need to be able to work simply
and easily to prevent long queues and delayed balancing. The object of the
Working Group is to examine and solve all the problems and should not just
be a black hole into which information disappears and nothing happens.

|
|
|
|
i

1) Ministers will be told that we must know where we are with this
situation.

2) Matters must be brought up to speed. ICL and POCL are to tell
the Working Group where they think they are, illustrate the problems
and demonstrate the proposed solution.

3) Solicitors have been involved since December 1997 and we
cannot expect a speedy conclusion.

4. A change of direction, or something similar, COULD be ¢
possible. Anything is possible. However, any change will still involve
ICL Pathway.

The Working Group will examine all the issues in detail and problems will be
ironed out. The system will not be rolled out until it is right.

Through the NATIONAL PRESIDENT, MR PEBERDY asked MR MARSHALL
to confirm that some changes to the system have already been written. He
understood that Pathway requested several changes which their software
writers were able to achieve instantly. Mr Marshall confirmed that there had
been minor changes to the software.

The GENERAL SECRETARY was asked by MISS LINDON to confirm that

roll-out would not take piace until the problems had been resolved. She said

her region were being told August. Mr Baker was emphatic that this would

not be permitted to happen and the resolution of problems prior. to roll-out ¢
could be ensured. The Federation had equal standing with the other
participants in the Working Group and our views would therefore receive

equal consideration.

A conversation about ordering goods on the Internet had been recently
overhead by MR ABERNETHY. He asked MR PEBERDY and the GENERAL
SECRETARY to focus the Working Group’s attention on the fact that the
majority of people do not want to talk to machines, preferring to deal with real
people.

Discussion at length took place between members as to whether a public ACTION
campaign should be started. Many felt that at action should begin at once,
while others felt that we may lose the goodwill of Government and the Post
Office if an offensive was launched immediately. A militant attitude may also
jeopardise the Federation’s acceptance as an equal member of the Working

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING ~ JUNE 1999 Pace 12
Party. In general it was felt that no plans could be made until after the issue
of the Government's White Paper in early July and the contract was signed
on the 19th July. Government and POCL proposals for the future would be
clearer, thus giving the Federation a better basis for protecting
subpostmasters’ interests in every detail. {t was generally agreed that
POCL/ICL must be made aware of the full extent of subpostmasters
complaints and problems with the system, and insistence pressed that the
problems are all addressed and solved, even if alterations to the system are
required.

The NATIONAL PRESIDENT asked the meeting if everyone was happy that
the agreed way forward would be decided on the 11th July and that a public
campaign would not, for the moment be pursued.

Concern about the Federation's approach was also expressed by MISS
LINDON who had received a report from the largest branch meeting in
Liverpool for many years. Subpostmasters were very disgruntled and sought
a rigorous campaign immediately. They were really angry and had
considered the possibility of approaching MPs direct. Any such action would
be contained until the issue of the White Paper on 14th July.

MR ABERNETHY suggested that after POCL had signed the contract, and
the White Paper issued, there should be a special Executive Council meeting
to decide what further action was necessary.

A lengthy discussion ensued during which almost every aspect was examined
and various different views expressed. MR PEBERDY said that everyone's
future was at stake and it was refreshing to hear such an open debate.

The GENERAL SECRETARY made a final point that a general decision
should be made now and after the points of detail emerged in the P&D report,
debate based on the reaction out in the field would be appropriate.

In view of Government’s assurance that the Federation would be involved in
every aspect, it was generally agreed after a lengthy discussion that any
action would be reviewed after the contract had been signed and the White
Paper published.

The following is a brief report on the Meeting of the Working Party for Horizon
attended by Mr Peberdy and the General Secretary on Tuesday morning,
22nd June and reported back to the Executive Council later in the day :-

“Mr Peberdy’s first remarks were to say he felt the meeting was
extremely valuable and it had been very worthwhile temporarily
vacating the EC meeting in order to take part. Members of the
Working party comprised, lan McCartney MP, - Minister of State, DTI
and Chairman of the working group, Stuart Sweetman - Managing

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 13

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471

;
|
|
|

. |
|
|

Director, Post Office Counters, Dave Miller - Managing Director, Post
Office Network Unit, Mena Rego - POCL, Derek Hodgson - General
Secretary, CWU, Tony Kearns - CWU, Terry Deegan - General
Secretary, CMA, Tony Harris - CMA, David Sibbick - Director,
Posts, DTI, and Colin Baker - General Secretary and John Peberdy -
Chairman of the Negotiating Committee, for the Federation.

The meeting began with a report on Post Office/ICL and Post
Office/Benefits Agency negotiations. These were followed by a
presentation which enabled Mr Peberdy and Mr Baker input to ask
about any alterations that could be made to the scheme and if they
would be considered under the current study. They were informed that
the answers were a much larger issue. Mr Baker pointed out that the
most important topics are those decisions made by Government and the
changes which will result. The main change was withdrawal of the
Benefits Agency Card which had been scrapped. Despite this, Ian
McCartney, Minister for Trade & Industry was emphatic that re-writing ¢
the roll out programme would not be contemplated and Dave Miller
confirmed that the intention of POCL/ICL was to adhere to the 2001
commitment.. Automation is expected to take place within the
timescale agreed and Mr McCartney was emphatic that he would not
accept slippage. The Post Office delegates were told “you will make it
work”.

The subject of systems faults was raised and the NFSP were given
assurances that there would be software improvements to cure the
present difficulties. The Federation were asked for more precise
numbers of Subpostmasters who were experiencing difficulties as this
information would assist them to provide us with the help we require.

Post Office Counters were committed to a £68m investment when the
project is accepted and signed with a further ongoing annual cost of
approximately £80m. Further investment was expected to be necessary
and this was a huge undertaking for POCL. ¢

Roll would proceed as planned starting 23/25th August, reaching 300
per week by January 2000. There were some very serious issues still to
confront, including training and systems difficulties which must be
ironed out, but there is no question of postponement or delay which
would cost approximately £8m per week. The Government
commitment to the Treasury for this programme to be complete by
2001 must be upheld and credibility maintained.

So far as termination of the automation project was concerned, the Post
Office would not consider this an option, They could only exit the
agreement if there are material issues which render the project totally
impractical. If POCL pull out it will cost £150m and the Benefits
Agency will start ACT anyway. Unless something very very serious

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 14
NFSP00000471

occurs the agreement will be signed, and sealed in July and the process
will duly commence.

The Benefits Agency and POCL are to meet regularly to discuss their
plans for the introduction of ACT and any proposals there may be for
banking facilities through post offices. They will be working closely
together and see this relationship as completely integrated until 2003.
For the benefit of subpostmasters the NFSP hopes they do not meet the
2003 deadline unless a practical and profitable arrangement in our
members’ best interests is in place by that time. (It is also noted that
such a deadline has never been met yet). However, the situation will be
closely monitored. There were no changes to the roll out programme.

Mr Jack Cunningham, Secretary of State, has agreed to the formation
of a ministerial group to examine opportunities for Government
departments to promote other work for post offices, from the present
time leading into the new regime. The group have been made aware in
very firm terms of the likely consequences of taking work out of the
Post Office and of the need to bring more work in, A letter from Mr
McCartney had been sent to ministers outlining the work of the group
and a study of Post Office Network funding required to replace the loss
of benefits revenue after 2003 had been requested. The implications of
the vast reduction in Government usage of the Post Office Network and
of non action to prevent this were emphatically outlined by Mr
McCartney who appeared to be wholeheartedly in favour of preserving
and improving the Post Office system. It was felt by Mr Peberdy and
Mr Baker that he will be a valuable ally in the struggle for replacement
of the lost benefits work with other government usage of post offices.
We hope that he will remain in the job long enough to see the project
through to fruition. However, there is a ministerial commitment that
whomever wishes to continue drawing their benefit at post offices will
be able to do so.

The Federation is currently enjoying quite strong Government support,
and both Mr Peberdy and Mr Baker felt that government were
somewhat worried about the extent of the Federations’ influence and
what we could achieve if we set our minds to it. The Federation
representatives hold equal standing in the Group with the other
participants and our input at meetings is being taken seriously. We are
therefore in a position to extract the best terms possible for our
members.

Grave concerns were expressed by the Federation about how the Post
Office/Benefits Agency will manage benefit payments after the card is
removed from the system. It is believed they will revert to benefit
books, cashable at post offices, until 2003. By then a revised system
for payment is expected to have been devised and set up for those
people who are not compatible with payment by BACS but require to
draw benefits, It is up to the Federation to rally support and ensure that

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 15

With the agreement of the meeting, Items d and e were taken together as

post offices retain as much of the business as possible. There may be a
possibility of a network bank but, at this early stage, it is impossible to
know what the outcome of discussion and planning will be.

Mr Stuart Sweetman, the Managing Director of Post Office Counters,
expressed concern as to whether the automated system required re-
testing after the removal of the Benefits card facility, because the
system was built around the card function. However, there is no time
for re-testing and the installation will, on his instruction, go ahead and
be made to work.

The Benefits Agency have not yet finalised their plans for ACT. A
paper for ministers will be tabled by the end of July, The timescale for
the paper will be known next week.

It was generally agreed that alternative options will have to be
introduced for the 15% of people who will be “unbankable” and the 2/3
million people who will refuse to consider a bank account. This
business could go out to a national service which could possibly be the
Post Office, and there has been ministerial commitment to this
suggestion.

There is no clear definition as to government’s or Post Office plans for
counteracting the loss of the Benefits package or what measures they
will introduce to enable benefits, paid by ACT, to continue to be
claimed through sub post offices.

There is also no firm knowledge as to the position of the Post Office
and Benefits Agency in 2003 other than by that date benefits will be
paid by ACT. It is expected that the Working Party and various other
committees will work solidly in the meantime to arrive at an
arrangement which is acceptable to all and which causes minimal
financial hardship to all involved in the change”.

Report ends.

they both fall under Logistics.

9(d)& Cash & Stock Resourcing and Distribution.

The Cash and Stock Resourcing and Distribution will be one of the first

Internal Logistics Review
Procedure for Discrepancies in Remittances.

PC NW 09.

business units to become active under “Shaping for Competitive Success’.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999

Past 16

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

|
|
Both MR BUTLIN and MR JANNETTA commented that forged notes were a
problem, although there were a number of detection aids on the market to

assist discovery of forgeries.

Checking time for remittances in plastic banknote envelopes was again
debated. There had been considerable lengthy discussion with the previous

Chairman of the Negotiating Committee and it was agreed that 48 hours was

an impossible timescale. MR JANNETTA recalled that the timescale was

previously 7 days and MR BURROWS agreed, pointing out that a letter dated i
17th November 1998, signed on behalf of lan Gosling was in existence, ;
stating that remittances made up in Cash Centres do not have to be checked |
within 48 hours.

MR PEBERDY undertook to ensure a letter is written to try and clarify these.
Notes go through detection machinery in Cash Centres, although not every

unit has one, and it is not for the Subpostmaster to be doing the work for the

Cash Centres.

9(e) Shortage of £20 notes. PC NW 09 03.

The Negotiating Committee have arranged a meeting with Mr Alan Carman to
deal with outstanding cash related issues, including discrepancies in
remittances and the shortage of £20 notes. A report of the meeting will be
circulated in due course.

10. SECURITY.
10(a) POCL/NFSP Meetings. PC NW 1101,

The Executive Council had already been circulated with the minutes of the
Security meeting on 15th April 1999. Relevant points of security were |
captured and a number of Conference Motions were addressed. MR |
PEBERDY undertook to respond to any questions which arose from those
minutes.

10(b) Regional Security Forums. PC NW 1101

The discussion on the Regional Security Forums formed part of the minutes
of the Security meeting on the 15th April and MR PEBERDY advised
Executive Officers that any contributions/feedback from their regions would
be welcome.

10(c) Bravery Awards. PC NW 11 01
The latest position of Post Office Counters was outlined in a letter from Kay

Hartigan dated 25th May 1999. MR PEBERDY stated that while this was
POCL'’s view, it was not ours. Nationally we are aware that a small number of

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 17

Executive Officers are invited to Bravery Award sessions, but there should be
more invitations to representatives of the Federation. We will be ensuring
that this continues in our discussions with the National Security team.

10(d) Equipment. PC NW 11 02

Security Capitalisation and Screen 2000.

MR BUTLIN asked if the option to purchase Screen 2000 was still open to
Subpostmasters not in ISIS and was is there a payment. MR PEBERDY
responded confirmation from Kay Hartigan of a pay split of 55% paid by the
Subpostmaster and 45% paid for by Post Office Counters was awaited. The
question of availability was a separate issue.

Some delegates considered that ISIS should be continued in the light of
difficulties being experienced with the Horizon project. However, alternative
views as to the wisdom of continuing this type of spend were also expressed
along with some conjecture as to whether an award from the discretionary
fund would be available to eligible Subpostmasters. The GENERAL
SECRETARY had a meeting arranged with Mike Granville and undertook to
raise the relevant questions.

MR DARVILL suggested to the meeting that in some cases Screen 2000 was
being used to upgrade offices, as some of those told they must have Screen
2000 were not security risks. The NATIONAL PRESIDENT was awaiting
information on a company who would supply this equipment at an alternative
price. When this is received she will pass it to the Chairman of the
Negotiating Committee for further consideration.

Although MR INGRAM'’s office is not in a bad crime area and has continued
for 17 years without incident, he is being pestered to spend a lot of money on
security. The GENERAL SECRETARY responded by assuring MR INGRAM
that he would make enquiries as to where the proposed spend of £45m on
subpostmasters security is intended to be utilised.

Access Doors

This subject is covered by the Security meeting minutes of 15th April 1999.
No further discussion.

Anti Intruder Alarms

Attention was drawn by MR BUTLIN to a letter dated 23rd April from Mr Tim
Wheeler, circulated on 5th May. Mr Butlin pointed out that although grants
for new installations are to be increased from £370 to £395, no mention was

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 18

NFSP00000471
made about grants for the replacement of old alarm systems. Are they
available? MR PEBERDY confirmed that if a system was in excess of 10
years old, POCL would look at replacement under the same terms as a new
installation.

Trial of Remote Alarm Signalling

No further discussion from the matters discussed and reported in the Security
meeting minutes of 15th April 1999.

10(e) Trauma Care Programme. PC NW 11 03

A letter from Mr Tim Wheeler had been circulated stating POCL’s position on
statements made to Retail Network Managers by subpostmasters following
incidents at their post offices. MR ERDY advised that POCL had given
assurances that the Regional Se fy and Investigation Manager attending
scenes of attacks will treat each situation with sensitivity. Some discussion
took place as a result of the contents of the letter. The GENERAL
SECRETARY confirmed it was accepted that RNMs were not trained
counsellors, only first aid. They are most likely to be first on the scene and
are trained not to say anything which might inflame a situation. If counselling
was required, trained counsellors would be brought in. The statement in the
letter was exactly what he had set out to achieve and is exactly what was
required. MR BURROWS concurred , pointing out that anything said during a
counselling session cannot be held against the Subpostmaster and a
situation can be challenged later if necessary. He believed the letter could
prove to be one of the most important pieces of paper the Federation has
ever received.

11. PRODUCT RANGE. PC PR.
No correspondence and nothing to report.
12. QUALITY. PC QY 01.

Notes and Actions on a meeting held on 8th April 1999 had been circulated.
There were no questions arising and no discussion

13. SUBPOSTMASTERS’ CONTRACT.

13(a) Standards at Post Offices. PC SC 03.

No discussion.

13(b) Introductory Payment. PC SC 04

No Discussion.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 19

NFSP00000471

2D
13(c) Loss of Office (Compensation Agreement). PC SC 12.

MR BUTLIN referred to the Federation’s meeting with Mr Stuart Sweetman
and asked what his stance was. MR PEBERDY advised that Mr Sweetman
wished to discuss with us the projected size and shape of the Network and at
that time we will want to review compensation Some things may not be
relevant and there may be other matters, around the corner, for which we
tequire more money.

13(d) Paypoint. PC SC 2101.

The meeting heard from MR PEBERDY that Paypoint continued to be a threat
within the bill payment market. Their stated objective of 7,400 agencies was
claimed to be achieved. The Federation will continue to monitor their
activities. Some of their statements are unsubstantiated and there are
continuing reports that a number of their agents are unhappy with their
current treatment. It is hoped that Post Office Counters will regain some of
their lost work and some progress has been made with Scottish Power. The
Executive Council will be updated regularly on developments.

MR JANNETTA said that any progress made with Scottish Power would be
most welcome in Scotland. MR ABERNETHY was disturbed to report that
Cabletel make no charge for payments through Paypoint. It was reported by
MR EDMONDSON that Paypoint was growing rapidly and one office in the
Newcastle area was taking in the region of £11,000 per week. MR
BURROWS agreed that in the North Thames and East Anglia region there
appeared to be a migration towards Paypoint. POCL’s “hard luck chaps”
attitude towards this drain away from post offices seems to be very disturbing
and they seem reluctant to take action to prevent this type of business going
over to Paypoint. Cabletel and East Coast Cables are, allegedly, about to be
taken over by NTL and, if this is the case, subpostmasters will have no cable
transactions at all. Mr Burrows requested that enquiries be made as to why
existing contracts are not honoured following a take-over. NTL are the
biggest in the country and Post Office management seems blasé about the
loss of this business.

MRS JERVIS said that 47% of people using Paypoint actually made a
purchase in the private shop. Mrs Jervis also pointed out that little or no
publicity had been given to the facility to make payments to Powergen at the
post office and customers would not know they could make these
transactions. Mrs Jervis requested some advertisements and posters to
advertise transactions which can be made through post offices. She felt that
Paypoint was taking more and more of the subpostmasters’ salaries and the
matter should be taken up with Post Office Counters to take some action.

It was pointed out by MR JANNETTA that Manweb swipe cards work through
Post Office machines, but most subpostmasters are being told they should
not be doing this business, only the ones in the trial. MR MORGAN-JONES
advised that the Post Office was ahead of the game here. There are only a

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING ~ JUNE 1999 Pace 20

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

few offices involved in the trial but all the machines in the Manweb area were
subject to the programme.

A great deal of discussion took place regarding the effects of Paypoint and
the need for replacement work. MR PEBERDY said that much more
information was required regarding these payments and that he would speak
to Dave Miller the next day following their meeting.. Mr Miller has stated that
he can achieve certain things for the Network and we will be pressing him to
prove what he can actually do to improve the situation.

13(e) Counter Losses and Gains Policy. PC SC 27.

MR PEBERDY continued his report by confirming that the Negotiating
Committee is continuing to work with the Network Directorate to fine tune |
parts of the document that was released into the Network prior to the i
agreement last November. The various points raised at the Executive |
Council meeting in March 1999 have been put to the Business and their
formal response is awaited.

13(f) NIPOC. PC SC 28.

No correspondence and no matters to discuss.

14. SUBPOSTMASTERS’ PAY. i
14(a) Pay Review. PC SP. i

- Identifying Costs of Running an Office.

The draft questionnaire, announced at Conference, has now been agreed
and finalised and will be circulated to Subpostmasters shortly. When
Executive Officers are addressing Branch Meetings they should use every
opportunity to stress the importance of the questionnaire to members and
insist that it is not overlooked or ignored. Completion of the questionnaire
may, in the long run, mean more money for subpostmasters.

14(b) Pay Claim 1998. PC SP/1998.

At this meeting It is usual to formally discharge the Pay Claim for the previous
year. Discharge of this item from the Agenda was recommended and agreed.

14(c) Pay Claim 1999. PC SP/1999
There have been no developments on this front since it was last discussed at

the pre-Conference meeting. Another meeting is scheduled for Sth July. We
are now aware of settlement reached by the CWU for some guards which

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 21

they represent. The recently circulated Newsbrief shows an agreed increase
of 2.3%, which is much less than our ambitions. However this could be
misleading as the 2.3% is added to the bonus for QPA and in real terms
means subpostmasters are getting more. MR BURROWS confirmed that
those with good QPA do get rewards, and MR JANNETTA considered that
this should be promulgated to other regions, and that all should be rewarded
somehow by the Business. MR PEBERDY indicated that it was preferable
now to go back.

14(d) Payment Rates. PC SP 01.

The outputs from the meeting on the 31st March have been circulated. A
reply to a number of the action points had been received from POCL and
circulated under A10(B) PC CM 03.

Bill Payment

No Discussion.

RPP Parcels - Annually Revised Offices.

The Federation has formally confirmed acceptance of the method of
remuneration. A letter was circulated at Malvern, prior to the meeting,
detailing the baseline content to monthly paid subpostmasters.

Revision of Postage Stamp Unit Credit.

The agreed, revised payment for this work has been agreed and advised at
Conference in May. It was agreed that this item should now be discharged
from the Agenda.

14(e) Intermittent Allowances. PC SP 02 03.

This item was recommended for discharge from the Agenda and this action
was agreed.

14(f) New/Changed Products. PC SP 02 08.
This subject will be discussed at a meeting yet to be arranged with Paul

Harris, where Counters will be requested to provide more information on the
bill payment schemes as they transfer from paper to plastic.

14(g) Pay Advice. PC SP 08.

HRSAPS, Section 7(a) reference PC HR 06 now covers this subject. It was
recommended and agreed that this item be discharged from the Agenda.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING ~ JUNE 1999 Pace 22

NFSP00000471

DECISION

DECIS._.N

[Bsn]
NFSP00000471

15. BENEFITS AGENCY.
Pensions. CL BA 03.

- BES ‘Casual’ Agents. i
- All Benefits at One Post Office.

Both the related matters here are no longer relevant with the withdrawal of

the Benefits Payment Card and it was recommended that this item be
discharged from the Agenda. Discharge was agreed.

16. BRITISH GAS. CL BG.

There was no correspondence under this heading and no discussion.

17. BRITISH TELECOM.
17(a) BT Payment Cards. CL BT 04.

This matter is now settled and discharge from the Agenda was recommended ;
and agreed.

17(b) BT Global Calling Cards. CL BT 05.

The issue regarding payment for selling these cards has now been agreed [action] i
and we are awaiting formal payment proposals, Post Office Counters will be |

reminded.

18. ELECTRICITY BOARD. CL EB.

No correspondence and no discussion.

19. FOREIGN EXCHANGE. CL FX.

Although the project is under trial at the moment. assessing the demand, MR
BURROWS stated that there have been increasing difficulties following the
move from Hounslow to Sheffield because of problems with Royal Mail.
Some deliveries are not being made until two or three o'clock in the afternoon
and he asked that pressure be brought to bear in order to make deliveries
earlier in the day. Improvements must be made to the service or business

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 23

NFSP00000471

will be lost. The trial is to be extended to the North West and North East
regions by the end of May 1999. An update on Foreign Exchange has been
circulated under A10(B).

20. GIROBANK.

20.(a) Girobank/NFSP Quality Forum. CL GB 01.

Discharge of this item from the Agenda was recommended and agreed.
20(b) Giro Business Deposits. CL GB 08 07.

This item relates to correspondence circulated earlier this year and is closely ,
associated with matters under item 20(d) Corporate Deposits. Both items {

were discussed together under heading 20.(d).

20(c) Winter Fuel Payments. CL GB 08 12.

Correspondence and a report has already been circulated. The project
should run smoothly for subpostmasters if they are requested to do the

business. The recommendation for discharge from the Agenda was declined.

MR BURROWS pointed out that this item was likely to appear again on the

Agenda for the EC meeting in October and MR EDMONDSON indicated that

the payment Agreement only ran for two years. The matter would therefore

remain on the Agenda.

20.(d) Corporate Deposits. CL GB 08 15. ¢

At the six-monthly review meeting with the General Manager of Girobank, Mr
Richard Banks, the question of corporate deposits was strenuously raised. A
fairly robust defence of the situation was launched by the General Manager
but, after receiving the Federation’s reminder of the wider benefits the
Network offers, he has agreed to reconsider Girobank’s policy on diversion of
corporate deposits from sub post offices to cash centres. It was recognised
that not all the deposits are diverted at the behest of Girobank. Some
diversions are client requested.

Vigorous discussion took place and a number of ideas emerged as to the
reason for these diversions. security being the principle one, despite the fact
that none of the offices involved were thought to be “at risk” or to have had
incidents. However, the loss of the work was not good for the
subpostmasters involved and every effort would be made by the Negotiating
Committee to prevent any more offices losing their cash deposits. MR DAVIS

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 24

NFSP00000471

would pursue a date for a meeting with Ray Lakeland, Head of Retail Network

NWNW Region to discuss the specific problems being experienced in

Liverpool, as there was concern that it could grow into a national problem. In

the meantime the Federation would investigate which offices were affected, |

how much cash was involved and how much income was being lost by those |

offices. |
|
i

MR JANNETTA voiced the question as to what happened to the
subpostmaster when his business falls below survival level due to the
withdrawal of the cash deposits, and would Post Office Counters offer more

compensation for “loss of office” in these circumstances? He requested that |
these issues be referred back to Tom Coleman and Mike Granville.

21. INSURANCE. CLIN.

No correspondence circulated and no further discussion,

22. LOCAL AUTHORITIES. CLLA.

No correspondence circulated and no further discussion.

23. LOTTERIES.

National Lottery. CLLO 01.
LSNs. Correspondence from Mr John Main, Deputy Network Director,

dated 10th December 1998, committed Post Office Counters to pay any
subpostmasters who provided a satellite link and had a concentrator
supporting five or more terminals. Payments would be made by the end of
the financial year and, where appropriate, backdated to 1994. An ACC has
already been issued for this, although no agreement had yet been reached
regarding reimbursement for the electricity used, and MR PEBERDY assured
members that the Negotiating Committee will continue their endeavours in
this direction. In addition, the Negotiating Committee are continuing to
pursue POCL for payments for subpostmasters who have less than five
terminals linked to a concentrator. This matter would not be allowed to drop.

Prize Payments. There was nothing to report on this matter and it was [pcision]
recommended for discharge from the Agenda. However, MR BUTLIN

mentioned that there was still no proper payment arrangement for prize
payments for Thunderball which was due to start shortly. Recommendation
for discharge was declined as the subject would need to be re-instated later
in the year when negotiations restart.

Lottery Sales - Under 16's. MR PEBERDY reminded the Executive [pacision]
Committee that Lottery sales to the under 16’s was the subject of a report to

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 25

Annual Conference. There was nothing further to add at this time and the
item was recommended for discharge from the Agenda. Discharge agreed.

Millennium Dome Entrance Tickets. A payment of 4% of the sale value
has been agreed for the sale of Millennium Dome Entrance Tickets the same
as the National Lottery. It had been confirmed that retailers were being paid
at the same rate as for the sale of lottery tickets. It was recommended that
the item be discharged from the Agenda. Discharge agreed.

24. MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS. CL MC
Pre-Pay Vouchers. The issues surrounding this item appear now to

have settled down with subpostmasters generally appreciating their right to
sell vouchers on the private side of their business as well as over the post
office counter. Correspondence already circulated shows the latest offer
received and confirmation that some payments will be backdated to the date
the product went on sale, with the exception of One-2-One £20 vouchers
which was only backdated to June 1999 remuneration payments. MR
PEBERDY advised the Council that the Negotiating Committee would like to
review this again with a view to obtaining retrospection on the One-2-One
vouchers to the date they first went on sale.

25. NATIONAL SAVINGS.

25(a) NFSP/DNS Trade Union Meeting. CL NS 01.

No correspondence and no discussion.
25(b) Marketing. CL NS 03.
No correspondence and no discussion.
25(c) ISAs. CL NS 07 08.

MR PEBERDY reported that whilst ISAs were perceived as another avenue of
business for subpostmasters it was disappointing that National Savings have
not yet been able to produce paying in books for use across the counters. It
is not acceptable to have customers having to complete transcash slips to
make deposits. This matter would continue to be pursued.

MR BUTLIN said that one of his staff bought ISAs and is still waiting to
receive a letter about paying in at post offices. Also, a customer of his asked
about purchasing Premium Bonds by credit card which had also been
advertised but no literature is available to subpostmasters. DNS seem to say

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING ~ JUNE 1999 Pace 26

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

one thing and do something quite different. Mr Butlin enquired if the planned
meeting with them had been arranged to see what they have to say.

MR PEBERDY and the GENERAL SECRETARY both agreed that words had ACTION
not been backed by actions here and the promised meeting would be
arranged.

A leaflet had been faxed to Shoreham headquarters by MR INGHAM which
showed how to top up premium bonds. It contained an application form which
made no mention of bonds being available at post offices. |

26. PERSONAL BANKING. CL PB.
Personal Banking Services.

As there is now a requirement to accept loose cheques for deposit to
personal accounts, the Negotiating Committee is endeavouring to seek an

improved payment for that element of work and which required a physical
examination of these cheque deposit envelopes.

27. PAYMENT COLLECTION SERVICES. CLPC.

No circulations and no discussion.

28. PARCELFORCE,.

28(a) Alternative Delivery Trial. CL PF 05 01,

From the circulated correspondence dated 7th June, it can be seen that a
higher payment is being sought for parcels left at sub post offices for
collection as part of the alternative delivery trial. A response from Post Office
Counters is still awaited. MR DARVILL expressed his view that the current
payment is totally insufficient for the amount of work involved.

Executive Officers had received many complaints from subpostmasters
involved in this trial. These comprised, not enough space for storage, parcels
hanging around for up to three weeks, and postmen not trying hard enough to
deliver - just putting a note through the door at the first opportunity.

Although it was understood that the trial only applied to Home Shopping,
Parcelforce appeared to be dropping every parcel they were unable to deliver
in to participating sub post offices - and to some who are not in the trial. One
parcel was in excess of 30kgs and neither the pregnant post office assistant

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 27

nor the customer was able to lift it. In addition, there were a lot of forms to
complete and often the subpostmaster was required to do this for the
customer. 17.9p per transaction was not considered to be enough.

It was obvious that in many cases the system was being abused and a
number of the complaints had already been taken up with Kay Hartigan of
POCL, who was anxious to get the abuse stopped. it was suggested that
Executive Officers give as much feed-back to headquarters as possible so
that complaints can be passed on to Post Office Counters.

28(b) RPP Parcels. CL PF 02.

This item was dealt with under item 14(d) and it was agreed to discharge this
item from the Agenda.

29. ROYAL MAIL.

29(a) New Sales Posts for Royal Mail. CL RM.

The Federation's views have been expressed on this issue and requires no
further involvement. It was agreed that this item should be discharged from
the Agenda.

29(b) Format Based Pricing. CL RM 04.

When moving Clause 6 at Annual Conference in May, delegates were made
aware that this project had been deferred for 12 months. The Negotiating
Committee will continue to monitor the position to ensure subpostmasters'
best interests are safeguarded.

The availability of electronic scales was raised by MR MARSHALL who
advised that some subpostmasters were experiencing difficulty in obtaining
electronic scales, particularly since the deferment of the project. MR
PEBERDY said he believed the contract with Avery Scales had been
withdrawn and the matter was now “out to tender’ with other suppliers. He
promised that this issue would be re-addressed and the current position
established.

29(c) Priority Services. CL RM 05 02.

It was recommended that this item be discharged from the Agenda. MR
BURROWS said he believed the Negotiating Committee were still pursuing
an outstanding claim for Recorded Delivery items, to which MR
EDMONDSON agreed. MR PEBERDY responded that with the advent of
Product Payments as part of pay he believed that Priority Services should not
now be a separate issue. After some discussion, it was agreed to discharge
this item from the Agenda.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 28

NFSP00000471

Acri ~
29(d) Do Not Redirect. CL RM 05 07.

As this item is more relevant to the Mailwork Forum it was recommended and
agreed to discharge this item from the Agenda.

At this juncture, MR BUTLIN brought up the issue of “Post Haste” which
appeared to have gone extremely. quiet and which he requested be brought
forward to the front burner. i Re-had-heard about an;
insurance salesman in otal bates was sé Selling these stamps from the back of |
his car and was so successful he was given his own Account Manager. He!
had access to all Royal Mail products, has a sizeable credit and earns
£60,000 p.a. from a turnover of £1.3m. A lot of Exeter subpostmasters had
suffered as a result. Similar stories of these sales to the detriment of
subpostmasters were reported from other parts of the country. MR
JANNETTA requested clarification of Poste Haste and was advised it was a
form of direct marketing of f stamps where the vendors received substantial
discounts.
caleulated.

The GENERAL SECRETARY assured the meeting that the matter was still a
“front burner”. A meeting which had been previously arranged had not taken

place as planned but the lawyers were busy looking into European Contract
Law to see what, if anything, can be done to prevent this practice.

30.  UTILITIES.. CL UT.

No correspondence and no discussion

31. DVLA. CL VL 04 02

Motor Vehicle Licences.
Proposed Changes / Graduated Vehicle Excise Licence.

Payment has been accepted and the necessary instructions have been
issued to regions to enable subpostmasters to be paid for this work. MR
BUTLIN commented that this was just another case of Post Office Counters
getting it wrong. Confusion was created about what to pay on V10 and the
helplines were not readily available. They did not issue the answers to
questions until late the following Thursday when the staff had all gone. He
believed the QPA error rate would be about 150% and felt that a letter should
be written to POCL to point out the shortcomings. MR BUTLIN proposed that
the Executive Council write to POCL complaining about the lack of

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING - JUNE 1999 Pace 29

NFSP00000471

GRO.

NFSP00000471

been requested from a number of organisations who possibly used such | i
organisations, and although replies were still awaited it appeared that charges | |
would be in the region of £50/60 for each person recruited. However, this !
approach did appear to be relatively successful. The gamble the Federation

would take would be whether the member would remain with the Federation

long enough to recoup the outlay.

MR JANNETTA reported that Dundee Branch took a decision to employ an ex

office employee who had been very successful in recruiting non members. 4
He was paid £25 per member plus expenses, which usually worked out to a :
cost of around £40 per member. This was paid from branch funds. He

considered that this should be looked at nationally, endorsed and

encouraged.

MR ABERNETHY congratulated the Publicity and Development Committee
on the idea but wondered whether it would work in practice. He believed that
the best people to recruit, were subpostmasters themselves because their
line of business was very different from others. This was the overall opinion,
but it was equally acknowledged that this had been tried in various ways, and { )
had not worked. \

MR BUTLIN did not consider that the Publicity and Development Committee
needed authority to investigate such an idea, but that they should have made
enquiries and presented a package to The Executive Council for
consideration. He thought that the best recruiters were subpostmasters and
referred to the training guide for recruiters that had been discussed
previously, but had not been produced. Subpostmasters were the only
professionals needed for recruitment.

MR CHALLINOR disagreed that nothing had progressed in this area. The i
Membership Officers had developed a training pattern for people in the

regions. They had called meetings with Branch Secretaries, solely to train

them in recruitment procedures. This was done with the use of slides and

had gone down well. However, this year had been less successful and the

matter was on the Regional Council agenda for their forthcoming. meeting. { )
The next step, he felt, was for the Publicity and Development Committee to

produce a paper on their findings conceming outside agencies, for this to be

analysed and responded to by the Executive Council, giving the Publicity and

Development Committee the opportunity to start making progress before

October. They should be trusted to do it.

MR BURROWS applauded the Publicity and Development Committee for the
idea but he saw this as an extension of the offices payment scheme for
Branch Secretaries. It was outhousing the Federation's responsibilities and to
do this in totality would mean that the Federation would not be in control of its
own destiny. He cautioned that the length of time needed to investigate this
matter could mean that in 18/24 months time nothing further will have been
done and with the possibility of the launch of an ACT campaign it was
imperative that the Federation increased membership and had the facilities to
do the job.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 32
NFSP00000471

MR CHALLINOR proposed that:

The Publicity and Development Committee prepare a paper for all Executive
Council Members to consider using an outside agency to recruit new
members, before the October Executive Council meeting.

* This was seconded and CARRIED.

MR MARSHALL thanked The Executive Council for their support and
undertook to move rapidly. He agreed that there was a necessity to sharpen
communications and although the request of a colour printer/photocopier had i
previously been turned down, this would be requested again.

MR MARSHALL invited questions on his report. \

MR MORGAN-JONES referred to items outstanding from the previous |
Publicity and Development Committee (his last as Chairman of that
committee), and asked if the Committee had found the opportunity to discuss
them:

1. What progress had been made since his meeting with Mr Heasman,
where bullet point headings had been made in relation of Training of
Branch Secretaries?

2. What progress had been made on posters?

3. What was the result of the investigation concerning advertising on the
front cover of The SubPostmaster?

4. Who would be responsible for Conference arrangements in the future?

MR HEASMAN advised that these had all be addressed in the Publicity and
Development Committee meeting held on Sunday 20th June. Each Publicity
and Development Committee member had taken responsibility for a particular
area of work, training, membership, printing etc. There had been limited
opportunity to do this in the last 6/8 weeks due to other work such as the
Doncaster Exhibition, Annual Conference and a special Executive Council
meeting. However MR HEASMAN assured The Executive Council that these
would be progressed and the fruits of that work would be seen in the very
near future.

* The Report of the Publicity and Development Committee meeting held on [DECISION |
19th & 20th April 1999 was MOVED AND ACCEPTED. [pecision]

eeti eld on 20 June

MR MARSHALL continued, moving a verbal report of the Publicity and
Development Committee meeting held the previous day. He reported that the

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 33
NFSP00000471

agenda had been re-arranged in order to give full attention to the future of the
Automation Project. THE COMMITTEE had a full in depth discussion on the
first three main points listed in BSC 12/1999.

1. Customer Focus - “Keep your customers warm”
2. — Tell non members
3. Government awareness

The fourth point - Final Resort was left for discussion at a later meeting.

The Committee had decided to launch the campaign as soon as possible,
with a gentle approach. Mr Darvill had presented to the Committee a card
that he used in his office for distribution to his customers and this they
considered to be an ideal way to commence the campaign. The card was a
useful size for keeping in a purse or wallet, or to be kept by the telephone.
MR MARSHALL described the proposed layout of the card. The front would
give information of what services were available at local post offices and the
reverse would feature telephone numbers that would be useful to
subpostmasters. It was intended that these cards would be printed on an A4 ¢
sheet, with 14 perforated cards on each. Every subpostmaster, including non
members, would be provided with 10 sheets as an insertion in the August
edition of the Journal. Text would appear within the margin of the sheet,
giving details of how to re-order.

MR MARSHALL advised that during the General Secretary's attendance at [action |
their meeting THE COMMITTEE asked if he could approach POCL to request
they print the cards at their own expense, which he agreed to do.

MR MARSHALL also called upon the assistance of the Editor to run a

campaign in the Journal for a slogan competition and to advise
subpostmasters how to obtain further supplies of the cards. THE EDITOR

was happy to do this and suggested a re-jig of “Use Us or Lose Us”.

MR MARSHALL suggested that there was not time to consider an appropriate

slogan during the course of the meeting, but urged The Executive Council to

give it some thought, the key message being that the sub post office was ¢
there for the community, and would continue to be.

In order to re-establish the coverage the Federation had previously had in
women’s’ magazines MR MARSHALL advised that it was intended to invite
Tim Cobb to the next Publicity and Development Committee meeting to
discuss the issue. This meeting was scheduled for 26/27 July 1999 and it
was also intended to invite the Editor to discuss publicity in an attempt to
encourage subpostmasters to become involved with local events in their
communities, and to maintain a presence.

THE COMMITTEE also believed that subpostmasters should be encouraged
to involve their local MPs. However, it was important that this be done in a
proper manner and although THE COMMITTEE had discussed the possibility
of MPs being invited to branch meetings, it was felt that this may be used as
an opportunity to criticise, and would therefore not convey the impression that

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 34
the Federation was trying to put across. It was suggested that a Branch
Secretary, together with a branch committee member, and local Executive
Officer should meet with one or two local MPs to discuss the situation and
invite them to visit two or three sub offices. This would give them an insight
into the work of a subpostmaster and the services they offer.

It was agreed that the involvement of MPs was vital. MR BUTLIN saw the
merits of the branch visits but was concerned about what subpostmasters
might say to MPs. He called for a guide to be produced, in order that it was
clear what the Federation’s message was.

MR MARSHALL reported that upon publication of the forthcoming White
Paper, THE COMMITTEE had instructed Mr Heasman to prepare a guide on
the best way forward in approaching local MPs and the order of discussion.

MR MARSHALL called upon MR EDMONDSON, National Treasurer, to
explain a paper which had been handed to the Executive Council concerning
the recruitment of MSPOs.

MR EDMONDSON advised that from the information he had received, and
that obtained at Annual Conference, it was apparent that MSPOs were
struggling and wanted the Federation to obtain negotiating rights for them.
He referred to the circulated letter, with a questionnaire attached, addressed
to MSPOs seeking their views on MSPO representation with POCL. Also
enclosed with this letter would be a recruitment form as he believed that
POCL would give negotiating rights if sufficient MSPOs became members of
the Federation. The letter would be on Federation letterhead, but would be
addressed from one MSPO to another. MR EDMONDSON advised that
although this had been instigated by subpostmasters from Modified Sub Post
Offices, they did not have the resources to pay for it and had therefore
approached him in has role of NATIONAL TREASURER, in the hope that the
Federation could assist with the financing of the operation. It was estimated
that the cost to be around £470.

« MR MORGAN-JONES applauded the initiative and proposed that the
spend be authorised. This was seconded and AGREED.

MR MARSHALL advised that Honorary and Retired Members would be
approached with a view to obtaining their services to assist in recruiting new
members. Additionally the Committee would be looking at the possibility of
introducing new membership categories.

2. FEDERATION MEMBERSHIP

2(a) ANNUAL CONFERENCE FM AC
Annual Conference 1999 FM AC 1999

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 35

NFSP00000471

|

Many complaints had been received concerning the Headquarters Hotel
including unclean rooms, bad service, swimming pool closed, untrained staff
at the Cocktail Reception and a shortage of glasses at the Reception.
MR MARSHALL advised that it was intended to write to the hotel detailing
The Executive Council's feelings and requesting a reduction in the bill.

Discussion followed concerning the amount charged for partners attending
Conference. Rates advertised within the reception area at the hotel were far
below those being charged to the Federation, and it was questioned whether
the costs of the suites and the function rooms were incorporated within the
bedroom prices.

MR MARSHALL explained that the partners were charged the difference
between the single occupancy rate and the double. THE NATIONAL
TREASURER advised that because of the poor condition of some of the
rooms, he and the General Secretary had agreed that partners would be
charged £45 rather than £60. Anyone who had already paid £60 on
departure would receive a refund of the difference. If the final bill at The
Royal was substantially reduced, then if was possible that the amount
charged for partners could be reduced in accordance.

MR HEASMAN advised that he had spoken with the owner of the hotel during
Conference and pointed out concerns about the level of cleanliness, and
suggested that she needed cleaning routines. Having received the bill, the
Publicity and Development Committee had already taken the decision at their
meeting on 20th June to challenge certain aspects of the account.

MR BUTLIN’s region had received a quote from The Royal for £40 per night,
but this had been for a late booking, and he was aware that the Federation
was not able to take advantage of such offers, as bookings had to be made
2/3 years in advance. The Federation was also very restricted on their choice
of hotels because of the other facilities required.

Discussion turned to the prices quoted at the Hydro Hotel in Eastboume for
Annual Conference 2000 and MR HEASMAN clarified the situation-regarding
the suggestion that Shoreham had overridden the booking from the Scottish
Region. He advised that prior to a decision being made on the Headquarters
Hotel for 2000 he had a discussion with the Regional Secretary in Scotland
who informed him that as much as they would like to go to the Hydro they
were unable to negotiate the price down to an acceptable figure and had
booked The Wishtower. However, THE CHAIRMAN advised that this was not
the issue for discussion. The issue was whether or not inflated priced were
being quoted as a Headquarters Hotel. MR JANNETTA confirmed that there
was no conflict between the Regional Secretary, himself as Regional Officer
or Headquarters, he had merely been relaying the prices quoted, which had
been firm prices, and highlighted the fact that Shoreham were quoted prices
50% higher.

MR HEASMAN advised that the requirements for the headquarters’ hotel
were very different to those of the regions in that the necessity to have

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 36

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

function rooms and suites limited the choice significantly. His preference for
hotels in Scarborough had been the Palm Court and the Crown but neither
had appropriate facilities.

MR CHALLINOR sought clarification as to whether charges were made at a ACTION
Conference rate or as individual delegates. He believed partners should be
charged the bedroom price which should not incorporate other facilities.

MR HEASMAN advised that this needed to be dealt with by the National

Treasurer, Philip Bloor and the tax authorities because the way partners’

charges were calculated had been worked out and negotiated with. the tax

office, and if changes were made this could well have an effect on other
arrangements with the tax authorities. However he believed that this could be

investigated at Shoreham.

THE NATIONAL TREASURER confirmed that there were no differences ACTION
between the quotes received for headquarters hotel this year than any other.
Discussion had suggested that it may be cheaper for the Federation to

negotiate the price of bedrooms separately to those for Conference facilities,

in order to avoid being charged a conference rate for the whole package.

Although this had not been a problem in the past, with the exception of the

Eastbourne Conference, he undertook to speak to the Chairman of the

Publicity and Development Committee and Mr Heasman to see if the best

method was being used, and report back.

Annual Conference 2000 - 15, 16 & 17 May FM AC 2000

MR MARSHALL reported that the Committee had considered whether
savings on costs could be made by investigating an alternative style of civic
hospitality. Many delegates felt that two nights of dancing was too much and
the Monday night was not well attended. The Committee was therefore '
looking at the possibility of the Local Authority providing a Civic Banquet free
of charge. Mr Heasman had been requested to investigate and report back. i

The cost of a repeat monitor was also to be investigated. This would be
positioned at the rear of the Conference hall and would enable those seated
on the platform to see the delegates as they spoke at the rostrum.

2. (b) MEMBERSHIP FM MS

Already dealt with.

2. (c) FEDERATION PUBLICATIONS
e Sub! FM PB 01

Mr Heasman had obtained details of costings concerning the bound copies of
the Journal MR MARSHALL advised that 40 copies were produced at a total

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 37

cost of approximately £2,000 and he sought The Executive Councils views on
whether this was something they wished to continue to produce.

It was strongly felt that these bound copies should be produced every year.
They were not only used as a point of reference, but were the very history of
the Federation and it was considered that the cost was very small in relation
to the importance of the volumes.

2(d) FEDERATION PROMOTIONAL & PUBLICITY
Sub Post Office Exhibition FM PP 04
Doncaster _- April 1999

MR MARSHALL reported that the Doncaster Exhibition had been a success,
with a sum of around £8,000 being due to the Federation from Paul Webster
at Pan Presentations. However, Mr Webster was experiencing a cash flow
problem and he still owed money to the Federation from the Wembley
Exhibition, of around £4,268. This, together with the payment due from
Doncaster totalled £12,268. MR MARSHALL therefore suggested that
Philip Bloor be asked to run a credit check on Pan Presentations. In the
meantime Mr Webster was to be invited to the next Publicity and
Development Committee meeting to discuss the situation.

MR MORGAN JONES urged the Publicity and Development Committee to be
very careful in their meeting with Mr Webster. He considered that if they
handled it in the wrong way they could be in danger of losing the Exhibition.

MR BURROWS thought that Mr Webster's financial problems should not
affect his payments to the Federation. If he had been paid by exhibitors for
stands at Wembley, then payment should be passed on to the Federation.
He referred to rumours about Mr Webster being approached by another
organisation which was interested in running a similar exhibition to the
Federation’s. He was concemed: that Mr Webster may be withholding the
money and may then give the sponsorship to another organisation.

MR BUTLIN thanked the Publicity and Development Committee for bringing
the matter to the The Executive Council’s attention. He expressed concern
that if Pan Presentations collapsed, then the Federation would have no right
to the October Exhibition, because it did not belong to the Federation but to
Pan Presentations. MR BUTLIN thought the Publicity and Development
Committee should be allowed to do everything they could assess the situation
and act accordingly.

Discussion followed concerning the possibility of the Federation getting its
income from the Exhibition in a different way, but the event was the property
of Pan Presentations and if the Federation was to stop its sponsorship it was
considered that this would be taken over by another organisation, probably
POCL.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 38

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

MR HEASMAN explained that Mr Webster's’ cash flow problem had been
generated by a number of factors, the main one being an unsuccessful
Racing Exhibition he had organised at York the previous year.
MR HEASMAN confirmed Mr Morgan Jones’ earlier comment that POCL
were one of his creditors, further advising that this year Royal Mail had signed
contracts but not paid anything. As the size of the Exhibition had grown, then
so had the costs and the NEC was much more expensive than venues such
as Telford. Although Mr Webster always tried to get money in advance, but
now bigger names were being attracted such as British Gas and British
Telecom, and the larger companies tended to pay a very small amount in
advance and then request an invoice after the event. MR HEASMAN
reminded The Executive Council that the Exhibition was in fact a PR exercise
and the fact that over the years it had grown to generate an income was a
bonus.

MR MARSHALL referred to the presentations made at the Exhibitions.
Humberstones and Christies, for example gave very professional
preséntations using colour slides and overhead projectors. However, the
Federation was only able to use black and white slides and MR MARSHALL
requested that the Federation’s equipment be updated to incorporate an
overhead projector with colour slides. |

The Executive Council agreed that this issue needed to be addressed and it
was suggested that a colour printer at Shoreham should be considered,
together with the possibility of a lap top computer. MR HEASMAN advised
that this type of equipment was now standard, and without it the Federation
would be deminished by what other organisations were doing. It was time to
take the step into modern technology.

It was envisaged that this equipment could be used at Exhibitions, Annual
Conference, presentations at pay meetings and circulations to Executive
Officers. Only two weeks previously at the Special Executive Council
meeting, circulations in black and white had been unclear and it was
necessary to have these photocopied outside of Shoreham and re-circulated.
Additionally, with the General Secretary and the Chairman of the Negotiating
Committee holding meetings with the DTI and Government, it was important
that the Federation portrayed itself in a professional manner.

e Costs of various types of equipment would be investigated and [DECISION]
presented to the Federation Trustees for consideration.

NEC - 9 - 10 October 1999

MR MARSHALL advised that it was intended for Executive Officers to be
outside the Seminar hall during presentations at the October Exhibition in
order to hand out cards giving information about membership of the
Federation, and inviting want to be subpostmasters to the Federation stand.
It was thought that these could be produced at no cost to the Federation, as

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 39

advertising could be sought from organisations such as Humberstones and
Christies.

MR MARSHALL sought authorisation on the spend for the Federation stand.
The cost at Wembley the previous year, had been around £10,000 but this
had incorporated the recycling of a number of panels from the previous year.
This would not be possible this year as the panels had a limited life, and had
now become tatty. It was anticipated that the income from the Exhibition
would be in the region of £22,000.

e Aspend of up to £15,000 was AGREED.

MR MARSHALL advised that as was normal practice, it was intended that the
stand would be manned by the following:

Publicity and Development Committee
President

Vice President

Editor

Local Executive Officers.

However, opinion was that there were insufficient people on the stand at the
last NEC Exhibition, and MR JANNETTA pointed out that if this criteria was
followed every year, then the Scottish and Northern Ireland Executive Officers
would probably not ever have a chance to attend because the Exhibition
usually didn’t visit their areas. MR BURROWS believed that the Chairman of
the Negotiating Committee should be present as that person's expertise was
important.

e It was decided that any Executive Officer who wanted to attend the
Exhibition should be allowed to do so and it was AGREED that an
Orange Paper would be sent from Shoreham to ascertain who would
be available and on what days.

OTHER MATTERS

Conference Report

e In its present format the binding of the Conference Report was
‘perfect bound’, and MR MARSHALL advised that if this was ‘saddle
stitched’ a saving of around £3,000 could be made on the production
costs. . He therefore sought The Executive Council’s approval to
change 6 the ‘perfect bound’ method. This was AGREED.

Subpostmasters’ Handbo

MR MARSHALL estimated that this would be ready in the next two weeks.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 40

NFSP00000471

MR MORGAN JONES sought an update on progress made on matters
arising from the Publicity and Development Committee meeting in April, when
he had been chairman. MR HEASMAN replied to each of them.

¢ Progress made on the bullet points identified by himself and Mr Heasman
on Training of Branch Secretaries.

No progress had been made as the meeting had been very close to Annual
Conference. However, this would be taken up again upon
MR HEASMAN's return to the office following this meeting.

¢ Progress on Federation posters

Again, this had been delayed in order to concentrate on arrangements for
Annual Conference, but would be progressed upon MR HEASMAN's return
to the office.

¢ Introduction of different membership categories

This was to be addressed by the Publicity and Development Committee at
their next available meeting. MR HEASMAN explained that the previous
Publicity and Development Committee meeting had been immediately prior
to the Doncaster Exhibition. That had been closely followed by Annual
Conference, a Special Executive Council meeting and then the present
Executive Council meeting. Efforts had been concentrated on the
immediate priorities brought about by these events and those subjects that
had been pushed back would be caught up with once this Executive
Council meeting was over.

« Clarification on whether or not advertising was permitted on the front page
of the Journal.

MR HEASMAN had consulted the General Secretary in his capacity of
advertising manager and it appeared that advertising on the front cover of the
Journal had at no time been banned. In fact, the advertising rate card quoted
for front page positions. The only problem that had occurred conceming front
page advertising had been when an inappropriate advertisement had
appeared next to a certain story. The advertisement being disputed
represented about £5,000 worth of income to the Federation over the course
of its run and was part of a much larger advertising budget by Christies.
MR HEASMAN advised that Marot & Co had been instructed to increase
advertising revenues, keeping it within the 50/50 ratio, which they had done.
The results of their efforts could be seen over the course of the last year or
more. With £40,000 coming to the Federation in revenue, the Federation was
very close to a break even point. However, the decision of whether or not to
accept front page advertising needed to be taken by The Executive Council.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 41

NFSP00000471

THE EDITOR recalled that this matter had been discussed at a time when
additional revenue was needed, and she thought it had been decided to trial it
for a year. As far as she was aware this had not been reviewed. However
provided advertisements were suitable and not offensive, she saw no reason
not to trial it for a further year.

e MR BUTLIN highlighted that The Executive Council had discussed, at
previous meetings, many ways in which to save Executive Council's
time at meetings and yet on two occasions during the Publicity and
Development Committee report the Chairman had asked permission
to investigate something. He urged the Executive Council to give the
Publicity and Development Committee authority to investigate
whatever they felt appropriate, only seeking permission if it involved
costs. This was AGREED.

3. CONFERENCE RI LUTION

No discussion

4. FUTURE DATES & VENUES OF EC MEETINGS

e Itwas AGREED that the March 2000 Executive Council meeting would
be at the Abbey Hotel, Malvern.

e However, it was felt that the facilities and service at the Abbey Hotel
had deteriorated, and the Committee was requested to investigate
alternative venues for Executive Council meetings.

« The verbal report of the Publicity and Development Committee of
20th June 1999 were MOVED AND ACCEPTED.

B) FEDERATION TRUSTEES REPORT

MR ABERNETHY, Chairman of the Federation Trustees advised that
Trustees had met on 20th June. Apologies had been received from
Mr Bradbrook who had been unable to attend due to holiday arrangements.

Report of the Meeting held on 22nd March 1999

e The Report of the Trustees meeting held on 22nd March 1999 had
been circulated and approved.

Property
Miller Technology and Membership System

It was reported that again the work being done by Danny Pond of Miller had
been suspended due to the needs of the Federation, with regard to the

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 42

NFSP00000471

)
|
\
|
|

¢

DECISION

payment of Union Facilities and Conference Grants. It was anticipated
however that Mr Pond’s work would be resumed again shortly.

The General Secretary had advised that it would soon become necessary to
replace, update and possibly expand the Federation’s main computer system
and a proposal was currently being prepared which, when ready, would be
circulated to the Trustees for their consideration.

The General Secretary also reported that following the permission given at
the last meeting he would soon be in a position to circulate quotations for the
re-decoration of Federation Headquarters, room by room.

reasurer’s Report

The National Treasurer was able to confirm that following Conference
approval for subscription increases, and together with other prudent
housekeeping measures, he hoped that the Federation’s accounts would be
back on an even footing by the end of the current financial year.

Investments
The Trustees decided to accept the Broker’s Advice as follows:

Sell 31’s Group Bond and purchase 5%% Euro Bond

Sell 644% Treasury Stock 2010 and purchase Abbey National 5.3/8% issue
Sell 1/3 Blue Circle holding and the proceeds to acquire equal investment in
Boots and Allied Zurich.

THE CHAIRMAN invited questions from The Executive Council.

MR DARVILL expressed great concern regarding the progress made by Miller
Technology and questioned whether other companies had been approached,
should it prove necessary to change.

THE CHAIRMAN advised that a meeting was being set up at Shoreham
between the Federation Trustees, Miller Technology and the personnel at
Shoreham using the equipment. However he reiterated that a certain amount
of the delay in progress made had been due to the Federation’s work taking
priority over that of Miller Technology.

MRS JENKINS believed that the Federation's hardware was running on
Windows 3.1 and sought confirmation on the matter. MR HEASMAN
confirmed that this was the case, but referred to THE CHAIRMAN’s report in
which he made reference to a general review of the computer systems and
the need for replacement, upgrade and possible expansion. This software
was a prime candidate for replacement as although it worked on the
Federation’s system it would not be compatible with technical applications
that may need to be added to the system.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 43

NFSP00000471

MR JONES considered that Miller Technology were not performing as they
should, and suggested that the Federation should re-access its IT equipment
using an independent advisor to ascertain just what the Federation's
requirements in this area were.

THE TREASURER advised that they had been in contact with such a person
but they were reluctant to move away from Miller Technology because they
were aware of the faults. A meeting between the Trustees and Miller
Technology was to be held at Shoreham in order that a decision could be
made as to whether to continue with their services, but THE TREASURER
thought it only right that Miller Technology be given the opportunity to correct
things. It was considered that there had been ‘giant strides’ in computer
technology in the past five years, and the Federation had been ‘caught short’.

MR WILLSHAW was concerned that Windows 3.1 was still being used
because he considered that it was not Year 2000 compliant.

MR HEASMAN reported that Miller Technology advised that their software
was Year 2000 compliant and that the machines had been inspected by
Worthing Computers, the Federation's computer maintenance people, who
had certified the system at Shoreham as Year 2000 compliant.

MR DARVILL disagreed that Windows 3.1 would be Year 2000 compliant. He
could not understand why Miller Technology had not put Windows 98 on the
system, as trying to update the membership system on such an outdated
application was not feasible. He was unhappy that five years after the
commencement of the project, various reports from the system were still not
available.

Mr Davis was called upon to clarify the difference between the two computer
systems at Shoreham. He advised that the Federation’s general computer
system was serviced by Worthing Computers, who had checked it for Year
2000 compatibility and had placed a sticker on each piece of equipment,
confirming its compliance. He was not able to say whether this confirmation
of compliance was right or wrong, but had to accept their advice as sound.
MR DAVIS’ further advised that his computer at Shoreham was switched off
because although it was able to access the membership system, it was too
slow to run properly. He confirmed that replacement of the equipment was
being investigated and a report would be presented to the Trustees.

The membership system was entirely separate from the general system, and
was the responsibility of Miller Technology. MR DAVIS recommended that
the Trustees be allowed to meet with Fuad El Hadery and Danny Pond, from
Miller Technology, together with Andrew and Lisa at Shoreham. After which a
decision could be made on whether to move away from Miller Technology.

Referring to this forthcoming meeting, THE CHAIRMAN stated that he would
welcome any questions that The Executive Council may wish the Trustees to
put on their behalf.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 44

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471

Broker’s Advice

MR BURROWS requested that the Broker's advice to the Trustees be
circulated to the Executive Council prior to the Trustees’ report on the
Monday morning.

THE CHAIRMAN had not been aware that this had not been circulated, and
apologised for the oversight.

« The Report of the Federation Trustees was MOVED AND ACCEPTED |

C) BOARD OF BENEVOLENCE REPORT

MR PEBERDY, Chairman of the Board of Benevolence and Trustees to the
Board of Benevolence, advised that the Trustees to the Board had met on
Sunday evening, 20th June. That had been Mr Burrows’ last meeting of as a
Trustee to the Board of Benevoience.

* The Trustees had some concerns about the content of the Broker’s ACTION
report, and with the approval of the Board of Benevolence, they
suggested that they meet with Bill Eason to discuss certain issues. i
They wanted to ensure that the suggestions coming from the brokers
were being made to best benefit the fund and not to generate income
for themselves.

* The Trustees had then discussed the replacement for Mr Burrows as DECISION
Trustee for the Board of Benevolence. It was part of their remit to
appoint a new Trustee and for the Board of Benevolence to ratify that
appointment. MR PEBERDY advised that the Board had appointed
Mr Morgan-Jones, who was happy to accept the position.

e MR PEBERDY advised that at the Board’s annual review meeting they [Decision]
approved payment on the en bloc list from 5th July to 31st October
1999 of £7,021. One off grants for immediate assistance totalled
£3,306,50.

In closing, MR PEBERDY, on behalf of the Board, thanked Mr Burrows for the
time and work he had contributed as a Trustee and as a member of the Board
of Benevolence.

¢ The Report of the Board of Benevolence was MOVED AND [Decision]
ACCEPTED.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 45

Al6 SPECIAL MATTERS
A) MEMBERSHIP
(i) Membership Statistics FI MR 04

THE CHAIRMAN invited questions or comments on items on membership
that had not already been covered.

MR BURROWS was concerned that the latest figures he had received were
as at the end of April, and was disappointed not to have received those for
May. He questioned how often figures were sent to branch and regional
secretaries and when the last disk was supplied to them, did they have to
request them?

MR HEASMAN was not in a position to answer this fully. He reminded The
Executive Council of the difficulties that had been experienced concerning
issues around the HR SAPS situation and the work being done at Federation
Headquarters, and this had taken its toll and had a knock on effect on other
work. Consequently work had stopped on the disk. He was well aware of the
importance of providing branches with this information and acknowledged that
it was highly relevant to the work of the Federation over the coming months,
as the database would be one of the major tools in the campaign that would
be fought.

MR BURROWS highlighted the importance of branches receiving up to date
membership figures and suggested that the figures that are circulated to the
Executive Council should also be sent to branch and regional secretaries.
Other shared this view. MR CHALLINOR advised that when he received his
figures, he circulated them to secretaries and membership officers in his
region.

MR HEASMAN confirmed that the figures were sent to regional secretaries if
requested. The information was also available on disk upon request,
although this had not been widely publicised. He concurred with Mr Burrows
and assured The Executive Council that the production of this information
was being treated as a matter of great urgency, and was one of the issues
that the Trustees would be addressing with Miller Technology. However, he
cautioned that there was an issue of manpower implications and the work that
was in progress at Shoreham had an impact, but membership figures were
vitally important to the future, as was the accuracy of the figures.

MR BURROWS felt that the supply of membership figures to branches should
not be hampered by other work being done at Shoreham. Without members
there would be no Federation. He considered that everybody had busy
workloads and excuses could always be found not to do something. He
proposed that the membership figures be circulated, on a monthly basis, to
branch secretaries, regional secretaries and membership officers.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 46

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471
|

MR HEASMAN confirmed that the problem with sending printouts
automatically to everybody on a monthly basis was that it tied down the
printer for a very long time. At peak times when a large number of printouts
had been requested, the printer had been running for around four days each
month to meet the demand. He suggested that Shoreham re-assess what
information was actually needed on the printouts.

MR HEASMAN further advised that the statistics that the Executive Council
Officers received was a set report which was generated by the membership
system. It didn’t show London as a separate region because it had to be re-
programmed to do this, which was one of the things that Miller would be
working on.

The Executive Council referred to the minutes of the March Executive Council
Meeting, which gave the responsibility of membership to the Publicity and
Development Committee and it was considered that they should assess what
information was needed by the branches. MR MARSHALL, Chairman of the
Publicity and Development Committee, suggested that this be left with them
for consideration. However, THE CHAIRMAN thought that this was a matter
to be dealt with by the membership office at Shoreham and not the Publicity
and Development Committee. MR DAVIS advised that the list referred to by
Mr Burrows was fairly easy to produce on a monthly basis but he was unsure
as to whether a non-members list being produced on a monthly basis would
be helpful, and should perhaps therefore not be done automatically. If The
Executive Council wanted to change the format, then Miller Technology would
have to re-programme the system and this would therefore mean a delay in
the information being supplied.

« It was DECIDED that the branch secretaries, regional secretaries and [Decision]
membership offices would be sent copies of the membership
statistics, as circulated to the Executive Council, on a monthly basis.

B. FINANCE i
(i) Treasurer's Report FLAC 02

THE NATIONAL TREASURER reported that the financial position of the
Federation was the same as it had been at the close of Annual Conference.
Despite the two resolutions lost at Conference he still believed that sufficient
slack had been allowed in the forecasts to be able to keep the accounts in
balance over the financial year. These calculations had taken into account
the fact that the increase in subscriptions by check off being delayed by one
month, e.g. August instead of July. He thanked Mr Darvill for bringing this
matter to the attention of the Executive Council and advised that by the end of
the coming week, the Federation will have gone back to POCL to try to
persuade them to include the subscription increase more quickly. If however,
this wasn't successful they would have to accept the situation andabsorb the
cost. The Federation had learned by Direct Debit that the collection of
subscriptions did not come cheaply. The ‘Check Off agreement was long

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 47

standing and one which the Federation had gained from, since its
commencement. THE TREASURER believed, however, that if the Federation
started dictating to POCL they would, in the present climate, want to re-open
the ‘agreement’ and this time charge for the service given.

THE TREASURER referred to the Interim Financial Review from Mr Bloor,
which gave a projection of the future finances of the Federation for the
coming months. For the past two years, a large chunk of Mr Bloor’s time had
been spent producing quarterly accounts, so much so that the Treasurer had
suggested to Mr Bloor that accounts be produced yearly and half yearly and
for the other two quarters, an Interim Financial Review be produced. THE
TREASURER considered this to be better use of his and Mr Bloor’s time, and
advised that it was a faint production which had been worked out over the
phone. He hoped that it met The Executive Council’s requirements, but if it
didn't Mr Bloor could revert to producing the accounts.

THE TREASURER reiterated the hope that the Federation's accounts for the
present financial year, ending 31st December 1999 would show a surplus,
and not as in the previous years, a deficit. If this was achieved, it would not
have been an easy task and he cautioned the Executive Council not to fet
complacency take over. The main part of the Federation’s income,
subscriptions brought about by membership, had not improved and the only
sure way to improve finances was to increase membership. Factors that had
contributed to the Federation's improved financial situation were that there
had been no Special Conference or Branch secretaries’ Seminar and the
number of Executive The Executive Council meetings had decreased since
the Pay Review. Members of the Executive The Executive Council had done
well in the claims they had made, possibly by better use of meetings, and the
previous Chairmen of the two sub committees had arranged meetings in such
a way that costs were reduced. . Greater efforts had been made to find
sponsorship and other income, the costs of The SubPostmaster reduced
dramatically due to the new advertising format, and the General Secretary
and Shoreham kept their costs under control and practised good
housekeeping. THE TREASURER urged The Executive Council to keep
these improvements going and not to allow the Federation to go into decline.

THE TREASURER thanked The Executive Council for their support over the
past 3 months, and he invited questions on his report.

MR JANNETTA referred to postage costs for the January edition of
The SubPostmaster which it had been reported was due to a stationery
magazine that had been distributed with in Journal, and he questioned
whether the Federation had received any payment for this.

MR HEASMAN advised that no charge had been made for this insert, but he
believed that the figure quoted for postage in the report was a typing error.
He also advised that the magazine had been one of four inserts that month,
and it would therefore be wrong to attribute the cost of that mailing to one
particular insert. The postage costs for January were £5489, and by

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 48

NFSP00000471

~~
comparison later in the year a mailing charge of £5205 was made for a edition
carrying three inserts.

MR BUTLIN congratulated the Treasurer and Mr Bloor for their good
housekeeping. MR BURFORD also offered his congratulations. He felt that
he had handed over the Federation's finances to somebody who had had a
very difficult time. He considered that the Treasurer had done a tremendous
job, he had taken tough decisions and kept The Executive Council focused
and he deserved all the credit that was due to him.

* The Treasurer’s Report was moved and ACCEPTED.

(ii) Outstanding Branch Accounts FI AC 02

THE CHAIRMAN advised that branch accounts were still outstanding from
Bedford, Bicester, Heart of England and Barnstaple.

(iii) Audit of Branch Accounts FIAC 02
(iv) VAT Registration FLAC 13

THE TREASURER advised that it was anticipated that the Federation
becoming VAT registered would assist substantially to finances in the coming
12 months.

(v) Union Facilities PC HR 03

The following branches had not submitted their Union Facilities claims:
Gloucester, Bedford and Derby. Claims from the South East and North
Wales North West Regions were also outstanding.

C) JOURNAL
(i) Editor's Report FM PB 01

THE EDITOR was pleased to report that there were no problems with the
Journal. She expressed her gratitude to Mr Heasman and Mr Cobb for their
continued assistance, and extended this to all members of staff at Shoreham.
The advertising revenue sales had increased on last year for the quarter
ended March 1999 Beverley Wright, who was responsible for selling the
advertising at Marot & Co, f i
! would be replace
equally as enthusiastic.

EDITOR advised was.

y Julie, who

Letters continued to arrive, more than could be published, and THE EDITOR
regretted to report that most were letters of discontent. She had adopted a
policy on occasions of obtaining a factual response from Federation
Headquarters, on major issues and hoped that The Executive Council viewed
this as an acceptable use of journal space.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 49

NFSP00000471

MR BURROWS reminded The Executive Council that it was the responsibility
of the Treasurer and the Editor fo submit their written report for circulation to
the Executive Council, prior to the meeting and he requested that this be
observed in future.

THE EDITOR offered her apologies to Mr Burrows and The Executive Council
for not submitting a written report, but this had been due to the pressure of
work. She was, in fact, interrupting her annual leave to attend the meeting.

THE CHAIRMAN appreciated the recent difficulties and workloads of both the
Editor and the Treasurer, but warned against The Executive Council letting
the standards it had set itself slide. She suggested that the reminder was
given with the best intentions and was confident that these items would
appear on the October agenda.

¢ The Editor’s Report was MOVED AND ACCEPTED.
D) EAGLE STAR

MR HEASMAN advised that following the announcement made at the last
meeting that Eagle Star had offered £50,000 to the Federation in return for
their commitment to stay with Eagle Star whilst they went through their re-
organisation process, he had now received an outline of the basis under
which they would like to try to proceed. He was arranging to meet the person
responsible for the Federation's. account in order to start the process of fine
tuning the agreement. This would be circulated to the Executive Council prior
to the October Executive Council meeting, with a view to making a decision
on the acceptability of the proposal at that time. The Federation was
continuing to be paid commissions for the current year on the existing basis,
but if the Federation remained with Eagle Star it was thought that the new
scheme would be run ona share of profit basis, claims against income.

MR HEASMAN also reported that Colin Stoner, from Eagle Star, had written
to the Federation expressing interest in being a sponsor at next year’s
Conference. He was particularly interested in the Tuesday evening, and
MR HEASMAN was hopeful that this could be developed as part of the
package.

Al7 CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS PRIOR TO 1999
8 i lic

This issue was considered very important and with Mr Burrows’ forthcoming
retirement from the Executive Council, it was necessary to select a
replacement representative on the Environmental Committee and
MR BURROWS considered this to be an ideal opportunity for his successor to
express the Federation’s concerns, especially those relating to responsibility

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 50

NFSP00000471

ron
for disposal of containers. MR BURROWS wished his successor luck in what
he had found to be a very frustrating task.

MISS LINDON, whose office was included in the Success Through Sales
Trial, advised that she had to regularly take 50% of the literature she received
as part of that trial to the tip in her car and she considered that no one should
be put in that situation.

Al8 CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS 1999

A/9_ MOTIONS TO EXECUTIVE COUNCIL

Michael Darvill: That Standing Orders for the Executive Council be amended
as follows. Add: No Executive Council member shall be entitled to put his
name down to stand on more than one committee.

MR DARVILL explained his reason for the suggested amendment in that he
believed that when a person put their name forward to be on a committee,
they should be doing so because they believed that they had something to
contribute to that particular committee rather than looking just to get on a
committee. As it is not possible to serve on two committees, he considered it
pointless to put names forward for two.

THE CHAIRMAN sought clarification that this motion was referring to the
Negotiating Committee and the Publicity and Development Committee. It did.

MR MORGAN-JONES seconded the motion

Discussion followed, in which it was accepted that people should not merely
put their names forward for two committees in the hope of getting on one of
them. Executive Officers should consider where they could best serve the
Federation. It was also felt that some saw membership of the Publicity and
Development Committee as a progressive move towards sitting on the
Negotiating Committee, using it as an opportunity to gain experience, and this
was not necessarily a bad thing.

« A vote was taken and the motion was LOST.

A/10 FOR DISCUSSION

POST OFFICE COUNTERS LTD
1. Network
1(a) _ Initial Distribution of New definitive Stamps PC NW 09 06

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 51

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471

* There was nothing further to report, but MR DAVIS advised that things
needed to be addressed in terms of Hemel Hempstead’s method of
advising subpostmasters of the need to order. The Federation met
regularly with the manager of the supply centre and MR DAVIS would
seek assurance that next time there was a need for distribution of
stamps of this nature, subpostmasters would be properly advised of
what they should do in order to get supplies.

It was considered that the way in which information for subpostmasters was |
set out in the Counter News could be improved in order that it could be more |
easily identified. Perhaps a heading saying ‘Actions by Subpostmasters this

week’. It was suggested that where a special order needed to be made, an

order form should be provided.

1(b) SSL Trial for Handling External Customer Calls PC NW 10

MR DAVIS advised that the move towards one central point for contact was
proceeding and would be monitored to ensure that the central enquiry point

serviced the needs of the subpostmaster. €
14(c) Emergency Cascades by Telephone PC NW 10

This was being dealt with by the General Secretary. Correspondence of
43th May from POCL detailed the current situation, offering subpostmasters
the option to choose whether or not they wanted to use the facility.

Some concern was expressed that subpostmasters may not receive the
message clearly and then be held responsible if they relayed information
incorrectly. However, it was pointed out that there was the facility to ting the
helpline if necessary.

POCL CLIENTS
2. Insurance
2(a) PO Travel Insurance - Product Extension CLIN 04

MR BUTLIN expressed concern about the way POCL was moving forward on
new projects and advised he had received correspondence saying that
because he had not sold any travel insurance, his office was not guaranteed
to be selected to provide it in the future. THE CHAIRMAN requested that
Mr Butlin fet him have a copy of the letter. MISS LINDON reported that she
had received a letter from an angry subpostmaster whose facility for travel
insurance had been withdrawn because there had been no previous
transactions.

MR DAVIS advised that there were two forms available to customers for travel [action |.
insurance. One for use at offices who were able to issue a policy, on
demand, over the counter and the other where customers wishing to apply for
their insurance by post, for which the subpostmaster received payment once

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 52

NFSP00000471

the policy was written. MR DAVIS thought that perhaps the facility to sell
travel insurance on demand was withdrawn because no policies had been
sold. However, he undertook to investigate the matter.

Discussion followed on the likelihood of subpostmasters providing the form to
customers, but then not receiving payment for policies written. However,
there was provision on these forms for the post office FAD Code to be
entered, which should ensure that payment was received.

MR DARVILL suggested that the cover of the ‘on demand’ insurance form be
a different colour from the other. He held both in his office and it was difficult
to tell the difference between them.

2(b) General Insurance CL IN 02

MR DAVIS drew attention to correspondence dated 15th June advising the
withdrawal of Everyday Cover Insurance Products from the Network. The
intention was to re-launch in September at Branch Offices who had produced
60% of the sales during the trial. This was disappointing and he welcomed
comments from The Executive Council.

MR BURROWS referred to the cost of transactions when providing general
insurance and urged The Executive Council to bear this in mind when
negotiating for pay increases.

3. Personal Banking

3(a) Personal Banking and POPOS
There was nothing to add to the correspondence circulated. 1
3(b) Lloyds/TSB Personal Banking - Extension of Service

MR JANNETTA asked when this would be available in Scotland and Northern
Ireland, as they had been waiting for it since 1998.

MR DAVIS reported that he had hoped to be able to announce the provision [ACTION |
of this at Annual Conference, but were told that no decision had been taken.
He would however, put the question again.

4. Parcelforce
Parcelforce Worldwide and Royal Mail Tariff Changes CL PF 04

Approximately 5 Orange Papers had been received at Shoreham concerning
the review process and MR DAVIS advised that the circulation dated
15th June was an amalgamation of the comments received by Executive
Council Officers in response to that circulation.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 53

¢ MR MARSHALL reported a problem with the DPI labels, in that the
international labels used to be a different colour than the inland ones,
and now they were the same colour. MR DAVIS undertook to look
into the matter.

5. Royal Mail
5(a) Tariff Changes CL RM 04

MR DAVIS advised that the correspondence under the previous heading was
an amalgamation of comments received concerning the tariff increase by
Royal Mail and Parcelforce.

5 (b) Millennium Products CL RM 05 06

Nothing to add to correspondence

6. DVLA
6 (a) Rates of Motor Vehicle Licence Duty CL VA 04 02

MR DAVIS reported that to some extent this item was historical as it was a
problem that arose because DVLA introduced wrong rates for motor cycles
and tricycles. Details had been advised at Annual Conference, and there was
nothing to add to the correspondence circulated.

6(b) Photocard Driving Licence Applications - Trial CL VL 04 03

e® MR JANNETTA queried how many offices would be involved in the

network when the trial was complete. From correspondence receive
so far, MR DAVIS was unable to answer, but undertook to follow it up.

AlM0 (B) FOR INFORMATION
1. Commercial

1(a) Market Research PC CM 02
1(b) Advertising PC CM 03

2. Sub-Postmasters Pay
Withdrawal of the Ideas Scheme PC SP

3. Euro Programme

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 54

NFSP00000471

ACTION

Preparation for EMU PC EU 01

POCL Clients

4 National Lottery

New National Lottery On Line Game CLLOO1

5. Network

(a) Centralisation of Vouchers PC NW 08 01

(b) New Variant £20 Banknote PC NW 09 03

(c) Integration of Helpline (Market Research) PC NW 10

6. Benefits Agency

Benefits Distribution Team Update CLBA01

7. Foreign Exchange

Foreign Exchange Update CL FX 02

8. Royal Mail

(a) New Salesforce Posts CL RM

(b) Briefing Meeting CL RM 01

A/11 REPORT ON CENTRAL APPEALS

Nothing to report

A/12 GENERAL SECRETARY’S REPORT

Applications for Sponsorship - Macmillan Sahara Hiking Challenge 2000
FM PP 03

THE GENERAL SECRETARY had sent an interim reply to Mrs Hicks, setting
out the Federation's policy on such matters. However, he sought a decision

from The Executive Council on the matter.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999

PAGE 55

NFSP00000471

NFSP00000471

THE EDITOR reported that she had featured an article in the journal on
Mrs Hicks’ behalf, asking anyone who wanted to sponsor her to contact her
directly.

Although The Executive Council sympathised with people seeking
sponsorship, the Federation already supported the Centenary Charity and
they therefore AGREED that the General Secretary should advise her
accordingly and wish her well with her venture.

Working Time Regulations

A series of correspondence had been entered into with Mr Mark Baker of

Larkhill Post Office, who held the view that the Working Time Regulations and

Minimum Wage should apply to subpostmasters. Mr Baker had not agreed

with the answers that Federation Headquarters had provided and had

therefore written directly to the Executive Council on the subject. He had also .
been trying to drum up support from other subpostmasters, via the Internet. ¢
The Executive Council considered whether a subpostmaster should be

governed by this legislation, as subpostmasters did not necessarily offer

personal service to the Post Office. THE GENERAL SECRETARY quoted

Section 1, paragraph 5 of the subpostmaster’s contact:

“The Subpostmaster is not obliged to attend the sub office personally, but he
is required, whether he is there or not, to accept full responsibility for the
proper running of his sub office, and the efficient provision of those Post
Office services which are required to be provided there.”

The very nature of the subpostmaster’s contract was such that it enabled any
subpostmaster to manage his or her business with freedom to operate in the
way they wanted to. It was considered that the Working Time Regulations
and National Minimun Wage were not relevant to subpostmasters as they did
not work contracted hours. ¢

It was suggested that if Mr Baker was sent copies of the correspondence from
IRPC perhaps he would accept that the Federation had tested it as far as it
needed to be, and therefore not pursue the matter. THE GENERAL
SECRETARY did not consider this would be the case.

Executive Council considered that it was often the freedom within the
subpostmaster’s contract which made it attractive to the businessman or
woman alongside the Post Office. It was the Executive Council's view that the
lack of freedom would not be appreciated by the majority of members and the
Federation's legal advisors had pointed out that there were other ramifications
which members would find detrimental.

The Executive Council therefore concluded that the testing of the contractual
status of a subpostmaster to prove personal service is provided was not in the
interests of the membership generally, and could indeed be dangerous. The

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 56
NFSP00000471

Executive Council also believed that to pursue a complete review of the
holiday and sickness arrangements with POCL as the Conference Motions
instructed was a much better way to proceed and would avoid the potential
long term detrimental effects with testing the contract in law was likely to
produce.

It was DECIDED that the General Secretary would write to Mr Baker, on [DECISION]
behalf of the Executive Council, advising their views on the matter.

A/13 NFSP TRADING LTD

MR HEASMAN reported that gift voucher sales presently totalled £92,000. A
considerable amount of work had concentrated around telephony products
and the Trading Company was involved in three at the moment, National
Calling Cards, Least Cost Routing and Pre Paid Mobile Phone Vouchers.

The International Calling Cards had originally been arranged by Martin Dawes
with the support of the Federation's logo. When Martin Dawes was taken
over it became necessary to source a different card supplier.

Another cause for concern had been on the Least Cost Route side because
the Federation’s contact at First Call Direct had left to set up their own
company, First Phone. It had therefore been necessary to ensure that this
departure had not left financial holes in the company. An advantage of this
was that MR HEASMAN had been able to establish a direct contact with the
ultimate supplier, Rocom, who were based in Yorkshire. He had received
their assurance that they were more than happy to deal directly with him on
behalf of the Federation, should he feel the need to move. Similarly he had
received the assurance of New World Telephones that they would be happy
to deal directly with the Federation. This was something that MR HEASMAN
suggested that The Executive Council may wish to consider next year as
revenues grew because it currently required a great deal of administration
and he therefore considered that First Call Direct earned their keep. He was
confident however that they could continue to do it in spite of the changes.

Another product that had been very successful was the Pre Paid Mobile
Telephone Vouches. Around three months previously the General Secretary
had advised that MR HEASMAN to proceed with these because of the
situation with regards to POCL and his negotiations with them. Within that
time a product was put together and launched at the Doncaster Exhibition
and in the following weeks the total turnover exceeded £113,000. The last
two week’s figures were reported at £26,700 and £23,185, and it was
anticipated that orders would stabilise at around £100,000 per month.
Although the Federation only earned around %% in commission and
members were very happy with the product.

Referring to the decision to shelve the Trading Company at the end of the
year, MR HEASMAN asked that The Executive Council consider how they
were going to structure and organise themselves going forward. He advised

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 57

NFSP00000471

bee

that they needed to have freedom and be able to deal in a flexible manner.
He considered that it would not work if it became a sub committee of the
Executive Council seeking ratification of decisions at each Executive Council
meeting.

e MRS JERVIS reported that she had experienced difficulties in ACTION
receiving point of sale material from First Call Direct, and requested
that Mr Heasman look into this on her behalf.

MR CHALLINOR confirmed that the decision to shelve The Company would
be put into place on 31st December and he agreed with Mr Heasman that
The Company needed to enjoy freedom to operate. He suggested that 2/3
people with commercial experience needed to be appointed, these to be a
point of reference for Mr Heasman so that he could consult with them when
approached by a would be supplier of a service. He envisaged that this
would not incorporate meetings, but be conducted over the phone or by fax,
with a commercial report being made at the Executive Council meeting on the
activities of that branch of the Federation.

MR CHALLINOR proposed that three people be selected as points of contact <
and it was suggested that these be selected from the existing Trading

Company Directors. The Executive Council agreed with this but as there

were four Directors, all of these individuals should be selected. In
acknowledging MR HEASMAN’s view that The Company should not be

run by committee, MR CHALLINOR sought his comments on the proposal.

MR HEASMAN reiterated that the Trading Company had provided a vehicle
to operate in a flexible way and although it was within the constitution of the
Executive Council to maintain a degree of contro! and responsibility, he felt
that if this was run in the same way as the Publicity and Development
Committee or the Negotiating Committee, then it would not work. He
considered that The Company should enjoy the freedom to operate almost as
it did at present, reporting to the Executive Council every quarter.

e MR CHALLINOR advised The Executive Council that the way the DECIS(
Directors of the Trading Company had worked to date with Mr .
Heasman, was that Mr Heasman would telephone him, as the
central person, who in turn would speak to the other Directors, and
then relay their comments back to Mr Heasman. MR CHALLINOR
proposed that the current Trading Company Directors be elected as
members of the Company to carry on the work under the banner of
the National Federation of Subpostmasters. This was AGREED.

AM4 EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REPORT

MR WALSH reported that he and Mr Willshaw were arranging a cycle ride
within their area during which they would visit sub post offices in an attempt to
increase membership and raise money for the Benevolent Fund. He would
report further at the next meeting.

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 58
MR BURROWS had received a letter from POCL, in relation to his resignation
from the Executive Council, in which it was stated that he was held in very
high esteem within the Post Office and that he “always presented the
subpostmasters’ case with vigour’. He had also received letters from other
senior Post Office managers and from subpostmasters, wishing him well.

MR BURROWS thanked The Executive Council for the social event held on
the Monday evening and the kind words and gifts, and also for the dinner that
was attended by some on the Tuesday evening. He expressed the difficulty
he had in reaching his decision to retire from the Executive Council, but knew
that it was the right one. He wished luck to his successor, Mr Peberdy,
expressed his confidence in Mr Baker, the General Secretary, and conveyed
his best wishes to everyone for the future.

A/15 MATTERS RECEIVED TOO LATE FOR INCLUSION ON
AGENDA

There were none.

Al6 ANY OTHER BUSINESS

There was none.

MR MORGAN-JONES offered a Vote of Thanks to the Chairman for the way
the meeting had been conducted.

THE CHAIRMAN closed the meeting, wishing everyone a safe journey home.

MARIAN JONES
LESLEY HARRIS

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING JUNE 1999 PAGE 59

NFSP00000471
NFSP00000471

am
