POL00143525
POL00143525

Control themes and observations.
Year ended 25 March 2012

_

El] ERNST & YOUNG
POL00143525
POL00143525
POL00143525
POL00143525

Anes
ii I] ERNST & YOUNG crete Yate

wn

Private and confidential

Chris Day 13 August 2012
Finance Director

Post Office Limited (“POL”)

148 Old Street

London

EC1V 9NN

Dear Chris

Control themes and observations from our 2012 audit

1am pleased to enclose the control themes and observations from our audit for the year ended 25 March 2012.

Our review of the company’s systems of internal control is carried out to help us express an opinion on the
financial statements of the company as a whole. This work is not primarily directed towards the discovery of
weaknesses, the detection of fraud or other irregularities (other than those which would influence us in forming
that opinion) and should not, therefore, be relied upon to show that no other weaknesses exist or areas require
attention.

Accordingly, the matters reported below are limited to those matters that we identified during the audit and that
we concluded are of sufficient importance to merit being reported to you. We would be happy to discuss any of
the points contained within this letter in more detail with you.

We would also like to take this opportunity to thank management for their input into this process, and to thank
you and your staff for assistance during the course of our audit.

Yours sincerely

Angus Grant
Partner, on behalf of Ernst & Young LLP
Enc

POL00143525
POL00143525

Contents

1. Executive Summary...

2. Current Year Recommendations — non IT related...

3. IT related Recommendations...

4. Prior Year Recommendations Update — non IT related...

The contents of this report are subject to the terms and conditions of our appointment as set
out in our engagement letter.

This report is made solely to the Audit & Risk Committee, Board of Directors and
management of Post Office Limited in accordance with our engagement letter. Our work has
been undertaken so that we might state to the Audit & Risk Committee, Board of Directors
and management of Post Office Limited those matters we are required to state to them in this
report and for no other purpose. To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or
assume responsibility to anyone other than Audit & Risk Committee, Board of Directors and
management of Post Office Limited for this report or for the opinions we have formed. It
should not be provided to any third-party without our prior written consent.

& Young |i
POL00143525
POL00143525

1. Executive Summary

Introduction

Consistent with the prior year, this report has been produced to draw out commentary and observations on a
number of issues arising from our audit work which we consider to be of relevance to the business. Whilst our
audit work is designed to support our formal audit opinions, this work produces other findings as well.

The finance leadership team at Post Office Limited (“POU”) has continued its success in implementing process
improvements across their finance and IT functions, despite having to deal with the challenges of separation-
related activity at the same time. Focused management action has addressed many of the issues raised in our
prior year management letter, with finance functions including payroll continuing to see improvements. Whilst
there continue to be challenges in areas including POUs IT environment, management have taken steps to
ensure these challenges are, and continue to be, addressed.

This report details these findings under the following sections:

> Current year observations for FY 2011-12; and
» Anupdate on non-IT matters we raised in 2010-11
We have not separately provided an update to the prior year IT related matters given the similarity of findings
and to avoid redundancy within this report.

We have shared these observations with the Company and management is reflecting on them in conjunction
with other priorities in the business.

Summary of non-IT control observations

As mentioned in our Audit Committee Report presented to you in May 2012, we utilised a controls based
approach in respect of the identified significant processes of revenue, purchasing, cash settlements and payroll.
Our controls testing approach focuses on the controls implemented across the entire POL business, including the
London head office, Bolton (payroll), Chesterfield (shared services), branches and cash centres. Whilst we test
controls in London, Bolton and Chesterfield annually, we rotate our cash centre and branch visits every year. A
summary of our findings were as follows:

> Financial Statement Close Process: Management continues to employ a robust system of
internal controls around its financial reporting and financial statement close process. Despite the
increase in separation-related activity by the finance team, we noticed no adverse impact on the
quality of information produced. At all times through the audit process, there was early and
timely resolution of accounting and technical issues as a result of regular interaction throughout
the year between POUs finance team and ourselves, and this led to a smooth ‘no surprises’
financial statement close process.

P» Payroll Process: We continued to see improvement in the payroll process during the current.
year, as management was able to successfully respond to our prior year management letter
comments. The last two years have seen significant improvement as comments raised by us in
previous years have now been addressed effectively by management.

> Transactional, branch and cash centre process and controls: For the revenue, purchasing and
cash settlements processes, we note that the controls framework remains consistent with prior
year with no significant findings from our testing.

> Whilst we have raised observations and recommendations based on the above processes in
this report, these should be seen as refinements to the current process as opposed to significant
control deficiencies.

POL00143525
POL00143525

Summary of IT Control Observations

As discussed in earlier communications, we continued to identify significant control weaknesses in POL's IT
environment, which in our view, reflected a need for improvement on the part of the service provider Fujitsu
and also a change in approach on the part of POL in terms of the governance, risk and control framework over
its business critical systems. These weaknesses in the IT control environment, coupled with the lack of an
ISAE3402 (formerly SAS70) report on Fujitsu’s control environment contributed to a lengthy and inefficient audit
process.

Improvements noted during the current year audit included the following areas:

> High risk areas: POL took action in the year to address the two highest risk areas we raised in
our prior year letter being improvement of governance over outsourcing application
management and improving segregation of duties within the manage change process.

> Planning: At an early stage in this audit cycle, Fujitsu, POL and EY took part in a workshop to
consider the control framework for POL and agreed planning milestones and protocols.

» People & commitment: Lesley Sewell and her team’s continued support and sponsorship,
coupled with the commitment of Fujitsu set the tone for improvements in the current year, and
this was reflected in the significant improvement to the audit process during the current year.

> Actions taken to drive efficiency in the future: We understand Fujitsu have initiated discussions
to commission an ISAE 3402 report for FY2012-13. If commissioned, we plan to place reliance on
the findings of such a report, subject to the opinion expressed in it.

However, whilst we noted that the IT general control environment for POLSAP and HNGX has improved year on
year, there is still scope for significant improvement, as detailed later in this report. A summary of key findings is
highlighted below:

> Fully implementing and embedding improvements: There were a number of issues raised in the
prior year which were partially addressed or implemented part way through the year; therefore,
these require further work to close.

> Review of privileged access: There remain 7 users with superuser access rights in POLSAP, which
in our opinion is high for a business of POL’s size and nature. POL need to verify whether the
existing process for determining the appropriateness of privileged access is sufficiently robust.

> Continue to strengthen the change management process: Change management processes need
to be further enhanced, as documentation to evidence authorisation needs to be improved. POL
should work with Fujitsu to verify the classification of maintenance and fix changes is adequately
documented between POL and Fujitsu.

Overall, many of our recommendations are made with the expectation of implementing automatic prevent
controls to mitigate our findings. However, in many cases POL has assessed that this is not possible and instead
have implemented detect monitoring controls to cover the identified risk. Whilst this approach is acceptable,
POL will need to be diligent in ensuring that these manual controls are continuously carried out effectively or
risk a deterioration or breakdown in the IT control environment.

Finally, for certain of our recommendations, we note that Management’s response represents a conscious
decision to accept the risk associated with our finding. In these cases, POL should put a formal governance
structure in place whereby formal acceptance of risk is documented and concluded and for those higher risk
areas, concurrence from the Audit Committee is also received.

We recognise this is a journey which will require continued focus and attention. We will continue to support
management in its continuous improvement initiatives throughout 2013.

Our findings are set out in greater detail in the following pages.

2.

POL00143525

POL00143525

Current Year Recommendations — non IT related

Issue Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
Account POL- We have noticed whilst Ensure that stats classification maps in | The provision codes used in POLSAP are owned by specified P&BA
Mapping Chesterfield reconciling the BCS trial balance straightforward manner to BCS trial senior managers and these in turn map to specific ESFS codes. At the
(Current to the stats some classifications _| balance to ensure easy reconciliation _| beginning of 2011/12 accountabilities changed, so the items
Year) are not as expected e.g. and that no items are mapping to the specific POLSAP codes was changed to be in line with
Provisions within creditors. In missed/misclassified to ease stats this new accountability. At audit, a full reconciliation was provided to
addition some POLSAP mappings | reporting at year end. explain these changes.
have changed in the year as team We will review the existing ESFS/BCS mapping to make sure
members have changed provisions are not misclassified.
departments, the impact of
which has been that the stats
classification changes when
these figures flow into ESFS/BCS.
Through the reconciliation
between POLSAP and ESFS the
mapping does not seem to be
checked.
GRNI POL-London | We recommended in previous | buring the current year, we noted that _| As discussed, GRNIs are reviewed regularly on a monthly basis. There
years that management continue . .
" management had regularly reviewed _| are very few manual accruals and these are:
to look for ways to improve the the GRNI balance to ensure that all the
purchasing process to reduce the R > 2 (a) that were missed out by Purchasing Services at the month end
required levels of manual input _ | GRNI items on the list were being and;
into the GRNI accrual. monitored and regularly challenged. . .
The balance has continued to We saw an improvement in the aging (b) the reversal of system accrual made after the ‘Delivery date’ in
reduce during the period as of GRNI balance compared to prior system, where the goods/services have not been delivered. We
management's review of the year. However, it is difficult to monitor agreed both these should be made to ensure the accounts are right.
balance has been more detailed. | the GRNI balance when there are a The three way matching is not currently available and we are aiming

POL00143525
POL00143525

Issue

Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
The main issues continue to be large number of accruals, such as ina to improve the current process under the new Finance Roadmap,
the volume of line items within month such as P12 when purchases which will deliver the new Finance System for independent POL.
the listing, the difficulty in are ramped up. Similarly, whilst a
tracking delivery dates, in review will identify and ensure that
Particular for services, andthe | high value items are being monitored,
clearing of residual values. we noticed a lot of "residual" amounts
< 10,000 GBP in the aged GRNI
balance. We encourage management
to look to reduce level of manual input
into GRNI accrual in the future.
DVLA POL- London | At the end of May (around stats | We recommend management to be In the jointly-agreed outturn forecasts POL use DVLA-supplied
Balance signing time), the DVLA creditor | proactive with anticipating the RPI inflation assumptions, which as you say are "trued up" the following
balance at year endistruedup | rate, either by contacting DVLA in year. This later adjustment is only the difference between the actual
to reflect RPI adjustment advance of what the RPI rate will be, or | RPI and the assumed one and ought not to be material.
communicated by the DVLA. This | looking at rates from Office of National
can result in an adjustment Statistics to do a reasonableness
posting to DVLA creditor in the check. When we checked this for stats
following year as the books are during current year, the amount wasn’t
closed. material, but may be in future periods.
IPS Balance POL- POL supply passport services on Whilst we were happy with the IPS. P&BA highlighted this to IPS last November and continue to
Chesterfield | Behalf of IPS, and have an IPS Creditor from an audit point of view, challenge IPS regarding correcting the current issue on a weekly

Vendor Creditor at year end.
During the year, IPS experienced
difficulties and significant
problems in recording the
complete amount of money
owing from POL to IPS, resulting
in IPS billing POL less than it

noting that the balance on system was
reasonable, and that the problem lies
on IPS' side, we encourage POL to push
IPS to solve their billing problems as
soon as possible, as this can be more
complicated to resolve as the balance

basis. Our contact within IPS is testing the use of an improved
reporting programme that should reduce the number of barcodes
that are being incorrectly removed from IPS invoice. They have
tested this on 2 invoices which we are yet to receive, however early
indications by IPS are that this has been successful. On receipt of
these invoices and the completion of the settlement adjustments,

Ernst & Y

POL00143525

POL00143525

Issue

Location Background Recommendation Management Comment

should have been owing them. increases and as time goes on. A POL will be in a position to confirm whether this improvement has
However, POL have been able to_| solution has to be found, which may been successful. P&BA continually challenged the late receipt of
track the correct amount of the | include; third party reporting to gaina_| invoices which has led to a change in the IPS billing process, resulting
balance, and have been been position balance as at March 2012 in a faster turnaround of invoices. IPS have been approached in the
reimbursing IPS by way of 7 fn
"settlement differences", POL end, followed by a new approach to past regarding settling on POL data but were reluctant to progress.
made £20.7m of payments by billing or a new agreement (such as
way of "settlement differences" | settling on POL data).
in the current year. We note that
POL is able to justify the correct
IPS Vendor Creditor balance of
£14m at year end, and we were
able to be comfortable from an
audit point of view.

ponus f Payroll - Every quarter, the Bolton payroll We fecommend that there are dear Agreed that in this area the control check failed which was not due

ecrual Bolton team sends the London finance | methods of communication from | +4 the actual control not being adequate but more so that it has just

team (ie. Finance Analyst Ravi
Dudala) a calculation of quarterly
bonuses for approval, which the
London team confirm by email.
All bonus payments are
authorized by both the
operational manager and a
financial manager, and a log
maintained of those which are
reviewed and authorised.

Finance team to Bolton payroll centre
to approve the Bonus calculation, and
management should ensure they keep
a record of this. The payroll service
head must also be copied into the
email confirming the final bonus to be
applied, since this is an important
issue that occurs on a quarterly basis.

not been delivered in full for 2 x quarters ie. sign off not received. It
was also noted that Q3 check had been delivered and since the audit
check subsequent bonus payments have all been subject to full
control check.

Ernst & Y

POL00143525
POL00143525

Issue

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

For Q3 & the Annual Bonus
Payment, we observed that both
the approval from London
Finance team & payroll manager
reconciling SAP output to the
bonus spreadsheet were in
place, and the control was
effective. However, for both Q1
and Q2, we noted that whilst
there was clear evidence that the
payroll manager reconciled SAP
output to the bonus
spreadsheet, there was no email
record as at Q1 &Q2 on the
London finance team approving
the bonus calculation.

3.

IT related Recommendations

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref | Observation Location | Background Recommendation Management Comment
1 | Privileged iT We reviewed privileged access to IT functions including | We recommend that management conducts a_| This observation and
access access to user administration functionality across the in- | review of privileged access to IT functions recommendation, repeated in

scope applications and their supporting infrastructure.
Whilst we noted some reduction on the number of
accounts assigned with privileged access to POLSAP, the
following observations identified last year remained open
at the time of our review:

POLSAP

The following seven dialog and service generic
accounts were found to be assigned to the SAP_ALL
and SAP_NEW profiles within the POLSAP production
environment (PLP-400):

°

000000

ADMINBATCH

BASISADMIN

DDIC (assigned to the SAP_ALL profile only)
OTUSER

SAP*

SOLMANPLMS00

WF-ADMIN.

Users with SAP_ALL access have unrestricted access
to POLSAP, including the capability to process and
approve financial transactions. The SAP_NEW profile
provides general access to new profiles and
authorisations which are included in a new SAP

across the in-scope applications and their
supporting infrastructure to determine
whether the level of privileged access granted
is appropriate. Where access is deemed to be
inappropriate, this access should be revoked
immediately.

For POLSAP accounts associated to the
SAP_ALL and SAP_NEW profiles, management
should revisit the need to grant this level of
privileged access to the production
environment. Access to accounts with the
SAP_ALL and SAP_NEW profiles should only be
used when needed.

Where privileged POLSAP accounts are used
to configure and run scheduled jobs,
management should consider creating system
accounts to run scheduled jobs so manual
login is not allowed and individual dialog
accounts to configure scheduled jobs in order
to promote accountability.

Where it is unavoidable to remove SAP_ALL

previous audits, has been
successively addressed by
increasing levels of control. Since.
the last audit the use of Generic
Privileged Accounts is monitored
continually by Fujitsu. The
granting of this privilege must be
justified; is time-bound and is
reported monthly to the POL
Information Security
Management Forum (ISMF) for
approval by the head of
Information Security. In addition,
where users have access to this
privilege, their ability to ‘SUDO’
(switch privileges inside user
session) is additionally
monitored. As for previous years
there is a continuing need for
certain key system activities to
be executed by these admin
teams with these privileges. For
out of hour’s support it is not
possible to predict the privileges

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

release.

The SAP* and DDIC accounts were not locked. This
does not meet recommended practice of removing all
profiles from SAP* and locking both the SAP* and
DDIC accounts. We also noted that the SAP* account
had a last login date during the audit period and that
the DDIC account is associated to the S_A.SYSTEM.
privileged profile.

HNGX

We understand that Fujitsu has undertaken actions to
investigate some of the inappropriate privileged access
identified from last year’s audit, however the prior year
observations noted below for HNGX were still valid at the
time our review.

There are inappropriate system privileges assigned to
the APPSUP role and SYSTEM_MANAGER role at the
Oracle database level on the Branch Database server
(BDB) supporting HNGX.

© There is inappropriate privileged access at the Oracle
database level on the Transaction Processing System
server (DAT) supporting HNGX:

© System privileges assigned to the APPSUP role
and OPS$TPS account are inappropriate.

© The following accounts associated to the DBA

and SAP_NEW access, it is recommended that
a periodic review of the activities executed by
the accounts granted permanent SAP_ALL and
SAP_NEW access is performed to gain
assurance that no inappropriate or
unauthorised activity has been performed
which may adversely impact the financial
statements.

Management should implement monitoring
controls to help ensure that controls operated
by the third party service providers are in
place and are in operation, for example,
monitoring of appropriateness of access to
privileged users/profiles.

required for support, therefore
the use of elevated privileges is
justified. Devolving SAP_ALL
privileges to specific roles could
not adequately cover all out of
hours support scenarios.

Further additional controls do
not appear to be justified.
However the rigour of the
monthly check at the ISMF will
be tested to ensure itis
adequate, if not steps will be
taken to optimise the checking of
these accounts.

The issues around privileged
access are focused on the
possibility that a privileged user
may abuse their access. Post
Office believes that the existing
process provide sufficient
transparency and accountability
to deter such activity. Post Office
accepts that deterrence is not as
strong as prevention but in this
case the operational impact of
devolving SAP_ALL privileges is

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

role are no longer required:
= CFM_DBA
= SPLEX_ROLE_BOTH.

© The following accounts have inappropriate
access to user administration functionality
through the Admin access parameter ‘ADM is
set to yes’:

= OPSSTPS
= SPLEX_ROLE_BOTH.

Unrestricted access to privileged IT functions increases
the risk of unauthorised/inappropriate activities which
may lead to the processing of unauthorised or erroneous
transactions.

believed to carry more risk of
operational instability.
Consequently, Post Office’s
attention will address enhancing
the process to ensure that lapses
in record keeping can not easily
occur in the future; and that
attention will be given to
enhancing this accountability
and transparency where
possible.

HNG

Post Office has significantly
improved the processes around
‘Privileged Access’ since the last
audit. There are a number of
controls in place to monitor
system privileges. The levels of
privileges required to maintain
the infrastructure and service are
deemed appropriate.

Astandardised approach to
access control now exists
including reporting for Privileged
Access Utilisation. Further
mitigating controls are in place

Ernst & You

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

through the use of iKeys and
issuing procedures.

The Post Office Information
Security Management Forum
reviews the adequacy and
controls in place regularly as part
of its BAU function and reviews
appropriateness of access
against best practice for centre
of excellence models.

POLSAP

Post Office will follow up on the
privileged access improvements
identified and liaise with the
third party supplier to ensure
such as access is appropriately
controlled.

Post Office will aim to ensure
such privileged access is given on
a strict business need basis such
as incidents and change requests
raised and where given effective
monitoring processes are in

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

place.

Currently, the review and
management of privileged access
through these accounts is
undertaken by all requests being
approved via Post Office Service
Management and subsequently
reviewed on a monthly basis
with suppliers and Post Office
Information Security. The use of
privileged accounts for
scheduled jobs and process for
scrutiny of this use will be
reviewed to assess the feasibility
of further strengthening the
controls over privileged users.

Post Office accepts there is
further work that can be done to
reduce the existing risks in this
area and the associated actions
look to close these risks down.

Action 1.a. Post Office to verify
that the existing process for
determining appropriateness of

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

privileged access is sufficiently
robust and if not then to action
further improvements.

Owner Richard Barber. Target
completion date 31/07/2012.

Action 1.b. Verify the existing
process adequately assesses the
activities executed by the
accounts granted permanent use
of SAP_ALL, SAP_NEW privileges
to ensure no inappropriate or
unauthorised activity has been
performed. If not then assess
and where possible implement
more robust process.

Owner Richard Barber. Target
completion date 31/08/2012.

Action 1.c. Post Office, through
their supplier Fujitsu, will
investigate the use of privileged
accounts with manual login for
scheduled jobs and report the
outcome through the
Information Security
Management Forum.

POL00143525

POL00143525
Ref | Observation Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
Owner Mark Arnold (TBC).
Target Completion Date:
31/08/2012
2 User IT Our examination of the processes for the creation, We recommend the following improvements: | HNG

administration
process

modification and removal of users’ access showed the
following:

HNGX

There was no evidence to support the authorisation
of the creation of one user account selected for our
walkthrough.

* The termination date for the leaver we selected for
our walkthrough was 06/05/11 whilst the request to
remove the access was raised only on 06/09/11, four
months after the leaving date.

Based on our reconciliation of the Fujitsu terminated
employee listing to the Active Directory listing which
controls access to the HNGX estate, we noted one
terminated employee whose Active Directory account
remained active.

There was no evidence to support the authorisation
of the removal of an Active Directory group
membership for one user account selected for our
walkthrough.

HNGX

Strengthen the existing user administration
processes within Fujitsu so that
documentation supporting the request,
approval and set-up of access to the HNGX
estate is retained.

POLSAP

Strengthen the existing user
administration process for cash centre
users so that (i) documentation supporting
the request, approval and set-up of
temporary assignment of access to cash
centre users is retained (ii) cash centre
managers are made aware that
permanent access modifications should
follow the standard user administration
process for supply chain users, where an
authorised SAP ADS access request form is
completed. Furthermore, management
should consider implementing a
monitoring control to ensure that the
process implemented for assigning
temporary access to cash centre users is

The process for managing the
User Admin process has been
improved since the last audit.
However, Post Office will
monitor the process regarding
retention of the documentation
that supports request, set-up
and approval.

Action 2.a. Post Office will work
with Fujitsu to re-iterate the
process regarding the document
retention

Owner Bill Membery. Target
completion date 30/06/2012.

Action 2.b. Post Office will work
with Fujitsu to ensure the
Joiner/Leaver/Transfer process is
fully embedded and appropriate
checks are being performed.

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref | Observation Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
being adhered to. Owner Mark Arnold. Target
POLSAP completion date 31/08/2012.

We found a POL employee who left on 04/06/11 but
the account remained active up to 23/09/11. Further
investigation showed that this delay was caused by
late notification from the line manager.

‘As we observed in the 2010/11 audit, POL cash centre
managers are granted limited access to user
administration in POLSAP through transaction SU01
allowing them to assign cash centre profiles to users
within their depot. As such there is a lack of
segregation of duties between the authorisation and
granting of access to cash centre users.

In response to our comments last year, POL has
implemented a process whereby a form is required to
authorise the temporary assignment of roles to cash
centre users and a monthly review is performed to
check that roles assigned to cash centre staff do not
create a segregation of duties conflict.

However, based on our walkthrough and testing
samples of 27 new and modified user access to
POLSAP, we noted 17 users (16 POL users, one Steria
user) where the line manager or cash centre manager
authorising/confirming appropriateness of access
also had access to user administration on POLSAP.

Implement a monitoring process around
the activities of privileged users (i.e. cash
centre managers with access to $U01).
Where part of the user administration
process is controlled by third party service
providers, management should ensure
adequate monitoring controls are in place
to help ensure the controls operate as
intended.

HNGX and POLSAP

e Strengthen the revocation of access
process such that IT is notified in a timely
manner when a terminated employee no
longer requires access to POLSAP and the
HNGX estates. Consideration should be
given to the HR department sending a list
of terminated employees to the IT
department on a periodic basis, e.g.
weekly or fortnightly. This is in addition to
the line manager notifying the IT
department of the terminated employee.
All documentation supporting this process
should be retained.

POLSAP

The administration process
within Cash Centres has been
improved following the last
audit. However Post Office will
re-iterate the process for
retention of documentation
supporting the request, approval
and set-up of temporary
assignments to cash centre
users. Additionally Post Office
will re-communicate to cash
centre managers that the
standardised process for user
administration should be strictly
followed. Post Office will also
consider a monitoring process as
part of this review both within
Post Office and with 3” party
suppliers.

Post Office accepts there is
further work that can be done to
reduce the existing risk and the
associated actions look to

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

Based on our sample of 25 instances of new and
modified user access to POLSAP, we noted that:

°

The new process noted above was implemented
on 01/10/11. For one out of two cash centre
modifications which took place after this date,
we noted that this form had not been retained.
For one cash centre user modification the line
manager stated that the role had been assigned
permanently, in which case the modification of
access should have followed the supply chain
user administration process rather than the
process for assigning temporary roles to cash
centre users.

Based on our reconciliation of the Fujitsu and Post
Office terminated employee listings to the POLSAP
user listing we noted four terminated employees
whose user accounts remained active.

Failure to maintain appropriate documentation for the
user administration process increases the risk that
accounts with excessive or inappropriate privileges may
exist, therefore increasing the risk of
unauthorised/unnecessary access to systems.
Furthermore, this risk is increased by inadequate
segregation of duties between the approval and setup of

access as well as failure to remove terminated employees’
access promptly.

resolve them.

Action 2.c. Post Office will re-
iterate the process for
documentation retention of
temporary assignments to cash
centre users, Ensure that the
existing monitoring process for
cash centre approvals and 3
party suppliers is robust.

Owner Sid Hadadi. Target
Completion date 30/06/2012.

Action 2.d. Post Office will re-
iterate to cash centre managers
the requirement to follow the
standardised process for user
administration.

Owner Sid Hadadi. Target
Completion date 30/06/2012.

Action 2.e. Post Office will
review the monitoring controls
for 3 party suppliers for POLSAP
to ensure that the controls are in

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref | Observation Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
place and in operation.
Owner Andy Jones (TBC). Target
Completion date 31/08/2012
3 Change IT We reviewed the processes implemented to determine Management should seek to enhance the Post Office has further improved
management that all program changes are appropriately authorised, current change management process/policy _| the process regarding change
process tested and approved prior to implementation into the further to include: management since the last audit.

production environment for the applications in scope.
Whilst we noted some improvements on the process
compared to last year, some of the points raised last year
have not been fully remediated. Specifically, we noted the
following :

POLSAP.

Based on a sample of 17 changes made to the POLSAP
production environment during the audit period we
noted:

* For six changes, whilst we were able to obtain
evidence that the changes had been tested by Fujitsu,
the name of the person who performed the testing
was not recorded

* For four changes, whilst we were able to obtain
evidence of approval from the POL Change Control
team, the name of the person who approved the
change to go live from POL was not recorded

* — For two changes, we noted that POL initiated the
change but the name of the Product and Branch

¢ The level of documentation to be retained
to evidence that POL is involved in
authorisation, testing and approving
changes made to the applications. In
particular, evidence to support the
individual from POL or third party service
provider authorisation, testing and
approval of the change prior to
deployment should be retained to
promote accountability. This will provide
management reasonable assurance that
program changes being implemented into
the production environment have been
authorised, tested and approved prior to
deployment. Please note that all
documentation should be retained.

¢ Definitions of the responsibilities of all
parties involved in the authorisation,
testing and approval of changes deployed
into the production environment, based
on the nature of the change. There is a
need for POL to increase their

However, both Post Office and
Fujitsu will amend their
processes to ensure that the
name of the individual
authorising, testing or approving
changes is recorded, as identified
by the audit this year.

Post Office does not always
engage in the authorisation,
testing and approval of
maintenance changes or fixes as
these are often BAU
maintenance of the system.
However, Post Office does
validate and authorise security
affecting changes such as
patches and anti-virus updates
and ensures that testing is
performed by Fujitsu and retains
an audit trail. Post Office will
verify that the classification of

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

Accounting (P&BA) team member who logged the call
was not recorded

For one change, we were unable to obtain evidence
that the change had been authorised by POL or
Fujitsu prior to development

For one change, we were unable to obtain evidence
that it had been approved by POL prior to
deployment into the production environment.

Whilst we have been advised that POL is not usually

involved in testing fixes or maintenance changes, we have
noted from the samples of changes made to POLSAP that
POL has tested one out of ten changes of this nature.

HNGX

Based on our walkthrough and testing samples of 11 back
end changes, 11 counter changes and six manual changes
made to the live HNGX estate during the audit period, we
noted the following:

For two manual changes and three back end changes,
although POL approval was recorded in the Manage
Service Change (MSC) system prior to
implementation, the name of the member of the POL
Change Control team who provided the approval was
not recorded.

For 28 changes we were unable to obtain evidence of

involvement in the change management
process, specifically business user testing
of fixes and maintenance changes to the
in scope applications. The change
management policy documentation
should also describe the overall manage
change process

Management should implement monitoring
controls to help ensure that controls operated
by the third party service providers are in
place and are in operation.

maintenance and fix changes and
responsibilities is adequately
documented between POL and
Fujitsu, and will update the
documentation if it is found
deficient.

Post Office has a documented
change process described in the
Manage Improvement & Change
document. All Post Office
suppliers have their own internal
change processes. However, Post
Office accepts there is further
work that can be done to reduce
the existing risk.

Action 3a. Post Office will amend
its change processes so that
names are recorded in the
authorisation, testing and
approval process of changes.

Owner Andy Jones. Target
Completion date 31/08/2012.

Action 3b. Post Office will work
with Fujitsu to verify that the

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref | Observation Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
testing performed by POL where 19 changes relate to classification of maintenance and
maintenance changes made by Fujitsu (e.g. anti-virus fix changes and responsibilities is
updates, standard platform build, branch/router adequately documented
configurations, security upgrades, infrastructure between POL and Fujitsu, and
changes) will update the documentation if
* For one change we were unable to obtain evidence of itis found deficient.
testing performed by Fujitsu. Owner Andy Jones (Post Office)
* For one change we were unable to obtain evidence of and Mark Arnold (Fujitsu).
POL approval prior to implementation in the live Target Completion date
environment. 31/07/2012.
There is an increased risk that unauthorised and
inappropriate changes are deployed if they are not
adequately authorised, tested and approved prior to
migration to the production environment and
documentation supporting these controls is not retained.
4 Periodic user IT In the 2010/11 audit we recommended improvements to Management should consider the The existing process verifies that

access reviews
and monitoring
controls

the periodic user access review process and monitoring
controls. Whilst we have noted the efforts by
management to strengthen the control environment this
year, we noted opportunities to improve the process
further.

HNGX

Whilst we have been advised that there is a new process

implementation of a POL owned periodic
review of appropriateness of access to in-
scope applications and their supporting
infrastructure. The implementation of this
review will assist in the identification of
inappropriate access and potential segregation
of duties conflicts. In addition, this will act as
an additional control to help detect users that
no longer require access to the financial

all joiners, leavers and movers
have appropriate access for their
role. The annual review of all
accounts verifies this. The
monthly review of all movers
captures interim changes and in
addition the inactive users are
also identified after a pre-
defined period of inactivity and

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

in place this year for the periodical review of the
appropriateness of access assigned to the HNGX estate,
we understand that this is based on a database that
records access granted and terminated, rather than on
user access listings generated directly from Active
Directory, which diminishes the effectiveness of the
control.

Our user appropriateness review identified one user
account that no longer required access to HNGX.

POLSAP

Whilst we note that there is a process in place to review
the appropriateness of P&BA and Supply Chain users’
access to POLSAP on a periodic basis, sufficient evidence
of the review has not been retained.

Conflicts in segregation of duties and excessive or
inappropriate access to financial systems may arise if a
regular re-validation of user access is not performed.

applications.

The following outlines how this process may
be implemented:

© User listings containing all active users
and their access levels to be generated by
IT and emailed to relevant department
managers whereby they provide
responses detailing:

co Whether the current access of their
employees is in line with their job
role

© Whether any users require their
access be modified or removed.
Where additional access is required
requests should be made through the
existing user modification process.
Where access is required to be
removed, flagging these users and
providing comments is sufficient.
These responses should be actioned
by IT ona timely basis.

¢  Alldocumentation to support the
operation of these controls should be
retained, including:

© Emails to managers requesting
responses

o Responses from managers detailing

then reviewed. These processes
are considered sufficiently
robust. However, Post Office
accepts there is further work
that can be done to reduce the
existing risk. Therefore, Post
Office in conjunction with Fujitsu
will verify that adequate
authorisation is identified and
recorded and where not will take
appropriate steps to remediate.

The issues around user access
management seem to be focused
mainly on very infrequent lapses
in the existing process.
Consequently, Post Office’s
attention will address enhancing
that process to ensure such
lapses can not easily occur in the
future.

Action 4. Post Office in
conjunction with Fujitsu will
verify that adequate
authorisation is identified and
recorded and where not will take

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

whether changes are required
(responses should be provided
whether changes are required or not)

© Overall signoff on the completion of
the review from management.

The above review should include all user
accounts including those privileged user
accounts owned by IT and vendors. In
addition, the individual responsible for
performing the review should have limited
access to the application in order to prevent
the review of their own access.

In terms of monitoring privileged access,
management should specifically consider
implementing a periodic review of users with
privileged access to IT functions within the
HNGX estate.

Evidence to support the operation of the
above monitoring controls for privileged IT
access should also be retained to support
accountability and provide assurance to POL
management.

appropriate steps to remediate.

Owner Richard Barber. Target
completion date 31/07/2012.

Generic
privileged
accounts

Our review of privileged access to the in-scope

applications and their supporting infrastructure last year
revealed individuals sharing password to multiple generic
privileged accounts. The same observation remains valid

this year at the time of our review:

Management should consider a review of
generic privileged accounts across the in-
scope applications and their supporting
infrastructure to determine whether such
accounts can be replaced with individual user

This observation and
recommendation, repeated in
previous audits, has been
successively addressed by
increasing levels of control. Since

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

.

The password to the privileged SYSTEM account on
the Oracle database on the BDB and DAT servers
supporting HNGX is known to four of the 11 members
of the IRE11 TST DBA team and the password to the
same account on the XID and R3D servers supporting
SAP XI and POLSAP applications is known to the three
members of the SAP Basis team.

The password to the privileged DBA account on the
Oracle database on the BDB and DAT servers
supporting HNGX is known to the RMGA Unix team
and four of the 11 members of the IRE11 TST DBA
team respectively. The password to the DBA account
on the XID and R3D Oracle database servers
supporting SAP XI and POLSAP applications is known
to the three members of the SAP Basis team.

The password to the privileged SYS default account
on the Oracle database on the BDB and DAT servers
supporting HNGX is known to four of the 11 members
of the IRE11 TST DBA team respectively. The
password to the SYS account on the XID and R3D
Oracle database servers supporting SAP XI and
POLSAP applications is known to the three members
of the SAP Basis team.

The password to the default privileged Administrator

accounts to promote accountability.

Management should also consider
implementing monitoring controls to help
ensure robust security practices are in place
particularly those operated by third party
service providers.

the last audit the use of Generic
Privileged Accounts is monitored
continually by Fujitsu. The
granting of this privilege must be
justified; is time-bound and is
reported monthly to the POL
Information Security
Management Forum (ISMF) for
approval by the head of
Information Security. In addition,
where users have access to this
privilege, their ability to ‘SUDO’
(switch privileges inside user
session) is additionally
monitored. As for previous years
there is a continuing need for
certain key system activities to
be executed by these admin
teams with these privileges. For
out of hour’s support it is not
possible to predict the privileges
required for support, therefore
the use of elevated privileges is
justified. Devolving SAP_ALL
privileges to specific roles could
not adequately cover all out of
hours support scenarios.

Further additional controls do

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

account on the Active Directory server controlling
access to the HNGX estate was known to the nine
members of the IRE11 NT team.

* Furthermore, the password to the following accounts
with the SAP_ALL and SAP_NEW privileged profiles on
POLSAP is known to the three members of the Fujitsu
Basis Consultants team:

o ~ADMINBATCH

o ~BASISADMIN

o OTUSER

o =SAP*

o =SOLMANPLMSO00:

‘© DDIC (assigned to the SAP_ALL profile only)

o WF-ADMIN.

The use of generic accounts undermines accountability
and can lead to unauthorised access to financial data.

not appear to be justified.
However the rigour of the
monthly check at the ISMF will
be tested to ensure it is
adequate, if not steps will be
taken to optimise the checking of
these accounts.

The issues around generic
privileged accounts seem to be
focused partly on very
infrequent lapses in the existing
process and partly on the risk
that a privileged user might
misuse their access or their
elevated privileges. Post Office
accepts that deterrence is not as
strong as prevention but in this
case the operational impact of
devolving SAP_ALL privileges is
believed to carry more risk of
operational instability. Post
Office believes that the existing
process provide sufficient
transparency and accountability
to deter such activity.
Consequently, Post Office’s
attention will address enhancing
the process to ensure that lapses

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

in record keeping can not easily
occur in the future; and that
attention will be given to
enhancing this accountability
and transparency where
possible. Post Office accepts
there is further work that can be
done to reduce the existing risks
in this area.

Action 5. The rigour of the
monthly check at the ISMF will
be tested to ensure it is
adequate, if not steps will be
taken to optimise the checking of
these accounts.

Owner Richard Barber. Target
completion date 31/07/2012.

Password
parameters

IT

We reviewed the password configurations for the in-scope
applications and the infrastructure supporting these
applications. Whilst our examination revealed some
improvements to the observations raised from last year’s
audit, the following observations remain open:

« We reviewed the password configurations for the in-
scope applications against Fujitsu’s RMGA Security
Policy and Post Office’s Information Security Guide.

Whist we acknowledged that password
weaknesses in the application, operating
system and database level are mitigated to
some extent by the network Active Directory
password controls, the following is still
recommended to further strengthen the
control environment

a) _Review and update the ‘RMG Information

Since the last audit the RMG
Information Security policy
(SVM/SEC/POL/0003) has been
amended to meet recommended
good practice and approved by
POL. In regard to network,
application and infrastructure
components these have been

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

We noted the following password parameters have
not been defined:

RMGA Security Policy

* Reset account lockout counter
© — Idle session timeout

Post Office Information Security Guide
¢ Account lockout threshold

¢ Reset account lockout counter

* Account lockout duration

e — Idle session timeout.

We also noted that there are password setting
weaknesses within the RMGA Information Security
Policy:

o Number of passwords that must be used prior to
using a password again is defined as ‘Re-use of
the same password must not be permitted for
either a specified time or until at least 4 other
passwords have been used’

o Account lockout duration is defined as ‘the user
must be locked out for at least 30 minutes or
until reset by an administrator’

© There are password setting weaknesses within the
POLSAP application:

Security Policy’ to meet the
recommended generally-accepted
practice password settings outlined
below. Management should also consider
having only one policy document
outlining the password guidelines that
apply to both HNGX and POLSAP

b) Configure all network, application and
supporting infrastructure components in
line with the policy requirements, For
infrastructure supporting the applications
in scope, where the critical authentication
level is at the POLSAP application layer or
Active Directory, management should
consider the risk of unauthorised access
to the financial data by privileged
accounts on the Oracle database and
Linux operating system

Password setting | Recommended
configuration

Minimum password | 6 - 8 characters

length

Complexity Alphanumeric

including special
characters and

reviewed and where necessary
have been amended to fall in line
with new policy. The new policy
has been cascaded to all users,
especially admin teams. There is
now regular monitoring and
communication through
embedded BAU process. Non
compliances are reviewed at the
ISMF and a Pen test has been
established as part of BAU.

Post Office believes that the
controls in place are sufficient to
mitigate the risk exposure.
Notwithstanding that Post Office
will continually monitor this to
ensure continuing compliance,
this risk is accepted.

Action 6a. Post Office will
regularly review the scope of the
BAU Pen test to ensure all
relevant network, application
and infrastructure component
password configuration
continues to meet appropriate
password parameters. Where

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref | Observation Location Background Recommendation Management Comment
© Minimum password length is 6 characters. This upper/lower case this is technically feasible.
does not meet RMG Information Security Policy | | Frequency of forced | 90 days or less Owner Richard Barber. Review

guideline of a minimum of 7 characters

© Idle session time out is set to 3600 seconds. This
does not meet the recommended setting of 1800
seconds or less

©. Table logging is not enabled (i.e. rec/client =
OFF). This does not meet the recommended
setting of ON

© There are password setting weaknesses at the Linux
operating system level on both the application servers
supporting POLSAP (R3A) and HNGX (BAL) :

© Minimum password length is 5 characters. This
does not meet RMGA Information Security Policy
guideline of a minimum of 7 characters

o Maximum password age is set at 99999 days.
This does not meet RMGA Information Security
Policy guideline that passwords must expire in 30
days

© Minimum password age is set to 0 days. This
does not meet the recommended setting of 1
day

© Account lockout after failed login attempts is not
set. This does not meet the RMGA Information
Security Policy guideline of 3 failed login
attempts

password changes

Number of
passwords that
must be used prior

5 (Should be higher
if passwords
changed more

to using a password | frequently)
again

Initial log-on uses a_ | Enabled
one-time password

The number of 3-S invalid
unsuccessful logon | attempts

attempts allowed
before lockout

Account lockout
duration
Idle session timeout

Account lockout
reset counter

Forever until
manually unlocked

30 minutes

60 minutes

Management should consider implementing
monitoring controls to help ensure robust
security settings are in place particularly those
operated by third party service providers.

Annually.

Action 6b. Where new
architecture is developed and
deployed (network, application
and infrastructure) these will be
required to meet the appropriate
password parameters and
included in the BAU Pen test.

Owner Richard Barber. Review
Annually.

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

© Password history is not set. This does not meet
the recommended setting of 5 passwords

© Idle session timeout is not set. This does not
meet the recommended setting of 30 minutes.
Note: This setting only applies to the POLSAP
R3A platform

There are password setting weaknesses on the
Windows 2003 Active Directory Controller supporting
HNNGX:

© Account lockout threshold is set to 6 failed login
attempts. This does not meet the RMGA
Information Security Policy guideline of 3 failed
login attempts

© Account lockout reset counter is set to 30
minutes. This does not meet the recommended
setting of 60 minutes

© Account lockout duration is set to 30 minutes.
This does not meet the recommended setting
whereby an Administrator is required to unlock
the account

There are password setting weaknesses at the Oracle
database level on the database servers supporting
POLSAP (R3D)and SAP XI (XID) and on the branch
database server (BDB) and transaction processing
system server (DAT) supporting HNGX :

© Minimum password length is not set. This does
not meet the RMGA Information Security Policy

POL00143525
POL00143525

Ref | Observation Location Background Recommendation Management Comment

guideline of a minimum of 7 characters

© Password composition is not set. This does not
meet the RMGA Information Security Policy
guideline of alphanumeric

© Frequency of forced password changes does not
meet RMGA Information Security Policy
guideline of 30 days or less

o The number of unsuccessful log on attempts
allowed before lockout is set to set to 10. This
does not meet the RMGA Information Security
Policy guideline of 3 failed login attempts

© Account lockout duration is not defined. This
does not meet recommended practice of at least
5 days for the Oracle database

o The number of passwords that must be used
prior to using a password again is not set. This
does not meet the recommended setting of 5
passwords

o Idle session timeout is not set. The does not
meeting the recommended setting of 30 minutes

Weak password settings increase the risk of unauthorised
access to financial processing and data.

7 Logical security | IT Our review last year of the logical security settings for the | Management should consider the following: __| Disabling the default

settings estas supporting the applications in scope © Setting an encrypted password for the aciministrator account for Active
identified certain logical security weaknesses. From our LISTENER.ORA file on all Oracle databases | Di"ectory for HNGX and replacing
review this year, we noted that these weaknesses are still with a new administrator

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

valid. These include:

* For the Oracle database supporting SAP XI (XID) and
the Branch Database server (BDB), and Transaction
Processing System server (DAT) Oracle databases
supporting HNGX, we noted that the password for
the LISTENER.ORA file has not been enabled and the

password entry does not contain an encrypted value.

The default Administrator account on the Active
Directory server controlling access to the HNGX
estate (ACD) has not been disabled.

Inadequate system security settings increase the risk of
unauthorised access to financial data.

supporting the in-scope applications

© Disabling the default Administrator
account and create a new Administrator
account with a strong password.

Management should also consider
implementing monitoring controls to help
ensure robust security settings are in place,
particularly those operated by third party
service providers.

account appears to carry no
benefit as the identifying ID for
the account would remain the
same. The existing password
follows recommendations for
strong passwords. Against the
marginal improvement in access
risk Post Office recognise that
the default admin account is
embedded in key maintenance
activities and replacing the
default admin account carries a
greater risk of causing disruption
to the operational stability of the
system. However, Post Office will
request Fujitsu to assess the cost
and operational impact of this
change.

There in only marginal benefit of
encrypting LISTENER.ORA
password when the other
controls managing access to the
listener service are considered.
However, Post Office will request
Fujitsu to assess the cost and
operational impact of making
this change. But it is believed
that the disadvantage in terms of

POL00143525

POL00143525

Ref

Observation

Location

Background

Recommendation

Management Comment

potential system disruption out
way the very marginal access risk
reduction.

Notwithstanding the actions
above (item 6) that may drive
further improvements Post
Office believes that the controls
in place are adequate to mitigate
the risk and therefore the risk is
accepted.

Action 7a. Post Office will assess
the possibility of setting an
encrypted password for the
LISTNER.ORA file.

Owner Richard Barber. Target
Completion Date 30/09/2012.

Action 7b. Post Office will
request Fujitsu to assess the cost
and operational impact of
encrypting the LISTNER.ORA file..

Owner Richard Barber. Target
Completion Date 31/07/2012.

POL00143525

POL00143525
4. Prior Year Recommendations Update — non IT related
Issue Location | Background Recommendation Management Current Year Update
Comment
GRNI Finance — We recommended in previous years that management We have noted Noted in detail in Noted in detail in
London _ | continue to look for ways to improve the purchasing improvement in the review | section2—Current | section 2—- Current
process to reduce the required levels of manual input into | of the accrual and would Year Year
the GRNI accrual. encourage management to pacommendations. | Recommendations.
continue to strengthen the
The balance has continued to reduce during the period as_| review to ensure that:
management's review of the balance has been more
detailed. - Aged balances are
challenged
The main issues continue to be the volume of line items - Significant services line
within the listing, the difficulty in tracking delivery dates, | items are reviewed for
in particular for services, and the clearing of residual adequacy
values. - Timely clearing of residual
values.
In addition, with upcoming
changes to the business, and
in particular separation
activity, management should
continue to explore options
to improve the purchasing
process.
Human Asset Payroll — An employee asset check was completed for the first 6 We recommend that HR Agreed Employees & Agents:
Check Bolton months with a response rate of 75%. The remaining 25% reviews the results of the a) Employees ~ the During the current year,
was not completed given the upcoming organisational trial run of the employee final verification of our | it was noted that whilst
asset check and ensure that | structure will in effect | the POL service centre

POL00143525
POL00143525

restructure. However, as all employees are expected to be
put onto new online organisational chart before March
2011, Management believes this will allow for a more
robust human asset check in the future.

The agent asset check continues not to be in place. The
design of an asset check for agents is still under discussion
and the HR department have put forward a suggested
process to senior management and are awaiting approval.
As this control is not yet fully operational, there is a
continued risk of either ‘ghost’ employees or agents, or
that employees or agents who have left the business
incorrectly remain on the payroll.

100% coverage is achieved.
In addition, we await to see
senior management’s
decision regarding
implementation of the
proposed agent’s asset
check but recommend that
the proposed control is
introduced at the earliest
opportunity to migrate the
inherent risks.

deliver the second 6
month review as per
the agreed control. We
also hope to deliver a
trial in March 2011 of
the new process which
will be introduced
from the new financial
year.

b) Agents — Currently
we are performing a
check of offices paid
on HRSAP against
office transacting
basics products eg. 1
class stamps (via
Credence). We intend
to continue with this
check and await a
decision on whether
we require anything
further to deliver an
acceptable asset check
for our agent
population.

carried out a human
asset check in June 2011
and January 2012, and
this was satisfactorily
carried out so we were
able to perform controls
testing and place
reliance. Management
were also able to review
the results of the
process, and received a
response rate of 97%,
which is an improvement
from 75% in prior year.
We would continue to
encourage management
to review the results of
the human asset check
as it is a value-adding
control to check for the
existence of employees.
We were able to rely on
the human asset check
from a controls testing
effectiveness
perspective and have no
current year
management letter
comment.

Change Requests
(General Review)

Payroll —
Bolton

We noted a marked improvement in the maintenance and
transparency of the employee changes log spreadsheet,
however one month sampled identified that the 10%
check had not been carried out in full, with only 8% of

We recommend that the
change from a “contractual”
change request to a “non-

contractual” change request

Agreed — Now in place
a) Additional column

has now been included
on our spreadsheet to

For current year audit,
we have noted that
management’s
responses to FY2010/11

POL00143525

POL00143525

changes (contractual and non-contractual) being subject
to review.

It was also noted that the log was not amended in cases
where the information would suggest a contractual
change but once processed this was not the case,
however it is recorded by sign off if the change lead to a
contractual change.

This control is important in ensuring that all changes are
being reviewed and input onto SAP correctly. It was noted
that this was done in the other months selected for
testing apart from the exception noted above.

be clearly documented on
the spreadsheet in order to
ensure transparency over
what contractual changes
have been made. In
addition, we recommend
that the level of secondary
check each month (eg 10%
of the full population) is
adhered too in all cases.

highlight where there
is a change in status
from the source
document ie. sent as
contractual and
processed as non-
contractual or vice
versa. This is already
noted on the source
document however
this addition adds
visibility.

b) 10% check as
detailed in our Control
Manual will be
delivered. On the one
month where only 8%
was documented this
has now been re-
visited retrospectively
and the team leader
has checked a further
sample to meet the
agreed requirements.

comments have been
addressed. We note that
the 10% check was
carried out in full for
Change Requests during
the current year. In
addition, an additional
column was included in
the spreadsheet to
indicate where the
change was or was not
contractual.

Agent Leavers
Review

Payroll —
Bolton

Based on our review of the secondary check-sheets used
in the agent leavers processes, we identified 3 instances
in one month (January) where the leaver was identified
for secondary checking but the secondary review of the
leaver details was not completed. We did note that the
initial checks of these leavers had been completed.

The secondary checks are in place to ensure that

We recommend that
management ensure that
the control policy to
secondary check 10% of the
population of leavers each

month is fully implemented.

Agreed — Now in place.

The 3 instances
identified have now
been checked
retrospectively. This
check is in place and
documented on our

In current year, we note
that EY 2010/11
recommendations have
been implemented. No
issues noted with 10%
check, control is
effective.

POL00143525
POL00143525

adequate review of the process is occurring and that the
leaver is correctly removed from the system to avoid
overpayment.

Control Manual so
should have been
delivered.

In addition to the
standard check this
area is checked
periodically at Service
Manager level
however given the
audit finding we will
extend this high level
check to be delivered
each month,
commencing P11.

Variance Report
for Agents

Payroll —
Bolton

It was noted when testing the agents pay variance reports
for April, August & September that there were a small
number of exceptions per the generated exception
reports that had not been brought forward and noted on
the summary front sheet — which is in turn reviewed by
the Service Team Leader (STL). There appear to be no
guidelines in place which dictate which variances and
follow ups require management review although those
exceptions identified within the report had been
investigated in the initial review but not included on the
front sheet ready for STL review.

A lack of clear guidelines dictating which variances should
be raised for management review leaves the potential for
oversight of significant variances generated by the SAP
report which are not included in the STL review.

We recommend that there
are clear process guidelines
for the level of management
checks to indicate which
variances should be raised
for management review, in
order to ensure no
significant variances and
follow up actions are
omitted. All items within the
report meeting this
threshold should then be
included on the front sheet
ready for management
review.

‘Agreed — Will be fully
in place for P12
processing.

The check is 100% on
the variances that are
produced with those
requiring action
documented on a front
facing sheet. Narrative
detailing the
guidelines to perform
the check will
accompany the front
facing sheet. The sheet
will also be updated to
include a ‘balance’ of

Management had scope
and materiality in place,
and there were clear
guidelines dictating how
variances should be
raised for management
review.

POL00143525

POL00143525

all variances identified
that period which will
form part of the team
leader sign off.

POL00143525
POL00143525

nat & Young LLP

Assurance

About Ernst & Young

st and clear perspective to audit commiltess and critical
ve the experience at auditing many of the world’s jeading com
ues, using a proven global methodology and deploying the latest, hig
nowladge and the latest insights frorn our work workdwide. It's how Emst & Young

maton for investors and other
anies, We pravide a consistent w

lity auditing tools. And
kes a dit

300 assurance professionals, who h
address the most complex i
subject matier

Kdwide
a work to give

1g the right maltidisciptin
tof our br experi

Mm to

For more information, please visit waxey.comvuk,

Published in the UK.

