                                                                                              POL00021503
                                                                                           POL00021503



                        Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




POLB(12)1st
POLB12/01-17
                                 Post Office Limited
                               (company no. 2154540)
                  Minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors
         held at 148 Old Street, London EC1V 9HQ on 12~J           2012

Present:
Alice Perkins           Chairman, Post Office Ltd
Neil McCausland         Senior Independent Director, Post Office Ltd
Les Owen                Non Executive Director, Post Office Ltd (items POLB12/01-12)
Paula Vennells          Managing Director, Post Office Ltd
Chris Day               Chief Financial Officer, Post Office Ltd

In attendance:
Alwen Lyons             Company Secretary, Post Office Ltd
Susannah Storey         BIS (Item No. POLB12/01a)
Matthew Starks          Acting HR Director (Item No. POLB12/01 and POLB12/07)
Susan Crichton          Legal & Compliance Director (Items No. POLB12/06 -14)
Nick Kennett            Director, Financial Services (Item No. POLB12/09)
Martin Moran            Commercial Director (Item No. POLB12/10)
Mike Young              Chief Operating Officer (Item No. POLB12/13)


POLB12/01                POL REMUNERATION

                  (a)   Feedback from ShEx (Susannah Storey)
                        The Chairman welcomed Susannah Storey to the meeting and
                        explained that she had invited Susannah Storey to put the process
                        for approval of Post Office Board remuneration into context from a
                        Shareholder perspective.

                        Susannah Storey explained that after separation the controls
                        currently existing in the RMH articles would be incorporated into
                        POL articles and this would mean that matters relating to Board
                        remuneration (base salary and incentives) would need the
                        Shareholder's consent. She stressed that the authorisation process
                        can take some time and emphasised the need to ensure any
                        proposal put by Remco to the Government was properly justified
                        and benchmarked to enable decisions to be taken. The personal
                        objectives on which any bonuses were predicated needed to be
                        justifiable and not seen as "just doing the job".

                        Susannah Storey explained that recent history shows significant
                        over achievement against stretch targets and this has inevitably
                        called into doubt whether the targets were challenging enough.

                        Les Owen highlighted that both Royal Mail Group and Post Office
                        Ltd dealt with small profit targets but calculated from significant
                        revenue and cost figures, and that this could lead to large
                        variances. He suggested the Business needed to find a measure
                        which was more aligned to share price for its long term incentive.
                                                                           POL00021503
                                                                         POL00021503



      Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




      The Chairman stressed the need to get proposals into the
      Government early and ensure that individuals were genuinely
      incentivised but not over rewarded.

      Susannah Storey emphasised that only the remuneration of the
      Board needed to go to ShEx, but that included any salary changes
      and any short or long term incentive proposals.

      Matthew Starks asked what is the Shareholder view of paying a
      bonus for performance below the target. Susannah Story explained
      that there was no set view and that the Business needed to argue
      its case but that Ministers had very publicly stated that they would
      not reward failure, so any proposal needed to bear this in mind.

      Susannah Storey left the meeting.

(b)   LTIP
      The Chairman asked Les Owen for his input on the LTIP paper
      POLB(12)01 as he had experience of the RMG scheme. Les Owen
      reported that from his private sector experience he was used to
      seeing the bonus expressed on an annual basis but that the three
      year amounts appeared to be appropriate and reasonable. He
      emphasised the need to find a less volatile metric for the financial
      target.

      Chris Day explained that the Business had only just hit the last LTIP
      targets and that the next three years profit targets were very
      stretching. Les Owen explained that he was not suggesting the
      Business always over achieves its profit target but that the number
      was volatile and susceptible to large negative and positive
      variances.

      The Chairman emphasised the need for very different measures for
      the short term and long term targets. Neil McCausland suggested
      that the LTIP should target the Business outputs and focus on being
      financially sustainable. Paula Vennellls explained why the Network
      Conversions were important in changing the Business cost base
      and therefore should be a gateway to any LTIP bonus payment.
      The Board agreed that the Network Conversion gateway target
      should be set at 5400 (90%) which aligned to the MDA agreement.

      The Chairman asked the Board if they believed bonuses should be
      paid for delivering below 100 of the profit target. Les Owen
      accepted the perception of rewarding failure but highlighted the
      danger of `cliff vesting' as this could derive the wrong behaviours in
      the Business. He suggested a gradation around the target point
      with significant increase for achieving the target. Neil McCausland
      agreed.

      Les Owen pointed out that it would be important for the Remco to
      have some discretion in relation to the LTIP because it is impossible
      to be certain in advance that all relevant matters have been
      anticipated when agreeing the scheme.


                            2
                                                                                               POL00021503
                                                                                         POL00021503



                       Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential


                       The Chairman asked if the forthcoming TUPE of staff from RMG to
                       POL would effect the remuneration proposal. Matthew Starks
                       explained that any changes to peoples' terms and conditions
                       needed to be deemed of a reasonable nature and had to pass the
                       "substantially equivalent" test, and that the longer the time between
                       the TUPE and the change the better. The Business would test any
                       proposal with the TUPE lawyers. Paula Vennells hoped we could
                       design something which would be acceptable for the long term
                       rather that have to make further changes in the short term.

                       Paula Vennells and Chris Day left the meeting whilst their
                       remuneration was discussed. Discussions were not minuted.

                       Paula Vennells and Chris Day rejoined the meeting.

                       The Chairman asked that a proposal be brought back to the Board
                       based on the discussions to date (including higher ranges for CEO
                       and CFO) with a gateway for Network Conversions; a small reward
                       for achieving 90% of the financial target; but with the main bonus at
ACTION:                100% and significant rewards for hitting stretch targets. It was
Matthew Starks         agreed that the work needed to be completed as quickly as possible
                       to enable a proposal to the Shareholder before the end of the
                       financial year.

                 (c)   Remuneration Structure
                       The Board discussed the STIP (short term incentive scheme)
                       structure. Paula Vennells clarified that the PDR score related to the
                       annual performance review against personal objectives and that
ACTION:                approximately 15% of employees were graded as 1 or 2. Neil
Matthew Starks         McCausland asked to see the distribution of scores for the last 2
                       years, which would be circulated to the Board.

                       Neil McCausland emphasised the need to focus on financial
                       measures and those drivers which effect financial performance. Les
                       Owen proposed a structure where greater bonus was attributed to
                       profit or sales, but where other targets such as Health and Safety
                       had to be passed or the bonus achieved would be reduced.

                       The Chairman asked that customer measures play a significant part
                       in any calculation but stressed the need for measurable targets.

                       Neil McCausland added that moving the Business towards
                       performance related pay as well as bonus would be beneficial.

                 (d)   Managers Pay 2011-12
                       Matthew Starks updated the Board on the CMA pay negotiations.
                       Crown Managers have been offered 1.4% to mirror the CWU grade
                       award, and admin managers have been offered 1.6% plus £400
                       cash payment to be paid against specific objectives. This award is
                       greater than that offered by RMG but has been cleared with RM
ACTION:                CEO. Discussions are continuing with the CMA and Matthew
Matthew Starks         Starks will update the Board if there are any significant changes or
                       the pay deal is agreed.




                                            3
                                                                                              POL00021503
                                                                                           POL00021503




                        Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential


                        Neil McCausland asked if this gave the Business a gap in its plan
                        over the next 3 years. Chris Day confirmed this and that the
                        increase would need to be included in the commercials and
                        assumptions in the Crown Plan.

POLB12/02               MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETINGS

                  (a)   The minutes of the meeting of 13`h December 2011 were agreed;

                  (b)   the minutes of the POFS Board (POFS(11)5th) were noted;

                        Les Owen asked what issues were driving the red status of the MI
                        migration programme and whether it should be of concern to the
ACTION:                 Board. Chris Day agreed to investigate and send a note out as
Chris Day               soon as possible.

                  (c)   The minutes of the FRES Board (FRES(11)4`h) were noted.

POLB12/03               MATTERS ARISING — Status Report

                  (a)   No.11b (POLB11/60(e)): The Chairman commented that the UKBA
                        action was intended to refer to the external (rather than the internal)
ACTION:                 communications plan. Paula Vennells agreed and ensured the
Alwen Lyons             Board that the FOoG update at the next Board meeting would
                        include FOoG external communication plan.

                  (b)   No.4c (POLB11/71(h)): Paula Vennells reported that Lord Freud
                        had postponed this meeting. This will now be picked up within the
                        Front Office of Government work as a meeting on this has already
                        been scheduled for April

POLB12/03               MANAGING DIRECTOR'S REPORT

                  (a)   Network Transformation
                        Neil McCausland congratulated Paula Vennells on the response to
ACTION:                 the survey and asked how the Business intended to prioritise the
Chris Day I             offices as the models had very different commercial implications.
Kevin Gilliland         Paula Vennells assured the Board that this would be included in the
                        next Board update due in March.

                        The Chairman stressed how vital this work was to the Business and
                        asked for it to come to the Board earlier if it was available.

                        Paula Vennells reported that the RMG and POL Communication
                        Directors were working closely to plan effective communications for
ACTION:                 Network Transformation. In future, the joint Communications Action
Alwen Lyons             Group minutes, including the details of the Network Transformation
                        Programme, would come to the Board for noting.

                  (b)   Front Office of Government
                        The Chairman stressed the importance of focussing the Business'
                        best people on the DVLA tender. Paula Vennells agreed and
                        stressed that the Business was using the lessons learnt from the
                        UKBA bid.



                                             4
                                                                                                      POL00021503
                                                                                                  POL00021503



                               Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential


ACTION:                        A full update and detailed project plan, including competitor
Martin Moran                   analysis, will form part of the Front Office of Government update at
                               the next Board.

                         (c)   IT Landscape
                               The Chairman emphasised the need for the IT Board paper to be
                               clear with practical language and to highlight what the IT changes
ACTION:                        will mean to the Business on the ground. Paula Vennells
Mike Young                     suggested that the Board might benefit from an IT deep dive.



ACTION:
Mike Young
                                 IRRELEVANT
                   (e)         Consumer Focus
                               Paula Vennells reported that she had met with Mike O'Connor from
                               Consumer Focus before Christmas, and although this was before
                               the unhelpful report in the Daily Mail, she was assured that such
                               reports were less likely to happen in the future.




                          IRRELEVANT
ACTION:                        Nick Kennett to provide a noting paper for the February Board to
Nick Kennett                   cover communications to customers.

                   ME
ACTION:
Paula Vennells I
Alwen Lyons                              Irrelevant
POLB12/04                      HEALTH AND SAFETY UPDATE

                   (a)         The Health & Safety Update (POLB12/05) was noted.

POLB12/05
                   ;on




                   (c)           Irrelevant
                                                    5
                                                                                              POL00021503
                                                                                          POL00021503



                       Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential



ACTION:
Chris Day
                                     Irrelevant
POLB12/06              POL GOVERNANCE

                 (a)   The Governance paper was presented as a basis for an opening
                       discussion on this issue; it had not been discussed in advance with
                       the Chairman who would work with Susan Crichton on it after the
                       Board
                       Neil McCausland asked for clarification of delegated authorities
                       from ShEx alongside the decisions ShEx retained.
                       Les Owen stressed the need to include 'Going Concern'
ACTION:                discussions as part of the Board's governance. Chris Day agreed
Chris Day              to discuss with Matthew Lester (RMG CFO) and introduce the
                       necessary reporting process at the Board.
                       The Chairman explained that she would like to understand the
                       rationale for proposed delegated authorities and their implications.
                       Les Owen questioned whether POL would need a Board Pensions
                       Sub-committee, but Paula Vennells asked to keep this in the short-
                       term as the sectionalisation, investment and funding strategies
                       would all need detailed work.
                       It was suggested that the Health & Safety Sub-committee could be
                       an Executive Sub-committee and the Board would be updated
                       through the Managing Director's Report.
                       Susan Crichton suggested that the Audit Sub-committee should
                       expand to include risk and compliance as this would give Board
                       rigour and sub-committee oversight to the reporting of compliance
ACTION:                by management.
Susan Crichton         Susan Crichton to bring a proposal back to the Board after the
                       discussion with the Chairman.

POLB12/07              SIGNIFICANT LITIGATION REPORT
                       - Noting Paper (POLB(12)13)
                 (a)   Les Owen asked for assurance that there was no substance to the
                       claims bought by subpostmasters which had featured in Private
                       Eye.

                       Susan Crichton explained that the subpostmasters were
                       challenging the integrity of the Horizon system. However the system
                       had been audited by RMG Internal Audit with the reports reviewed
                       by Deloittes. The audit report was very positive.

                       The Business has also won every criminal prosecution in which it
                       has used evidence based on the Horizon system's integrity.

ACTION:                Susan Crichton suggested that she clear the audit report with the
Susan Crichton         external lawyers and if it is possible to give the report privileged
                       status it would be circulate it to the Board.




                                             6
                                                                                          POL00021503
                                                                                        POL00021503


                     Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential


POLB12108

               (a)



               (b)


               (c)


                      Irrelevant
               ~Ul

               (e)




POLB12109            EAGLE UPDATE

               (a)   Heads of Terms
                     Nick Kennett reported that the Heads of Terms has been signed on
                     29th December 2011 and the hope was to have the contract in place
                     by the end of March.

               (b)   Insurance
                     The issue of where insurance would sit in the Business is yet to be
                     resolved. Bol have proposed that this part of the current joint
                     venture be retained within Midasgrange (which will be wholly owned
                     by Bol), but with a new Board.

                     Nick Kennett explained why he thoughit this structure was too
                     bureaucratic and suggested an alternative.

                     The Chairman asked that Nick Kennett provide a paper to the
ACTION:              Board setting out his alternative proposal with the negotiations
Nick Kennett         mandate he requires.

                     Les Owen agreed and stressed the importance that any new
                     structure enables POL to have control over products, incentives and
                     sales campaigns.

                     Neil McCausland emphasised the need to manage the short term
                     Junction contract effectively to ensure no penalty was paid. Nick
                     Kennett reported that Junction were supportive of including the 30k
                     Van Insurances currently with AVIVA in the portfolio until Sept
                     2012.


                                          7
                                                                                          POL00021503
                                                                                        POL00021503



                     Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential



                     Les Owen asked if Nick Kennett had confidence in the Manager
                     running the Insurance Business. Nick Kennett reported that the last
                     two weeks had seen the portfolio grow for the first time in three
                     years and that he had every confidence in the way the contract was
                     now being managed. The Chairman asked for a paper to be
ACTION:              brought to the Board covering the Business and the proposals for
Nick Kennett         the last two years of the Junction contract.

               (c)




                     IRRELEVANT

ACTION:
Nick Kennett


POLB12/10            PREFERRED SUPPLIER — OUTPUT FROM TELEPHONY
                     TENDER

               (a)   Martin Moran explained that the Telephony Tender process was
                     now complete, and that the preferred bidder was Fujitsu.

                     Neil McCausland questioned the reliance on Fujitsu. Martin Moran
                     explained that we were their third biggest customer worth circa 5%
                     of their turnover. But the new contract provided only a small return
                     for Fujitsu with the bulk of the contract passed through to Talk Talk.

                     The Chairman asked if there was any scope to reduce the price of
                     the contract further. Martin Moran explained that it had already
                     been reduced three times so he would not want to reopen the price,
                     but that he had negotiated IF rights for Horizon and a £2m
                     reduction in Horizon change request charges for 2012/13, as well
                     as step in rights to work direct with Talk Talk etc if Fujitsu failed.

                     The Board endorsed the recommendation and congratulated Martin
                     Moran on the deal.
                                                                                             POL00021503
                                                                                           POL00021503




                         Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential



POLB12/11                BRIBERY ACT

                         Neil McCausland asked for assurance that the Business is
                         complying with the Bribery Act required disclosures.

                         Susan Crichton explained that POL had the same policy in place as
                         RMG and colleagues were trained when the Act came into force.
                         The register of Gifts is held in Compliance and shows no significant
ACTION:                  disclosures. Susan Crichton undertook to revisit the requirements
Susan Crichton           at an Executive Team meeting.

POLB12/12                POL STATE AID APPLICATION

                         Susan Crichton reported that BIS will be submitting a notification to
                         the EU Commission for POL SGEI State Aid at the end of January.
                         The process had been underway since May, but because of a
                         change in the SGEI framework BIS had decided to hold back the
                         notification.

ACTION:                  The Chairman asked Paula Vennells Ito draw the Board's attention
Susan Crichton /         to any concerns and notify them when the notification was
Paula Vennells           submitted and agreed.

                         Les Owen left the meeting.

POLB12113                MDAIMSA

                   (a)   Minutes shown at Appendix A because of Conflicts.

POLB12114                British Postal Museum & Archive (BPMA)

                   (a)   Minutes shown at Appendix B because of Conflicts.

POLB12115                ANY OTHER BUSINESS

                         The Chairman informed the Board of several non-executive director
ACTION:                  candidates, a possible Chair of Audit and that Susannah Storey had
Alwen Lyons              agreed to join the Board as a NED. Alwen Lyons to organise her
                         induction.

POLB12/16                    •   NOTING PAPERS
                   (a)       •   Telecoms Tender — POL Sourcing Council and Group
                                 Investment Committee Business case (POLB(12)11) was
                   (b)           noted.
                   (c)       •   Insurance Risks (POLB(12)12) was noted.
                   (d)       •   Insurance Risks (POLB(12)12) was noted.
                   (e)       •   Pin Pads — Lessons Leant (POLB(12)14) was noted.
                             •   Post Office Sealings (POLB(12)15) was noted.
                             •   Intelligent Pricing (POLB(12)16) was noted.

POLB12/17                CLOSE

                   (a)   There being no other business, the Chairman closed the meeting.
                                                                                   POL00021503
                                                                                 POL00021503



                       Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential



                                                   Appendix A to Minutes POLB(12)1st

POLB12113


                 (a)



                 (b)


                 (c)



ACTION:          (d)
Mike Young /
Susan Crichton

                 (e)


                 (f)


ACTION:
Susan Crichton
                          Irrelevant
ACTION:          (g)
Susan Crichton



                 (h)




ACTION:          (j)
Susan Crichton


ACTION:          (k)
All
                                                                                    POL00021503
                                                                                 P OL00021503



                       Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




                                                            Appendix B to POLB(12)1st

POLB12/14              British Postal Museum & Archive (BPMA)

                 (a)




                 (b)
                         Irrelevant
                 (c)
ACTION:
Paula Vennells

                 (d)




GRO




                                           11
