                                                                                                                         POL00091384
                                                                                                                       POL00091384




Message
From:          John Breeden [/O=MMS/OU=EXCHANGE ADMINISTRATIVE GROUP
               (FYDI BO HF23SPDLT)/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=JO H N. BREEDEN 3E 12944E-D07B-479D-8B19-52890F8655E0]
Sent:          05/12/2010 19:23:32                  ---_
To:            Angela Van Den_Bogerd .                                 GRO
CC:            Sue Huggins. ._._,_._._._._._._._._._GRO               ~ Tracy Marshall     GRO_                Lin Norbury
                                                         iAndy Bayfield                GRO    ; Mike Granville
                         GRO
                          1~
Subject:     FW: Follow up to BIS meeting on JFSA
Attachments: JFSA response issues for BIS.doc; Suspension cases - process.doc; Post Office Ltd Investigations.doc


Angela,

Further to my voicemail message on Friday please find below the email I have received from Lynn Hobbs

The second documented attached above, entitled Suspension cases - process was the one prepared for the meeting with
BIS that Lynn was to attend in November — it is not clear from Lynn's email below if this document was discussed with
BIS, the indication being Mike Granville was going to send these across to BIS (sorry I am not clear on the date of the
meeting and the order of events here but from the third email I wi ll send you it appears the process was not discussed at
the meeting.).

I have two further emails from Lynn will I wi ll forward on one relating to Horizon Integrity which Sue and Mike have already
received and the third providing a brief ahead of the meeting with BIS.

Regards

John

John Breeden
National Contract Manager North
Post Office Ltd — Network Support
2nd Floor, The Markets Crown Office, 6/16 New York Street, Leeds LS2 7DZ
Tel l . . . .GRO
              . . . . . . . . . . 1obexi       GRO
Email:                                -
                                  GRO -------------------------

 Confidential Information: This e-mail message is for the sole use of the intended recipient (s) and may contain
confidential and privileged information. Any unauthorised review, use, disclosure or distribution is prohibited. If you are
not the intended recipient, please contact me by reply e-mail and destroy all copies of the original message.


From: Lynn Hobbs
Sent: 03 December 2010 18:16
To: John Breeden
Subject: FW: Follow up to BIS meeting on JFSA



This is the last email exchange I had with Mike Granville about the BIS meeting. The attached documents were what
Mike was proposing sending to BIS and I commented as below. I haven't seen anything further but I did have a
conversation with Mike about the whole 'remote access to Horizon' issue. This was being looked into by Andy McLean
and Mark Burley. The view being expressed was that whi lst this may be possible it's not something we have asked
Fujitsu to provide. I don't know what the final outcome was.

I am also forwarding two further emails

One from Rod Ismay which is the final report he produced as a request from Dave Smith, MD, to review the whole issue
of Horizon integrity

The second from Mike Granville with a document that was sent to BIS in August as a briefing in advance of Ed Davey's
meeting with JFSA




                                                                                                                        POL-0090406
                                                                                                                    POL00091384
                                                                                                                 POL00091384




Happy to discuss next week if it would help

Lynn


My reply to Mike and Rod

Mike, Rod

I'm happy with the report and just have one observation

I found out this week that Fujitsu can actually put an entry into a branch account remotely. It came up when we were
exploring solutions around a problem generated by the system following migration to HNGX. This issue was quickly
identified and a fix put in place but it impacted around 60 branches and meant a loss/gain incurred in a particular week in
effect disappeared form the system. One solution, quickly discounted because of the implications around integrity, was
for Fujitsu to remotely enter a value into a branch account to reintroduce the missing loss/gain. So POL can't do this but
Fujitsu can.

Lynn


From: Mike Granville
Sent: 17 November 2010 17:31
To: Rod Ismay; Lynn Hobbs
Subject: Follow up to BIS meeting on JFSA

Rod / Lynn

Further to the meeting we had with Mike Whitehead about the JFSA — I am aiming to send this broad response
note. Please can I ask if you could cast an eye over this and let me know if you have any comments — or whether I've
missed anything. I'd like to be able to send tomorrow (Thurs) — so, if feasible, could I ask you to let me have any
comments tomorrow.




Mike Granville
Head of Regulation Strategy
Post Office Ltd
       1st Floor, Banner Street Wing, 148 Old Street, LONDON EC1V 9H1Q
       Postline              GRO

 =if             GRO




                                                                                                                  POL-0090406
