POLO0099694
POL00099694

Message
From: Belinda Crowe! GRO!

on}
behalf :
of '

Sent:
To:

Paula Vennells } Martin Edwards Mark R Davies

ce: Belinda Crowe j
Subject:Re: Fwd: Example Applications

Thanks Paula

Not easy to read on blackberry but | see your point from what I can see.

i have not seen the second sight report. Would someone be able to send me a copy?
| hope to catch up with Angela after you have seen her today.

Best wishes

Belinda

From: Paula Vennells

Sent: Wednesday, October 02, 2013 08:50 PM
To: Martin Edwards; Belinda Crowe; Mark R Davies
Subject: Fwd: Example Applications P&C

Dear all, | am not sure who else | want to read these yet. But certainly the three of you.
They make disturbing reading. (I couldn't make sense of the spread sheet but the individual submissions are sufficient to

get a steer on what we are dealing with.)

We have to keep it in perspective of course. But even in perspective they are challenging from all sorts of angles.
(Belinda these are examples of Sparrow cases that have been submitted for consideration for mediation.)

I'm with Angela tomorrow am. She and her team are hopefully going to talk me through where we have made
improvements and where we still need to do more. | am glad I've decided to make the trip - we need to show we are

taking this v seriously.

BW Paula

Sent from my iPad

Begin forwarded message:

From: "Ron Warmington"
Paula Vennells"
Cc: "Angela Van-Den-Bogerd",

Subject: Example Applications

Paula:

POL-0099277
POLO0099694
POL00099694

As promised in today's call, here are eight examples of the incoming
Applications. I've selected those that are more clearly expressed than most of
the others that we've been receiving. I'd have also sent Case MO41 but it hasn't
been scanned yet.

I'm also enclosing a spreadsheet that shows which ‘Thematic Issues’ each
Applicant has reported to us. It's probably not worth you looking at that before
your meeting with Angela and her team tomorrow but, in case you do, you only need
to look at Rows 55 to 97 (those are the Mediation Applications). The rows above
that relate to the MP-sourced cases and those that came in from the JFSA. In
some cases the Mediation Applicants were already on the spreadsheet so are
cross-referenced to their earlier appearance. Where there are more ‘Thematic
Issues’ marked on an MP-sourced case than on that same case's Mediation
Application that's because we know more about the case than has as yet been
revealed in the Mediation Application.

Best regards,

Ron Warmington CFE, FCA
Director

Second Sight Support Services Ltd
Tythe Farm

Maugersbury

Cheltenham
Gloucestershire

GL54 1HR

POL-0099277
