                                                                                                          POL00028057
                                                                                                       POL00028057




                    CONFIDENTIAL AND SUBJECT TO LEGAL PROFESSIONAL PRIVILEGE

                         Project Sparrow -Chairman's Report Recommendations

                                                Thursday 4 February 2016, 11.00am

1.   Introductions


     Patrick made the necessary introductions. In attendance were:


     Jon Wear (Deloitte)
     Andrew Whitton (Deloitte)
     Mark Westbrook (Deloitte)
     Patrick Bourke (POL)
     Gary Hooton (POL)
     Mark Underwood (POL)
     Rod Ismay (POL), who joined by telephone


2.   Legally privileged character of proposed work and applicability of Non-Disclosure
     Agreement(s)


     Patrick articulated the importance of being able to assert Legal Privilege over any piece(s) of
     work that were commissioned in response to the recommendations included in the Chairman's
     report.


3.   Background to Chairman's Review


     Patrick provided the necessary context to the Chairman's Report and the Complaint Review &
     Mediation Scheme more generally, noting its sensitivity.


4.   Recommendations


                    Suspense
               a.




                               Account




               b. Transaction
                                                 Review
                                         Logs




                    Balancing Transactions
               c.




               d. Audit Store Controls


     Having discussed each of the recommendations set out above and that Deloitte could
     potentially become involved in, it was agreed that Deloitte would for each, in the first instance,
     undertake a scoping exercise. Andrew stated that the output of this should be with POL early
     next week.




                                                                                                       POL-0023060
                                                                                                          POL00028057
                                                                                                        POL00028057




     POL noted upon receipt of this, it will need to seek approval from Jonathan Swift QC that the
     proposed course of action discharges each recommendation. It will also be necessary for
     Deloitte to speak with Fujitsu to help Deloitte understand what is / is not possible and for the
     former, necessary levels of resource, time and cost.


5.   Statement of Work, Timescales and Working Arrangements

     Patrick noted that POL would like this report to be completed by Summer Recess.




         •   Andrew asked, referencing his email of 03/02/2016 to Rodric Williams, that an 'FAQ'
             type document which addresses how to maintain Legal Privilege be produced, and
             whether the existing NDA with Deloitte would suffice for this potential piece of work or:

                 o   The letter of engagement from the June 2014 work could be re-used / tweaked
                 o   It would be necessary for new NDAs and engagement letters would be required


             POL, said it would confirm this with its General Counsel .


         •   Andrew noted that in order for them to understand the nature of the complaints made
             against POL, it would be useful for them to be provided with Second Sight's Part 2
             Report and P0 L's Reply to it.




                                                                                                    POL-0023060
