                                                                                 POLOO142322
                                                                               POL001 42322




Simon    Hi is that Gareth Jenkins.

Gareth   It is indeed.

Simon    Oh hi Gareth it's Simon Clarke I'm a Barrister prosecuting a case
         for Jarnail on Monday at Birmingham Crown Court.

Gareth   Right,

Simon    Jarnail suggested that we give you a call because we've heard
         that the Insight Committee Report is due to go before MPs next
         week I think I don't know if you have heard the same thing,
         have you?

Gareth   8th July is the date I have been told.

Simon    I beg your pardon.

Gareth   8th July I have been told.

Simon    Oh, is it the 8th of July, ok that's fine. Well I don't suppose you
         know anything about the case of Samra the Hurst Lane
         Birmingham Post Office do you?

Gareth   No that's not one I have been asked to provide any statements
         for before I know nothing about it I'm afraid.

Simon    Ok, well can I give you a brief sort of thumbnail sketch.
         Basically this is a Post Mistress who is alleged to have made
         double transaction withdrawals from Horizon when people
         have come in and taken money out on their Post Office card
         accounts. Do you follow?

Gareth   Yes I think I've heard about that sort of scam going on yes.

Simon    Yes, and essentially what she is doing she is asking them to put
         their pin number in a second time claiming that it hasn't worked
         the first time and accordingly then taking the money out herself.

Gareth   Yep.

Simon    All of and I mean all of the evidence we have got against her is
         Horizon data evidence.

Gareth   Yep.




                                                                               POL-0143576
                                                                                  POLOO142322
                                                                                POLOO1 42322




Simon    And when I say that what I mean is that all the transactions are
         conducted over the counter through Horizon.

Gareth   Yep

Simon    I don't know if you know that the accounts themselves are
         maintained by Hewlett Packard who provide the data
         processing facilities that send out the bank statements but all of
         their information of course is derived directly from Horizon
         transactions back at the branch yeah.

Gareth   Yes I understand that. Yep.

Simon    Ok. The problem I have got is that we are not allowed to see the
         Report but we are told that there are up to 30 offices where bugs
         have been identified, yeah, and we know that Hurst Lane is not
         one of the branches where there has been an identified bug. Still
         with us?

Gareth   Erm right as I say certainly I am aware of 2 bugs. Is it. Firstly is
         this something that has been done on Horizon on the new
         Horizon system or the old system.

Simon    It's the

Gareth   What's the date.

Simon    It's Horizon Online.

Gareth   Ok right. So there is 2 bugs that we have declared to Second Site
         in that sort of area erm and erm we know exactly which
         branches are affected and they wouldn't have any impact
         whatsoever on that part of err what's going on erm. and I think
         we've, we are confident that the audit trail that you are using for
         prosecution has not been compromised by those bugs.

Simon    Right Ok. So what I'm looking for then ... That's helpful.
         What I'm looking for then because I have to consider whether or
         not we need to disclose this information to the defence or even
         stop the trial as you will understand.

Gareth   Yeah.




                                                                                POL-01 43576
                                                                                POLOO142322
                                                                              POL001 42322




Simon    What I'm looking for is confirmation effectively that you have
         given so can I ask you a couple of questions which may prompt
         yes or no answers?

Gareth   Sure.

Simon    Erm as far as the data that the transactions conducted over
         Horizon which involve the withdrawal of sums of cash from
         Post Office card accounts, is there any reason to believe that
         Horizon can be, can slip into error?

Gareth   Not that I'm aware of.

Simon    Ok and has there been any evidence or hint or suggestion from
         anybody or any complaint from anybody that that might be the
         case?

Gareth   No.

Simon    Ok. Erm, where are we going from here. What's the questions I
         posed earlier. Sorry I've got Martin Smith here with me as well,
         he's the Solicitor in the case.

Gareth   I know Martin.

Martin   Hi Gareth.

Gareth   Hi.

Martin   Hi. It's the Horizon system is functioning perfectly.......

Simon    This is the other point. Bugs have been identified in Horizon
         which call into question some of the aspects of the way in which
         is operates. That's a fair assessment isn't it?

Gareth   Erm yes.

Simon    Yep. Ok. How can we be sure that (a) we have identified all of
         the bugs that there are and (b) that although Horizon has been
         demonstrated that to be fallible that in so far as the case we are
         conducting is concerned we can eliminate the possibility of
         error.

Gareth   Right I mean clearly we can't you can never say there are no
         more bugs in the system so we've got to be careful about trying
         to say anything like that but what we can show is that nothing




                                                                              POL-0143576
                                                                                  POLOO142322
                                                                                POLOO1 42322




         has been found to show that there is a problem in the integrity
         of the audit trail which is what has been used for the erm erm
         your evidence.

Simon    So your view is that erm that if the defence were to suggest erm
         there is a problem with Horizon and therefore we can't rule out
         that there might be other problems with Horizon what you say
         is as far as you're concerned the integrity of the system is intact.

Gareth   Yes.

Simon    That's very very helpful. Thank you. Martin over to you.

Martin   Thank you for that Gareth I think that's answered a number of
         questions that we had. I'm grateful for the time you have taken
         to talk to us.

Gareth   Ok, no problem. Good luck.

Martin   Thank you Gareth.

Gareth   Cheers, bye




                                                                                      971
                                                                                POL-01 43576
