From: Parsons, Andrew} GRO H
Sent: Tue 03/03/2015 1:29:29 PM (UTC)
To: Rodric Williamsf.

Cec: Brooks, Victoriaf. GRO H
Subject: RE: M056 - Wylie - Remote Access [BD-4A.FID20472253]

POL00312743
POL00312743

Not quite — we say that transactions entered by SPMRs cannot be edited but we don't go on to say that FJ can input

new transactions in exceptional circumstances. This information would therefore be entirely new news to SS.
A

Andrew Parsons
Managing Associate

mvie:| GRO

Fax:

Follow Bond Dickinson:

Blin}
www.bonddickinson.com

From: Rodric Williams [mailto:
Sent: 03 March 2015 12:40
To: Parsons, Andrew

Cc: Brooks, Victoria

Subject: RE: M056 - Wylie - Remote Access [BD-4A.FID25887248]

This is consistent with our responses/statements about remote access isn’t it, ie you can add data/inject a balancing
transaction, and ifdone “it is possible to identify any data that has not been input directly by

staff in the Branch”?

POST
OFFICE

From: Parsons, Andrew [mailto! GRO ]

Sent: 03 March 2015 12:01

To: Belinda Crowe; Tom Wechsler; Rodric Williams; Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwood1
Cc: Brooks, Victoria

Subject: M056 - Wylie - Remote Access [BD-4A.FID25887248]

All
POL00312743
POL00312743

We've been through the prosecution file for M056 - Wylie. There will be further documents to disclose including the
attached witness statement by Gareth Jenkins. At the top of page 3, Jenkins states:

"T also note a comment made about it being passible to remotely access the system. It is
true that such access is possible; however in an analysis of data audited by the system, it
is possible to identify any data that has not been input directly by staff in the Branch.
Any such change to data is very rare and would be authorised by Post office Ltd.

As I have not had an opportunity to examine data related to this Branch, I cannot
categorically say that this has not happened in this case, but would suggest it is highly
unlikely.”

I'm pretty certain that Jenkins is referring to the Balancing Transaction process that allows FJ to input new transactions
rather than edit old transactions. Nevertheless, this will be a red rag to Second Sight.

Can we discuss how to deal with this when I'm at Old Street tomorrow?

| don’t think we need to bottom this out before the SS meetings. We'll just say that we are still working on reviewing
the legal files for this case.

PS. I'll send through a full update on where we are with the legal files shortly.

Kind regards
Andy

Andrew Parsons
Managing Associate

Follow Bond Dickinson:
www.bonddickinson.com

Please consider the environment! Do you need to print this email?

ation in this e-mail and any attachments is confidential and may be | only is authorised to
his e-mail and any attachments, If you are not rodrie.williamsf

copies. Unauthorised use, dissemination, distribution, publication or copy

<i and protected by law. rodrie.williamsf
notify andrew.parson{”

‘Smmunication or attachments is prohibited and may be unlawful

ally privile;

ssible and delete any

Any files attached to this e-mail will have been checked by us with virus detection software befor

which

ransmission, Bond Dickinson LLP accepts no liability for any loss or damage
achment

ay be caused by software viruses and you should carry out your own virus checks before opening any a

Content of this email which does not relate to the of

business of Bond Dickinson LLP, is neither given nor endorsed by it.

This email is sent for and on behalf of Bond Dickinson LLP which is a limited liability partnershij
office is St Ann’s Wharf, 112 Quayside, Neweastle Upon Tyne, NEI 3DX, where a list of mem
the LLP, or an employee or consultant who is of equivalent standing. Our VAT registration number is GBI

egistered in England and Wales under number 0C317661. Our r
en to inspection, We use the term partner to refer to a member of

3627,

ames

ation Authority

Bond Dickinson LLP is authorised and regulated by the Solicitors Re;

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named
POL00312743
POL00312743

recipient, you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication. If you have
received this in error, please contact the sender by reply email and then delete this email from your system. Any views
or opinions expressed within this email are solely those of the sender, unless otherwise specifically stated.

POST OFFICE LIMITED is registered in England and Wales no 2154540. Registered Office: 148 OLD STREET,
LONDON EC1V 9HQ.

JESS ISIS I INI ISIS IIS IODIDE
