                                                                                                         POL00073739
                                                                                                       POL00073739



4




                   "Stephen Dilley"            To:
                                                    <cheryl.woodward _      _ _GRO
                         GRO                    cc:
    r




                                           Subject: FW: The Post Office -v- Lee Castleton
                   16/11/2005 19:30


        Dear Mandy and Cheryl,

        I tried to contact you both today, but you were not available.

        1. Mandy, please can you let me know whether the Post Office has
        experienced widespread problems with Horizon? Mr Castleton's solicitors
        are seeking disclosure of this sort of information before they agree to
        mediate. If it would he difficult for you to find out this information,
        please can you give me an idea of how and why it would be difficult (and
        expensive) to retrieve it? (eg perhaps there are no central records).
        This viLl give me some ammunition to go back to Mr Castleton's
        solicitors with to explain why the Post Office does not feel it is
        appropriate to disclose it and to try to persuade them to mediate sooner
        rather than later.

        2. Cheryl. I know you say the paperwork removed form Marine Drive can't
        now be found, but did the Post Office keep a list of what items it
        removed? Do you know that the Post Office definitely removed the
        documents Mr Castleton seeks? Do you have the contact details for Mrs
        Oglesby so that I can discuss this with her? She will be an important
        witness.
        I look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.

        Kind regards.
        Stephen Dilley
        Solicitor
        for and on behalf of Bond Pearce LLP

        Maini                  GRO
        www.bondpearce.com <http://www.bondpearce.com/>



        From: Stephen Dilley
        Sent: 11 November _200x-._14_06-                         ._._._._._._•
                                                                            --• -•-•-•-•-•--•-•-•-•-
        To: 'mandy.taibot          GRO     ;; 'cheryl.woodward',            GRO
        Subject: The Post Office -v- Lee Castleton


        Dear Mandy and Cheryl,
        Thanks, Cheryl, for. your e-mail of 10 November.

        I note that the Post Office is not able to find the documents which it
        removed from the sub post office. These documents are crucial to Mr .
        Castleton's Defence and the Court will draw adverse inferences if we are
        not able to produce them. This reinforces my view that we should seek
        an early settlement.

        I attach a letter dated 10 November 2005 from Mr Castleton's solicitors
        to Bond Pearce for your information, together with an article from the
        November 2005 edition of the Sub-Postmaster Magazine in which a
        sub-postmaster in Chelmsford complains of problems with the operation of
        the Horizon computer system. Other sub-postmasters' problems are in my
                                                                                POL00073739
                                                                              POL00073739




view irrelevant to the issue of whether the Horizon worked. for Mr
Castleton, unless there is evidence of widespread problems. Mr
Castleton's specific point is that there are widespread problems with
Horizon and accordingly he should not have been dismissed.

Mandy, I look forward to hearing from you in relation to my 9 November
letter. If it will be helpful to discuss things o_v_er._the._, honey please
do not hesitate to contact me on telephone number;       GRO
Kind regards.

Stephen Dilley
Solicitor
for and on behalf of Bond Pearce LLP
DDI:
                            RO
Main. -----------------------*-.....-.--G
Fax:
www.bo.ndpearce.com <http://www.bondpearce.com/>


The information, in this e-mail and any attachments are confidential and may be
legally privileged and protected by law. The intended recipient only is
authorised to access this         and any attachments. If you are not the
                             e-mail




intended recipient, please notify the sender as soon as possible and delete
any copies. Unauthorised use, dissemination, distribution, publication or
copying of this communication is prohibited.
Any files attached to this e-mail will have been checked by us with virus
detection software before transmission. You should carry out your own virus
checks before opening any attachment. Bond Pearce LLP accepts no liability for
any loss or damage which may be caused by software viruses.

Bond Pearce LLP is a Limited Liability Partnership registered in England and
  Wales number 0C311430.
 Registered Office: Bristol Bridge House, 138-141 Redcliff Street, Bristol,
 BSI 6BJ.
A       of Members is available from our registered office. Any reference to a
  list




Partner in relation to Bond Pearce LLP means a Member of Bond Pearce LLP, Bond
P arce LLP is regulated by the Law Society.

D-C.hlm

fl       - Ecopy Scan.pdf

D        - Ecopy Scan.pdf
