                                                                                                               POLOO120561
                                                                                                           POL00120561

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3


Mike:Granville
 from:          -Mike Granville.
 Sent;          26 November 201Q.. 14:46
 To             Paula Vennells .,Mike Moores; Mike Young; Susan Crichton; Kevin Gilliland Sue Huggins,
                Rod Ismay
Subject:                                            a. urgent respinse needed for BIS - in strictest
                Update on JFSA and .Horizon. issues and
                confidence
 Attachments: JFSA response issues for BIS2.doc.
I'm sending this note around. to provide an update on the issues related to JFSA and to ensure
concurrence with. the line that I am taking back to BIS.

Background;

You will all be aware of the allegations that the JFSA has been making about the integrity of the. Horizon
system and the associated processes that POL uses in terminating contracts, There have also been
 various legal cases relating to individual subpostmasters being prosecuted for theft] false accounting
-where the JFSA have had some kind of involvement (the most recent being Ms Misra, West Byfleet,
 where the ex-subpostmaster was recently found guilty of theft). As you are aware Channel 4, were also.
looking the subject :in the summer --although nothing has yet          of this;
         at




                                                                       come
Our approach throughout has been to                defend the integrity of the Horizon system.
                                        robustly




However SIS continue be. interested in this issue. They have had a succession of MP's writing into the
                              to




Minister on behalf of constituent subpostmasters referencing the JFSA'S allegations     the JFSA have




                                                                                         and
also written directly the Minister on several occasions, As result of this pressure, back in September,
                     to




                                                                   a




Ed Davey agreed to meeting with the JFSA and whilst at the meeting the Minister listened and didn't
                          a




commit to any actions, -BIS thereby maintain an 'involvement in this issue..

As a result of this and to follow up the BIS meeting with JFSA, Mike Whitehead recently met with ;Rod.
Ismay, Lynn Hobbs and myself and went through some of the points that JFSA raised at the meeting with
BIS plus a few of the more recent MP letters that have been received on the subject.

We are at the stage where we need to go back-to Mike on some of the points that were raised. I have
been preparing a draft to do this, but we have had to await few points to be checked out
                                                               a




In the meantime, further events have intervened. JFSA have put a submission to the Postal Services Bill
Committee (which hasn't been picked up on to date butis another indication of the ongoing pressure
that they are-exerting).

Response;

I'm attaching a copy of the, material that I am sending over to BIS to cover both the individual cases and
the more general points raised (this document also includes a copy of the JFSA submission to. the Bill
Committee)

However, the key point I'd like to draw to everyone's attention is that BIS are looking for general lines to
go back to the JFSA (and to MP's whose correspondence that is quoting them). BIS accept POL's
assurances about the integrity of the system and don't want to intervene in that area but they do have
some concerns about some of the ways in which our disciplinary processes' might be being perceived.

To take this issue forward, a suggested approach is to be robust on our current system and procedures —
but also to seek to make reference to some of the work being already undertaken in the contracts team
looking at our process approaches on 'discipline matters' in certain cases going forward. We need to
make clear that this is ongoing review type work, it is unrelated to the JFSA allegations, rather it is
conducted with the NFSP as the representative of subpostmasters and is a natural thing, normal practice
we would be doing — and particularly as we look to take forward our contracts in the light of the
Government's recent policy statement around the Post Office.

In the attached document the_re.levant,extract looks like this;




29/11/2010
                                                                                                                     POL00120561
                                                                                                                   POLOO120561

                                                                                                       Page, 2. of 3


5. Next Steps within POL

The Horizon system and accompanying contractual processes remain fully robust. Their
integrity and sound basis have been demonstrated over many years, and they have
underpinned the provision of effective and sustainable service to Post Office.customers. POL
refutes the unsubstantiated allegations made by the JFSA.

POL maintains a legal contractual relationship with subpostmasters which is based on values
of trust and mutual respect. In cases where there are reasons why this relationship cannot
continue, there are full processes of internal appeals and the parties can have full subsequent.
recourse to the UK legal system. As a matter of course, and on an ongoing basis, POL works
with the National Federation of Subpostmasters (a recognised representative body for
subpostmasters) on the development of contractual and associated process matters.

Looking              part ofits future strategy consistent with. the Policy Statement outlined by
          forward,




                      as




Government in November 2010, Post Office Ltd will be seeking to further review its contracts
and accompanying processes to meet the changing needs of its customers. This approach will
continue to ensure that the contractual basis and associated procedures between Post Office
Ltd and individual subpostmasters remains sound, fair, commercial and equitable._

It is this combination of;

-the current robustness and _integrity of Horizon,

 clear internal processes with appeal systems with the ultimate backstop of the, UK legal.
system (should cases be referred to it),

-..ongoing liaison with the NFSP as the recognised group representing,subpostmasters and

  a forward looking approach to the further development of contracts and associated policies in
line with developing strategy and. Government policy

 that provides assurance to BIS that the approach taken by Post Office Ltd continues to be fair
and equitable.

This positioning is important — hence circulating this note to yourselves as BIS are putting pressure on for a
way forward and are looking for a generic 'statement' from us they can use The risk is, in the absence of our
providing something -like the lines above, that BIS say something off their own bat which could lead to
                                                                                                            more




difficulties.

As      all have had an involvement in this particular issue -- I'm looking to. see if I can gain concurrence to this
   you




particular statement— or to check the process whereby concurrence can be quickly achieved.

Postscript - I have just had Mike Whitehead on to me saying that Edward Davey is coming under extreme
pressure to respond on the cases that he has received. I will send to Mike the extract of the information in the
attached document on the three specific cases referred to us by BIS but I know he will come back to us
asking for something like the 'way forward' statement I've outlined above.

I'd therefore like be able to get the full document over to them on Monday. Please can I therefore ask if I can.
gain views by then,

Thanks


Mike

Mike Granville
Head of Regulation Strategy


29/11/2010
                                                                                       POLOO120561
                                                                                    POLOO120561

                                                                               Page 3 of 3...


Post Office Ltd
   1st Floor, Banner Street Wing, 148 Old               LONDON ECIV 9H1Q____




                                              Street,
   Postline: GRO i L_._._._._GRO_._._._._3)
       GRO _•_•_(G.__._. GRO_._.__.
    -• -




29/11/2010
                                                                                                                    POLOO120561
                                                                                                                 POL00120561



                                         In Strictest Confidence


JFSA response issues _paper for BIS

     Issues covered in this note;

    1. Suspension and contract termination numbers
    `2. Update on cases referred by BIS
     3 :Follow up items from 4 November meeting between. BIS and POL
     4. JFSA submission to Postal Services Bill Committee  prospective POL




                                                                              and
        response
     5. Next Steps        POL.
                         within




1. Suspension and Contract Termination Numbers


Jesse lllorman HP (Hereford and South Herefordshire)' (Con).- is my hop Friend as
concerned as / am about the back-door closure of post offices, which / raised in a
debate last week? am enormously grateful to the Minister for recognising the
                         /




problem. He. may be interested to know that, of the 2 406 audits that were done in
2009 265 suspensions were held, and there were only two reinstatements




                                                                                                         after
appeal That very much reinforces the picture that suspensions are being used as a
means of closing post offices which / am sureis something that we would
                                                                     . ............ ...........................................


                                                                                                   all
deprecate.


It is worthwhile seeing some more background to these figures.- which related to
the period 1 January to 31 October 2009.

In that         there were 2406 audits and there. were 265 suspensiops,as..
         period.




identified in the Parliamentary quote..

Of those 265 suspensions. 64 were subsequently reinstated following the initial
 investigations. A further 67 resigned to avoid termination.. There were subsequently
131 summary terminations, I termination at 3 months notice and 2 reinstated
!following appeal.

Therefore of the suspensions in the Jan-_Oct 2009 period, 25%o were reinstated..
25% resigned themselves and 50% had their,contracts terminated by POL

If we consider more up to date figures. for January September 2,01Q, we see 166
                                                                    to




suspensions. Of these 29 have been reinstated, 37 have resigned to avoid
termination, 30 cases still being considered. There have been 62 terminations of
contract, I reinstatement following appeal and 7 cases currently at the appeal
stage.
                                                                                                    POLOO120561
                                                                                               POL00120561




                                In Strictest..Confidence


Therefore of the suspensions in the Jan-Sept 2010 period, 22% cases are still in
progress 1.8% have been reinstated, 22% have resigned to avoid termination and
37% have had contracts terminated.

A final point with respect to Jesse Norman's comments where there _is a
termination, it, does not necessarily mean that the Post. Office. will close. Typically
we will be seeking to appoint a new <subpostmaster to take over the Business -
either at that :location or very nearby. Termination of contract refers to the
subpostrnasters individual contract,'it does not mean that we are seeking to close
the Post Office facilities in that location. Another-subpostmaster will be typically
sought              be appointed to run services at the location concerned.
            and..............
     ...........




    2. Update on correspondence referred from BIS


Jonathan Djanogly MP (letter to Ed Davey 22 October 2010)

on behalf of Mrs Jenny O'Dell. ex subpostmaster Great Staughton Post Office

In November 2009 Mrs O'Dell contacted the internal help tine (NBSC) advising that.
her branch had seen monthly losses of £1000 since May and the figure stood at
  7.OQ0. Mrs 'O'Dell stated that she had carried out checks..and had not received.
any transaction corrections. She believed the Horizon system to be at fault so
xrefused to make good any tosses.

-Checks undertaken by the contracts team with the Chesterfield accounting team
,confitmed they were not aware of any issues at the branch; no problems with
 cheques/cash or ATM and that no losses had been settled centrally. There were no
 losses within the last three trading periods so this raised the possibility that the
;cash figure may have been inflated to cover losses.

;On 9 December 2009 the contracts team wrote to Mrs O'Delt asked her to supply
 any evidence to support Horizon was at fault. Mrs O'Dell referred to a shortage of
 16 December 2009 of £8,506 and subsequent gains on 17 & 21 December of
 £5,000      £7,000 but could not provide any evidence to support_ Horizon was
                                                                                     at
        and




 fault..

An intervention visit took place on 6 January 2010 to try and ascertain the cause..
                                                                                          _.




                                                                                                .




                                                                                                     .




                                                                                                             .




and extent of the losses and whether there was any fault with the :system or
                                                                                                                                                               POLOO120561
                                                                                                                                                             POL00120561




                                                                             In Strictest Confidence

       incorrect accounting. Following an -audit Mrs O'Dell was suspended as a number of
   discrepancies were found. Some examples are; multiple cash declarations added
  together to hide losses; three cash declarations on the system totalling £21,000
  but less than £8,000 actually on hand; no losses in balance over 12 months but
  one misbalance settled centrally; the branch trading statement of 30 December did
  not        any Christmas stamps but there were 9,032 on hand. The total shortage
                   show




    audit was £9,616.66.
 at




                                 O'Dell was invited to a meeting on 8. February 2010.
                          her
       Following




                                       suspension




                                                                  Mrs
to put forward her reasons why her contract should not be                  The charge




                                                                                                                 terminated.
was loss at audit and falsification of accounts. During the. interview Mrs O'Dell was..
accompanied by NFSP representatives. Mrs O'Dell admitted to inflating cash
figures in the Post Office accounts. Neither Mrs O'Dell nor the NFSP could provide
any evidence to-suggest that the losses had been occurring over a period of time.

 Mrs O'Dell was advised on 19 February 2010 that her contact was summarily
terminated and that she was required to make good the outstanding loss. She took
    the right of appeal, which was held. on 30 April 2010. Mrs O'Dell was advised
   up




                                                                                                                                                        in
  letter dated 21 May 2010 that the decision to terminate her contract       upheld.
a




                                                                                                                                           was
A separate             also raised by Post Office Security to follow up the audit
                                case




                                                    was




findings. The registered staff at the branch was Mrs O'Dell and her son Daniel
O'Dell. Both were interviewed under caution. Mrs O'Dell admitted to               the
                                                                                                                               inflating
        cash on hand to cover shortages in the Post Office account and falsifying
official




                                                                        up




branch trading statements. Despite Post Office Ltd being able to prove that

                                                                                                                                                 more
than one cash declaration was being made, :Mrs O'Dell maintained the system was
at fault An official caution was administered under Section 1 of the Fraud Act
2.006. which Mrs. O'Dell refused to .accept: The outstanding debt is currently, being
pursued via our Civil .Litigation team.

Neither Mrs O'Dell nor her son provided any evidence of or identified any specific
transactions which contributed to the losses. Post Office remains fully satisfied that
the Horizon system is robust and fit for purpose.


Jonathan Lord MP,- Letter to Edward. Davey 25 October re Mrs S Misra — West
Byfleet
In the case of Mrs        the case has now been before the           and Mrs :Misra.
                                                          Misra




                                                                                                       Courts.




was found guilty after a full jury trial. She has subsequently been sentenced to 15
months by the Judge taking all due regard to Judicial guidelines.

Background information is provided below
                                                                                            POL00120561
                                                                                          POLOO120561




                               -In. Strictest Confidence

Brief on Mrs Misra is below:

Mrs Misra was the subpostmaster at West Byfleet.

An audit was carried out on .14 January 2008 and Mr..s. Misra was suspended the
same
 .............. ...day
                    .... .

Audit was .£7.7;643,87 short, which included a loss settled centrally of £3,034.03

Audit report: cash & stock left in counter drawers :over night which included date
stamps .and MVL`s

Mrs        told the audit team that the account would..be £50-£60K short and that
    Misra




this had teen going on for about a year prior to the audit. She said staff had taken
£89k and that she -had not informed anyone in the Post Office as she was worried
she would lose the branch. She stated she had         good some of the losses and
                                                 made




was looking at ways to make the rest good. She admitted she had been adjusting..
the branch trading to make it balance, There was an amount in the suspense
account £27K + £3k; Mrs Misra showed the auditors the grey pouches & rem slips
but there was'no money in the pouches.

Mrs Misra was charged by Elaine Ridge, contacts manager, on 12 March 2008 of
misuse of PO funds & false accounting

Mrs Misra attended interview and more or less repeated the statement she ,made
to the auditors

The decision was taken to terminate her contract for services on 1 April 2008; Mrs
Misra sent in her resignation on 7 April

She was interviewed by POID and again admitted the account had been short for -a
long period and that she had been falsifying her account, to cover it up. She
blamed it on staff theft.

The case has now been before the Courts, and Mrs Misra was found guilty after a
full jury trial, She has subsequently been sentenced to 15 months by the Judge
taking all due regard to Judicial guidelines. It is probably inappropriate to comment
about the detail of the trial -- although it is worth pointing out that the Defence for
Mrs Misra did utilise an IT expert with regard comments on the Horizon system
and a. clear decision was arrived at by the Court.

Jarnail Singh, who was the RMG lawyer on the case, explains that the charges were
one of theft of £74,000 and five charges of false accounting. There was a 7 day
Jury trial at Guildford Crown Court between 11 October and 21 October 2010
                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                POLOO120561
                                                                                                                                              POL00120561

r.

                                                       In                               Confidence




                                                               Strictest
     where.she was found guilty. The sentencing hearing took place_at :Guildford ,Crown
     Court on 11. November 2010.

     A                             is being arranged for                        confiscation order to seize Mrs           s
         hearing




                                                           a




                                                                                                                  Misra




                                                                                                                              assets.__
     Please note that this was a criminal not a civil case. With a criminal case there is
     higher of proofand beyond reasonable doubt-- civil cases are decided on balance




                                                                                                                                          a
     on probabilities, Issy Hogg was her criminal. barrister &.is closely associated with
     JFSA. There were also lots of adjournments, whilst Mrs. Misra's. solicitors kept
     asking for more &..mare evidence, which was supplied. ..


      It is probably inappropriate to comment to the ;MP about the detail of the trial --
      although it may be worth pointing out that the Defence for Mrs Misra did utilise an
      IT expert with regard comments on the Horizon system (the,MP's letter suggested
     ;that they          to employ at IT auditor to look at the case but the costs were
                          wished




     prohibitive)
     .. .... ... .. and a clear decision
                                  ..     was arrived at by the Court.


     Wendy Buffery -- Up Hatherly

     Background to this case as follows:

                   • Chesterfield noticed a pattern of unusual cash rises on Tues. Weds &
                       'Thursdays

                   • Following an audit of the branch on 11/12/0.8 an initial shortage of
                     €27,776.63 was identified. £1,50.0 was later found, reducing the loss :to,
                       26,25663..

                   •   Mrs Buffrey told the lead auditorthe main stock would be £20k short

                   • At her RTU interview on 21/01/09 Mrs Buffreyadmitted that;she had
                      started to inflate her cash cover losses from May 2008 but that she., had
                                                                           to




                     :not taken any:money for her own. use.

                   •   During the period the losses occurred her husband had been taken. ill with
                       :cancer and she too .had ill health

                   • _-Mrs Buffrey raised no -issues around her accounting difficulties with- either
                      POL or the NFSP

                   • It appears Mrs Buffrey went to appeal and the decision to terminate her
                     Contract for Services was upheld in March 2009 for falsifying accounts
                                                                                          POLOO120561
                                                                                        POLOO120561




                                   Strictest
                              .n............. ...... Confidence


   • Post Office security took forward a prosecution and went to court in April
     2010. A trial date was given for September 2010;

   •- A week before the trial date, we were advised that Mrs Buffrey would be
      changing her plead to guilty and produced a cheque for E26,256.63 which
      was the amount of the outstanding debt..
   •• On 18          2010. Mrs Buffrey -admitted to one count of fraud was
                   October




      sentenced to a-12 month community order of 150 hours unpaid work.

Note: Although Mrs BuffreY stated she had not taken any money, she admitted to
falsifying accounts. No claims were made to challenge Horizon integrity. However,
security advised that Horizon was mentioned prior to -her court date but.after Mrs
BuffreY's forensic accountants had gone through the reports her plea was changed
to guilty. No evidence has been provided. to.support that Horizon was at fault.




3.. Follow up points from POL meeting with Mike Whitehead on 4 November
.(subsequent to the JFSA meeting with Edward Davey).


Points discussed at the meeting

       Whether the contract has changedsince 1994 to reflect Horizon - The
       Contract has had a series of amendments and associated operational
       instructions which mean that it remains..a proper legal and commercial.
       document with respect to the operation of a Post Office. There has      no
                                                                           been




       legal challenge to the appropriate'nature of POL's agency contracts

       Lack of audit trail for subpostmasters- subpostmasters can pull off a
       transaction log every day and declare their cash at the end of the day. The
       facilities are there for subpostmasters to track their own transactions should
       they
            wish




       POL can access the system remotely and make changes to it The system
       is based on a user log in, and all actions have to be endorsed by the user.
                                                                                        POLOO120561
                                                                                      POLOO120561




                          In Strictest Confidence

;POL cannot remotely control a branches system. Any technical changes by
;Fujitsu that impact the system have to go through clearance processes
which would prevent any amendment to existing data,. The independent
audit file is in place and can show all the system activity ln.a particular
branch.                                            A      t4           st`

Frequency ofsoftware updates- these are normal.operational updates




                                                                               such
   those that occur any system. They do not indicate in any way any


                     in
as




faults or unreliability in the



                             system
Equipment moved from one branch to another. If any equipment is moved
from one branch to another there is no potential for past transactions




                                                                          in
any way to impact the system. Transactions are not held on or tagged to
the equipment in the branch - they are recorded against the branch code.
As previously advised every transaction undertaken on. the system is.
independently recorded and maintained in a separate tamper proof audit
log. There is always therefore the capability to track back transactions
related to the branch independent of the equipment .on which it was
undertaken.

 No regular audit systems-our audit systems are based_on random choice
 and on risk factors. Audits from the central team are not needed for the
 subpostmaster to operate the system or to know where they are with their
 own account. Subpostmasters can obtain a full transaction log, make daily
 cash declarations and can regularly balance their account. They have access.
-to phone help. and p.ersonal.visit in any cases of difficulty.

5ubpostmasters having to agree to a loss or cant open the office the next
day - this is not the case. If there is a discrepancy in an account when it is
balanced, the subpostmaster has the option for 'settle centrally.' - this
means that they can roll the system over whilst the issue is being looked
Into, It is a standard process which does not imply acceptance or otherwise
of the discrepancy by the subpostmaster. It is a standard part. of the
process.


Processes for suspension and afterwards - The PQst Office. processes cover
the situation whereby the subpostmaster is made clear of the, situation, has.
the opportunity for interview, can be accompanied at that interview - and
there are clear rights of appeal once the decision is made (the attached
document summarises the situation). In cases where the Post Office
Investigation Branch is involved, the procedures followed within their
investigation and interviews are fully compliant with the relevant UK
Legislation. . The attached note explains further the credentials of Post Office
                                                                                               POLOO120561
                                                                                             POL00120561




                                                               in Strictest Confidence

                       Invest4ators.;(who would always be involved in a case that involved
                       prosecution).




 4. J FSA submission to Postal Services Bill Committee

      Memorandum submitted by Justice For.Subpostmasters Alliance !JFSA)
                                                                  (P524)

  lh submission .corrmprises of

 o Introduction - .who we are ;and why we came into existence

:o, Aim the objectives of the Alliance

•o Background Examples.- offers a brief insight into subpostmaster
 problems relating to.

 o The Subpostmaster Contract

 o Audits

a Suspensions

.....o......
       Recommendations
            ............................. ..... ............
 Introduction

 Justice For Subpostmasters-.Alliance .(JFSA) was established during
 November 20Q9 It an entirely voluntary self-help group comprising of
                                                         is




 mainly ex-subpostmasters, a smaller group ofserving subpostmasters and
 a number of professionals who are able to assist with their expertise. Since_
the introduction of Post Office Ltd ('OL Horizon system during the late
1990' Many individual subpostmastersin isolation.have endeavoured to
stand to POL. Inevitably they have been crushed under the weight of
                  up




their power and their endless funds underwritten by Labour Government
that al/a wed them to act with s.uch impunity. This, when combined with the
flat refusal to confront POL ;over the failures of its Horizon :system by the
so. called representative body for subpostmasters the National Federation
 of5ubpostmasters (NFSP) is the reason why JFSA has been formed. We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00120561
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POLOO1 20561




                                                                                                                                                                                     In Strictest Confidence.


                  are still small group with over a hundred active cases and roughly twice



                                            a
                 .that number of serving subpostmasters who are following our
                 developments. Yet our numbers continue to grow weekly as people
                  discoverJFSA and many more subpostrriasters fall victim to the vindictive
                  and puritive actions ofPOL,          is little doubt that when the true extent




                                                                                                                                                                 There
                 of the.       of POL, ,are finally exposed the victims will number in the
                             antics




                  thousands.

                 Aim

    Our aim is to bring to the attention of those in power the abusive and
    destructive manner in which POL have, and are stilt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            treating:
    subpostmasters and to seek to redress the many injustices that we have
    been subjected to by POL. We intend to highlight the rriiscarriages of
    justice that have been inflicted on subpostmasters by an organization that
    abuses its licensing power to criminally prosecute
                                                    .. . .. without
                                                            .... ....__..providing
                                                                           ... . ..
    evidence in cases of a civil matter;

                  The systemic faults of POL. and:its Horizon system are too numerous and
                 too complicated to deal with in this briefsubrnission. Though in order to
                 offer some insight into the points and recommendations that          at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               appear
                 end of this document a brief outline of the background to some ofthese
                 issues has been included

                 Background Examples

                  The Subpostmaster Contract
      The Performance and Innovation Unit report of 2000. "Counter Revolution.
      Modernising The Post Office Network" identified "The majority of sub-
      postmasters      work       a contract which can be tracedback a
                                                                                                             under
                                                            still




      hundred years': POL uses this          emanating from the Victorian era,
                                                                                                                                                                         contract,




        pursue subpostmasters through the courts order to.recover POL 's
             to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in




losses from their flawed Horizon system. Even with the introduction of,the
latest technology POL still rely on clauses such as Subpostmaster is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                'a




responsible for all losses', originating from a contract from a time when
the lighting was by oil lamp and the ledger was completed by quilland ink.
 They use such clauses to extract money from a subpostmaster, eithor from
their salary or through the                  their flawed Horizon system
                                                                                                                          courts




                                                                                                                                                                                                   should




decides it_is owed System errors are           considered (POL states it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  never




handles 24 billion, transactions              this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                without




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              single




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             error1
                                                                                                                                                                                        a




                                                                                                                                                                                            year
only




                                            contract




                                                                                                :is




                                                                                                      used




                                                                                                                                   recover




                                                                                                                                                                                                            any




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        part




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that
                       the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of
                                                                                                                     to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                shortage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the
                                      can
   system




                                                       be




                                                                    accessed.and




                                                                                                                                                   manipulated




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      network




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    without
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           over
subpostmasters




                                                                                                                                             ;or




                                                                                                                                                                           agreement,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  but




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       subpostrnaster
                                                                                   "knowledge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it
                                                                                  POLOO120561
                                                                                POL00120561




                                   in Strictest Confidence

who is made financially liable,.

:The few hundred Crown _Past Offices left that are directly runty POL, they
also use this Hononystem and during the rrancialyear 2007/8 these.
offices lost £2     using this system, and whilst their staff are not treated
as guilty until proven innocent, a subpostmaster is

Audits

 POL refers it as an audit when they,descend upon a subpostoffice, but
             to




 the reality is it is little -more than a  take. The POL staff that carry

                                        stock




                                                                          out
 these audits can be anybody though we have yet to find a member of
 Institute of InternalAuditors or any other professionally recognizedbody-in
 attendance. What makes .them qualified to carry out an audit' of a
 subpostoffice?After all they hold a subpostmasters future in their hands
:and the leastyou should expect is a suitably qualifiedprofessional person
 to be involved but they are not, and a subpostmaster is not allowed to
 bring in his own professional auditor to check the findings:

Then there is the matter ofPOL and their totalfailure to undertake routine
audits'ofsubpostoffices There are subpostmasters who have never had
an 'audit' in eight years a.'d post offices which turn over £5m everyyear
that have refer had an audit for over 5years, and they have to use
Horizon a system they are unable to gain full access to in order to check
all the information they have entered into the system. Yet they are being
held responsible for the accuracy.ofeverything during this period

A question often asked is why does POL not audit' all subpostoces on a
regularbasis2 Many people believe that they are :well aware ofall the
faults inHorzon and the more post offices they audit the more these
faults will become apparent After all from the POL standpoint they don't
have to undertake audits ' as they can rely on using the contract to pursue
subpostmasters through the courts or deduct money from their wage
packets to recover any shortfall due to whatever reason.

Suspension .... ...
:.Should:a subpostnaasterbegin to have problems and then find themselves
 suspended they-soon discover they have nowhere to turn to for support
  Their salary is stopped instantly and they are treated as being guilty from
  the outset by POL. There is no independent adjudicatoryou can apply to,
 POL act as judge, jury arid executioner in all matters. The National
 Federation of 5ubpostmasters the so called representative of the
 subpostmaster have taken the decision that Horizon faults do not exist as
 POL has decided it has to be that way. When POL requests the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00120561
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL001 20561



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In Strictest Confidence

                              subpostmaster to attend an informalinterview theyare not even permitted
                              to     a solicitor, partner.or anyone with them other than a Federation
                                                                              take
                              representative who is then,not allowed to sayanything.

                              The few examples given above really only scratch the surface ofthe
                             problems facing sibpostmasters tryingto offer a service to their
                             community. Through JFSA we willcontinue to          these and many other




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rare
                             points.

                                Recommendations

                            Regardless ofthe direction which lays aheadfor the Post Ofrice, there are,
                            at the very minimum, a numberofissues which              addressed and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         shouldbe
                       included in any wayforward.

                       o A fulland complete independent/Taudit ofPOL systems and support,
                       shouldbe undertaken with its findings made public

                            o An external independent adjudicator should be appointed review cases


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to
                            andissues between POL andsubpostmasters The adjudicator should have
                            the authority to demand documents from both POL and thesubpostmaster
                            and should be assisted by       of it/edtechnicalstaff who    able to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            team




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                si




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              are
                        gain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       check
                                                                                                                                                                                                                and




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  or




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            document




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        that




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             necessary.;
                                                                                                           access




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                deem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        any




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              they
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   system
                                                                                     new




                                                                                                                                                              subpostmaster




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                contract
                             a




                                                     A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  should




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       produced
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  replace




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               still
                                       Victorian




                                                                                                                                                                                   template




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        use




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       today.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 all




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       it




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               should
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Above




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        reflect




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the
                             in




                                                         troduction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ofnew




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 technology




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               detail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              address




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     where




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              responsib




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ilit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ies,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and




                       liabilities and boundaries lay. It should ensure that there is full and easy
                            access




                                                                                                                                              to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              records




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     transactions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     that




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            subpostmaster




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          being




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        held
                                                                                                                                                                                              the
                            liablefo




                                                                                                                                                   r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   full




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     liability.
                                                                                                                                                                              during




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              term




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that
                                                                                                                                                       must




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               legal
                                                                      There




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     or.a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   contractual




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               requirement




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  for




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                undertake
                            o




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL
                        a




                                                                                                                    audit




                                                                                                                                                                                                           of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              all




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          least
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           subpostohrces




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               annually




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    by




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qualified




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           staff.
                                                         full
                   o




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
                                                                      The




                                                                                                                                    licence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           prosecute




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        should




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  removed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       as




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tool




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           any
            prosecutions,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   referred




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Crown




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Prosecution.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to
                   a




                                                   Any




                                                                                                                                   external




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             access




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Horizon




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  over




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            terminals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  subpostmasters
                                                                                                                                                        should




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 accompanied




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         by




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       automatically




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    system
                   network




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        generated
'.entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           event




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         then
                                                                                                                       recording




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       details




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  which




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         made




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      available
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the
                   that




                                                                                           subpostmaster
                November




                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010
      @Parliamentary




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         copyright




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Prepared




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17th




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          November22010
                                                                                              POL00120561
                                                                                            POL00120561




                                In strictest Confidence



                 on the JFSA Memorandum to the Bill Committee

Post Office Ltd does not accept the unsubstantiated allegations that are being
made by JFSA a small self appointed group which, by its own admission, consists
mainly of ex-subpostmasters. The. Horizon system has brought major benefits to
subpostmasters and customers and carries the full confidence of the NFSP and the
CWU who represent serving staff and subpostmasters that use the system
throughout the Business. it.shoula be noted that all subpostmasters are able to
obtain their own transaction log from the system and conduct a daily cash
declaration - thereby being in a position to fully understand their own accounts
within the system. In addition the system also creates a separate independent audit
file of every transaction on the system.

The commercial contractual position between subpostmasters and Post Office Ltd
is well established and both its content' and the way it is applied, is compliant with,
and subject to, all relevant UK legislation. The contract is fully recognised by the
National Federation of Subpostmasters (NFSP) and any amendments or changes to
the contract will typically be discussed with that representative organisation
Should a situation arise whereby Post Office Ltd seeks to end a subpostmasters
contract, processes are in place whereby the subpostmaster involved can put
forward their case, can be assisted in doing so by the NFSP or by a friend, and the
subpostmaster also has a subsequent right to appeal any decision made to a
separate appeals authority within the company which           look at the case afresh.
                                                          will




Of .course, as independent business people, all subpostmasters also have access to
the UK legal system should they believe that Post Office. Ltd are acting
inappropriately. The results of individual cases that have          before the Courts, do
                                                                 come




not indicate that Post Office Ltd's :systems .or processes are inappropriate.

'The future development of contracts and. associated. processes affecting
 subpostmasters is a matter that would be discussed between Post Office Ltd and
 the National Federation of Subpostrnasters to help ensure that the interests of
 subpostmasters are represented..




5. Next Steps within POL,

The Horizon system and accompanying contractual processes remain fully robust.
Their integrity and sound basis have been demonstrated over many years, and they
have underpinned the provision of effective and sustainable service Post Office
                                                                        to.




customers. POL refutes the unsubstantiated allegations made by the JFSA.
                                                                                         POL00120561
                                                                                       POLOO120561




                               In Strictest Confidence

POL maintains a legal contractual relationship with subpostmasters which is based
on values of trust and mutual respect., In cases where there are reasons why this
relationship cannot continue, there are full processes of internal appeals and the
parties can have full subsequent recourse to the UK legal .system. As a matter of
course, and on an ongoing basis. POL works with the National Federation of
Subpostmasters (a recognised representative body for subpostmasters) on the
development of contractual 'and associated process matters.

Looking forward, as part of its future strategy consistent with the Policy Statement
outlined by Government in November 2010, Post Office Ltd will be seeking to
further review its contracts and accompanying processes to meet the changing
needs of its customers. This approach will continue to ensure that the contractual.
basis and associated procedures between Post Office Ltd and individual
subpostmasters remains sound, fair, commercial and equitable.

It is this combination of,

- the current robustness and integrity of Horizon,

- clear internal processes with appeal systems with the ultimate backstop of the UK
Legal .system (should cases.be referred to it),

  ongoing liaison with the NFSP as the recognised group representing
subpostmasters and

  a forward looking approach to the further development of contracts and
associated policies in line with developing strategy and Government policy

 that provides assurance to BIS that the approach taken by Post Office Ltd
continues to be fair and equitable.
