POL00143075
POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

POST OFFICE LTD
Briefing for Paula Vennells (Chief Executive) and
Chris Day (Chief Financial Officer)

Post Office IT General Controls
Ernst & Young Audit 2011/12

1. Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to provide an update on the:

1.1 Progress made in addressing the observations from the 2010/11 IT General
Controls Audit.

12 Implementation of a SAS70 (ISAE3402) style report.

1.2 Observations arising from the 2011/12 audit and the proposed Management
Response.

23 Background

2.1 As part of the annual independent Financial Audit, Ernst & Young undertake
an audit of the core Post Office systems that support financial transactions,
namely:

« Within the Post Office domain hosted by Fujitsu
o HNGX (product sales platform)
o POLSAP (product and branch accounting and supply chain
/ stock management)
e Within the Royal Mail domain hosted by CSC.
o SAP HR (human resources)
o SAP ESFS (general ledger)

2.2 The focus of the IT General Controls audit for each of these systems covers:
« Change Management

o Only appropriately authorised, tested, and approved
changes are made to applications, interfaces, databases,
and operating systems.

e Logical Access

o Only authorised persons have access to data and
applications (including programs, tables, and related
resources) and that they can perform only specifically
authorised functions (e.g., inquire, execute, update).

e¢ Operations

o Data supporting financial information is properly backed up
so such data can be accurately and completely recovered if
there is a system outage or data integrity issue.

o Programs are executed as planned and deviations from
scheduled processing are identified and resolved in a timely
manner.

o IT Operations problems or incidents are identified, resolved,
reviewed, and analysed in a timely manner.

2.3. The 2010/11 audit resulted in a number of actions for Post Office and Fujitsu
to address which were concluded by October 2011. The implementation of
24

POL00143075
POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

these actions has resulted in significant changes to our processes and to
deliver improvements to our IT General Controls.

Given the timing of this year’s audit (January and February 2012), there was
some time for these changes to have embedded. The improvements are
evidenced in the findings of the 2011/12 audit where there are no high risk
observations within the 7 identified (versus 10 last year) and only 25 specific
recommendations (versus over 70 last year).

Summary of the 2010/11 audit position

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

The 2010/11 audit identified 10 observations (classified as 4 high risk, 3
medium and 3 low) with over 70 specific recommendations.

In response to these observations, Post Office and Fujitsu agreed a series of
actions (as identified in the Management Comments to the audit report for
2010/11) to address the areas of risk identified.

A Post Office led Audit Steering Group was established to track and manage
the agreed actions, with all being completed by the end of October 2011, as
planned.

Through an independent Royal Mail Group audit conducted on the Post
Office systems (November 2011), it was agreed that all actions had been
completed as planned. Two actions had minor activities still to be completed,
which were addressed by December 2011. (See Appendix A for a summary
statement for each of the 2010/11 observations as agreed with the RMG
audit.)

Update on the SAS70 (ISAE3402) style report implementation

41

4.2

43

One specific recommendation from the 2010/11 audit was to investigate the
feasibility of having a SAS70 style report produced annually (now known as
ISAE3402), with a view to establishing greater standardised controls and
continuously evidenced compliance. Post Office have worked with Fujitsu
and Ernst & Young to agree an initial way forward where Fujitsu will, at their
own cost, engage Ernst & Young to produce such a report for the Fujitsu
hosted Post Office systems within the scope of our annual IT General
Controls audit.

The Fujitsu ISAE3402 report will be introduced for FY2012/13. It will bring
benefits to both Fujitsu and Post Office. Whilst initially Fujitsu will still require
the same level of effort to support the ISAE3402 audit, over time the scope
of that audit will be expanded to cover other standards (e.g. |SO27001, PCI,
LINK). This results in economies for Fujitsu as only one audit is required for
all those controls that are common across all standards. As the adoption of
the annual ISAE3402 report embeds, the good practice of continuous
evidencing of compliance will also deliver efficiencies, with each subsequent
annual audit having more immediate access to evidence of control.

Post Office will also benefit with the introduction of Fujitsu’s ISAE3402 report.
With the initial scope covering the controls within the annual IT General
Controls audit, our auditors will be able to draw on the ISAE3402 report as a
trusted source of evidence. Where control is evidenced in that report,
reduced investigation will be required by our auditors, with resulting
efficiencies.
44

POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

In addition, Post Office IT & Change and Information Security functions are
jointly aiming to adopt ISAE3402 good practices to establish a single audit
framework to manage how Post Office maintains compliance with the
controls across all required standards. This single audit framework will not
only drive efficiencies for Post Office, similar to the benefits identified above,
it will also drive improvements in the adoption of our policies and processes
through the requirement for continuous evidencing of compliance.

Update on the 2011/12 audit

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

Building on lessons learned from the 2010/11 audit, a more rigorous
management control approach was adopted for the 2011/12 audit. This
involved clear planning and communication to all parties well in advance of
required involvement. As a result the 2011/12 audit operated with a high
degree of cooperation across all parties and delivered on time. This is in
contrast to 2010/11 that required substantial senior management intervention
and delivered 3 months later than planned.

The 2011/12 audit found a demonstrable improvement from the 2010/11
audit across all previous observations and no high risk observations were
identified.

A total of 7 observations have been identified this year with only 25 specific
recommendations. Each of these observations built on the findings of the
2010/11 audit with Ernst & Young recommending further areas for
improvement or repeated recommendations where similar weaknesses
persist.

The proposed 2011/12 Management Response identifies how the agreed
actions from last year’s audit sought to address any repeated weaknesses. In
addition, the responses identify where repeated weaknesses persist due to
legacy constraints, with policy and process being used to mitigate any
potential risks.

This year’s responses also identify what further immediate actions will be
taken, e.g. re-iteration and communication of policy. In addition, new reviews
of policy and process are to take place to identify appropriate further
improvements.

Asummary of this year’s Ernst & Young recommendations and related
responses can be found in Appendix B.

Post Office Audit Steering Group will track and manage the progress of these
actions and report to the Post Office Audit Committee to agree each course
of action proposed, timeframes required and evidence completion of agreed
actions.

Recommendations

6.1

This paper is provided as a briefing paper only.

Lesley Sewell
Chief Information Officer
May 2012
POL00143075
POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential
Appendix A Summary status of the 2010/11 audit observations — as agreed with the
RMG independent audit in November 2011.

E&Y
Rating

Finding

Summary Status

Governance of outsourcing arrangement with Fujitsu: POL is responsible for the governance and risk and
control frameworks and should have visibility and assurance over their design and operating effectiveness.

‘Segregation of change management duties: Inappropriate access should be revoked and roles for development
and migration to live environment should be segregated.

3 High | Change management process: All changes should be appropriately authorised, tested and approved prior to
deployment to live environment.

4 High | Privileged access: Privileged access to IT functions should be reviewed to determine whether it is appropriate,

5 Med | Periodic POL-owned review of user accounts: To assist in the identification of inappropriate access and potential
segregation of duties conflicts.

G Med | User administration: Review the current user access policy and strengthen the existing user admir
process within POL and third party service providers.

istration

7 Tow | infrastructure logical security settings: Undertake architectural review and periodic scan of passwords as part of
a penetration testing schedule.

8 low | Password parameters: Review and update Information security policy and configure all applications in line with
policy requirements.

9 Med | Access to generic privileged accounts: Review across all applications. Consider replacing with individual
accounts and implement monitoring controls.

10 low | Incident identification and resol Regular review of the problem and incident management process to
ensure incidents are identified, classified and resolved on a timely basis.

POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

Appendix B Summary of 2011/12 Ernst & Young audit recommendations and proposed Management Responses.

E&Y Recommendations

Summary of the proposed Post Office Management Response

1. Privileged Access.

© Conduct a review of
privileged access for in
scope applications (HNG
and SAP)

e Revisit the need to grant
access at SAP_ALL and
SAP_NEW levels

e Consider creating system
accounts to run scheduled
jobs for POLSAP

e Periodic review of the
activities where SAP_ALL
and SAP_NEW are
retained.

e Implement monitoring
controls for 3“ party
suppliers.

Definition: Privileged access describes the level of control where the user having this access can perform
all or nearly all tasks within the system e.g. SAP_ALL provides the capability to process and approve
financial transactions within a SAP system. The purpose of SAP_ALL is to enable qualified
administration users the capability to maintain the system.

Observations from last year: Observations from the last audit identified inappropriate privilege access
in HNGX and POLSAP.

Observations this year: This year repeats the same observations but notes a reduction in accounts
assigned with privileged access in POLSAP and reviewed inappropriate privileged access in HNGX.
What have we done to address the observations: Since the last audit the use of privileged accounts is
monitored so that the granting of this privilege must be justified, time bound and reviewed monthly by
POL. There is continuing need for certain key system activities to be executed by the administration
teams with these privileges’. For example, for out of hour’s support it is not possible to predict the
privileges required to resolve any incident, therefore the use of encompassing privileges is justified.
Further additional controls do not appear to be justified. However the rigour of the monthly check at the
ISMF (Information Security Management Forum) will be tested to ensure it is adequate. If not steps will
be taken to optimise the checking of these accounts. The issues around privileged access are focused on
the possibility that a privileged user may abuse their access. Post Office believes that the existing process
provide sufficient transparency and accountability to deter such activity. Post Office accepts that
deterrence is not as strong as prevention but in this case the operational impact of devolving SAP_ALL
privileges is believed to carry more risk of operational instability. Consequently, Post Office’s attention
will address enhancing the process to ensure that lapses in record keeping can not easily occur in the
future; and that attention will be given to enhancing this accountability and transparency where possible.
Risk Treatment: Post Office accepts there is risk associated with its use of privileged access but also
determines it is operationally appropriate (given the nature of operational support required). Post Office
also accepts there is further work that can be done on the related secondary controls to reduce the
existing risk.

May 2002, Issue 7
POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

n

. User Admin Process.
Strengthen the HNG user
admin process to retain
approval documentation
for access to the HNG
estate
Strengthen the POLSAP
user admin process to
retain approval
documentation for
temporary set up for cash
centres.

Consider a monitoring
process for temporary set
up for cash centres.
Re-communicate to cash
centre managers that the

standard process should be

followed for permanent
access modifications for
SAPADS.

Implement a monitoring
process for privileged
users within cash centres.
Where user admin is
controlled by a 3" party
ensure adequate
monitoring controls.

For HNG and POLSAP
strengthen the process for
revocation of access when
employees contracts are

Definition: This is the process for the creation, modification and removal of user’s access to a system. In
particular HNGX and POLSAP.

Observations from last year: Observations from the last audit identified the need to introduce the
retention of user application documentation to record the user application request. For POLSAP to
identify how the segregation of duties can be maintained and for HNGX Implement a standard user
administration process to include all creations, modifications and removal of access to HNGX
Observations this year: This year repeats much of the same with additional focus on revocation of users
who have left or moved on.

What have we done to address the observations: There is a good strong process in place and the
observations seem to be driven from some lapses in documentation e.g. some individuals did not record
their name on the retained documentation. Post Office will work with Fujitsu to ensure the process is re-
iterated to the user population and will work with Fujitsu to ensure the joiners / leaver’s process is
robust. Similarly in POLSAP we will re-iterate the process to the user population and ensure the
monitoring process for third party users is robust.

Risk Treatment: Post Office accepts there is further work that can be done in terms of process
reiteration and monitoring to reduce the existing risk.

May 2002, Issue 7
POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

3. Change Management
Process.

To enhance the change
management process by
retained evidence of
authorisation, testing and
approval to promote
accountability.

Define the responsibilities
of all parties involved.
Increase involvement in
the change management
process specifically for
fixes and maintenance
changes.

Describe the overall
change management
process within
documentation.
Implement controls to
ensure that 3" party
service providers are in
place and in operation.

Definition: This is the process that determines that all programme changes are appropriately authorised,
tested and approved prior to implementation.

Observations from last year: The observations from last year centred on the authorisation and testing
of changes prior to go live. Of the samples taken there were a number of observations where evidence of
authorisations could not be found, evidence that testing took place or evidence that approval was not
received. This was based on a sample of 18 changes in POLSAP and 15 in HNGX.

Observations this year: Observations were much the same but referred to instances where names were
not recorded on the appropriate documentation. The auditors noted that there were improvements in the
process.

What have we done to address the observations: Post Office has further improved the process
regarding change management since the last audit. However, both Post Office and Fujitsu will amend
their processes to ensure that the name of the individual authorising, testing or approving changes is
recorded, as identified by the audit this year. It is noteworthy that Post Office does not always engage in
the authorisation, testing and approval of maintenance changes or fixes as these are often BAU
maintenance of the system and 19 of the 28 samples referred to maintenance or BAU changes. However,
Post Office does validate and authorise security affecting changes such as patches and anti-virus updates
and ensures that testing is performed by Fujitsu and retains an audit trail. Post Office will verify that the
classification of maintenance and fix changes and responsibilities is adequately documented between POL
and Fujitsu, and will update the documentation if it is found deficient. Post Office has a documented
change process described in the Manage Improvement & Change document. All Post Office suppliers
have their own internal change processes.

Risk Treatment: Post Office accepts there is further work that can be done with respect to adequate
documentation of actions taken and the classification of maintenance requirements to reduce the existing
risk.

May 2002, Issue 7

w
POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

4. Periodic user access

reviews and monitoring

controls.

¢ To consider the
implementation of a
periodic review of
appropriate access for
HNG and POLSAP.

Definition: This regular process reviews whether a user has appropriate privileges’ for the job / role that
they undertake.

Observations from last year: Requested that Post Office should implement a periodic review of
appropriate access of users. The findings found 2 users out of 25 had left the business and 1 user had
inappropriate access.

Observations this year: This year’s observation repeated that a review process be implemented based
on the findings that one individual had access to the HNGX estate that was no longer required to.

What have we done to address the observations: The processes that manage all user privileges have
been further improved from last year. The Fujitsu joiners / leavers process has improved; there is now a
monthly review of all movers and inactive users are identified after a pre-defined period of time. Annually
there is a full review of the user access and Fujitsu report on a regular basis on the user access status to
the Post Office Information Security Management Forum. These processes are considered sufficiently
robust. However, Post Office in conjunction with Fujitsu, will verify that adequate authorisation is
identified and recorded and where not will take appropriate steps to remediate. The issues around user
access management seem to be focused mainly on very infrequent lapses in the existing process.
Consequently, Post Office’s attention will address enhancing that process to ensure such lapses cannot
easily occur in the future.

Risk Treatment: Post Office considers its user access process to be sufficiently robust but accepts there
is further work that can be done to ensure that future lapses are avoided and reduce the existing risk.

May 2002, Issue 7
POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

5. Generic Privileged

Accounts.

© To consider a review of
generic privileged
accounts and supporting
infrastructure to determine
if they can be replaced by
individual accounts.

e To consider monitoring
controls to help ensure
robust security practices
are in place, particularly 3
party suppliers.

Definition: A Generic privileged account describes a non user specific account which can perform all or
nearly all tasks within the system e.g. SAP_ALL provides the capability to process and approve financial
transactions within a SAP system. The purpose of SAP_ALL is to enable qualified administration users
the capability to maintain the system.

Observations from last year: Observations from the last audit highlighted that a number of users e.g. 10
of 11 for system accounts 4 of 11 on database accounts etc., knew the password for specific accounts
and asked that we consider replacing such accounts with individual specific owned accounts to promote
accountability.

Observations this year: This year’s observations repeated very much the same.

What have we done to address the observations: Since last year the processes that control access to
accounts, where these are privileged, generic privileged or user accounts has been further improved. The
improvements mean that the use of generic privileged or privileged accounts can be tracked back through
an audit record to a particular person and authorisation for the use of the accounts and the defined period
for which he account is used. This is monitored and reviewed by Fujitsu at least monthly. All accounts are
reviewed at least annually and Fujitsu present reports to Post Office at the monthly Information Security
Governance Forum. The issues around generic privileged accounts seem to be focused partly on very
infrequent lapses in the existing process and partly on the risk that a privileged user might misuse their
access or their elevated privileges. Post Office accepts that deterrence is not as strong as prevention but
in this case the operational impact of devolving SAP_ALL privileges is believed to carry more risk of
operational instability. Post Office believes that the existing process provide sufficient transparency and
accountability to deter such activity. Consequently, Post Office’s attention will address enhancing the
process to ensure that lapses in record keeping can not easily occur in the future; and that attention will
be given to enhancing this accountability and transparency where possible.

Risk Treatment: Post Office accepts there is risk associated with its use of generic privileged access but
also determines it is operationally appropriate (given the nature of operational support required). Post
Office also accepts there is further work that can be done on the related secondary controls to reduce the
existing risk.

May 2002, Issue 7
POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

6. Password parameters.

e Review and update the
‘RMG Security Policy’ to
meet the generally
accepted password
settings as described in the
management letter.

e Consider one single policy
rather than multiple
policies and guidelines.

e Configure network,
application and
infrastructure components
in line with the policy.

Definition: Password parameters are attributes that can be applied to the way a password is generated by
a system. And which may be forced on a user when selecting a password. For example the length of the
password, the mix of characters, the length of time a password exists before it must be renewed etc.
Different systems and applications can and do employ widely differing sets of attributes and do not
necessarily agree on the value of these attributes. These then become technical constraints on setting and
enforcing policy.

Observations from last year: Observations last year was to review the RMG security Policy and update
the password settings accordingly for the network, application and supporting infrastructure components.
Additionally the auditors recognised that the risk was mitigated by the level of controls in Active
Directory and that this was considered to be a low risk.

Observations this year: The observations were much the same and they recognised that there had been
improvements to the observations raised last year.

What have we done to address the observations: The ability to align all of the technical password
controls is significantly limited by the flexibility and range of options of password parameters provided by
the manufacturers. Given that HNGX has a significant number of legacy systems, this drives a lot of
differences that cannot be reconciled at all. However, as new systems are designed and brought on line
and new applications developed these differences will gradually disappear. The main reason for this is
that over time manufacturers have recognised the need for comprehensive and flexible options for
security settings.

Risk Treatment: Given legacy nature of its systems, Post Office considers that the password parameter
controls in place are sufficient to mitigate the risk exposure. Notwithstanding that, Post Office will
continually monitor this to ensure continuing compliance.

May 2002, Issue 7
POL00143075

POL00143075

Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

7. Logical Security Settings.

e To consider specific
encrypted password
settings for all Oracle
databases and disabling the
default administrator
account and creating a
new one with a strong
password.

e To consider monitoring
controls to help ensure
robust security practices
are in place, particularly 3"
party suppliers.

Definition: Logical (as opposed to physical) security settings (or system security settings) is a generic
term that can apply to any security parameter of a system or its supporting infrastructure.

Observations from last year: This was considered to be of low risk at the last audit. It considered that
there were certain logical security weaknesses identified. Five observations were highlighted and three
were implemented. Of the two remaining the operational impact of HNGX was considered a marginal
improvement in the logical access risk.

Observations this year: Observations were much the same.

What have we done to address the observations: Last years observation was to encrypt the
LISTENER.ORA file. Fujitsu and Post Office considered that the impact of encrypting this file was a
very marginal improvement to the logical access risk and a significant increase of the risk to the long term
stability of the service. However, Post Office will request Fujitsu to assess the cost and operational
impact of this change.

Risk Treatment: Post Office believes that the logical security controls in place are sufficient to mitigate
the risk exposure. Notwithstanding that, Post Office will continually monitor this to ensure continuing
compliance.

May 2002, Issue 7
