POL00142323
POL00142323

? Protection of Commercially Sensitive and/or Legally
Privileged? Information

Dear All.

A review has been conducted in respect of commercially sensitive and/or legally privileged information, in
particular with the management and exchange of information subject to the Second Sight review. Whilst
most information within this group will be legal privileged, none the less, if the information was to
inadvertently be sent to the wrong email address or intercepted innocently or otherwise, once out in the
public domain it will be hard to control.

Having agreed with Susan Crichton, with immediate effect, all information should where possible be placed
onto a document and access is through a password protocol. The procedure is easy to use and only takes a
matter of seconds.

For matters relating to the Second Sight review, the password is the one that has previously been issued two
weeks ago. For general or BAU investigation communications, the existing password issued to Post Office

Legal, Post Office Security and Cartwright Kings is to be used.

Additionally commercially sensitive and/or legally privileged information should not be copied/pasted onto
unprotected email text to make it more easily readable on a Blackberry.

Any queries or if you require clarification on the passwords previously issued or how to create a password
document, then please give me a call.

Regards.
John.

John M Scott - Head of Security

Post Office Head Office, 148 Old Street, London, EC1V SHQ

$0309 IORI TAI IGRI IO IIIB IIB IO III TIO III III IIIA IO IIOE

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the
named recipient, you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this

978

POL-0143577
POL00142323
POL00142323

communication. If you have received this in error, please contact the sender by reply email and then delete
this email from your system. Any views or opinions expressed within this email are solely those of the sender,
unless otherwise specifically stated.

POST OFFICE LIMITED is registered in England and Wales no 2154540. Registered Office: 148 OLD
STREET, LONDON EC1V 9HQ.

JORIS IS ISOS IO IO IOI IOI IIIS III IO ISO IDI IIIS ASIII AI IIIA

979

POL-0143577
