                                                                                                                                                       POL00028838
                                                                                                                                                   POL00028838


                                                                                                                    Appendix 1 to CS' Responsive Note
                                                           Receipts/Payments Mismatch issue notes'
                                                                                                                                 FU1T:.
    ♦




                                                           l
Attendees

                                           Service Deliv
                                           Service




                                                   Deliv
                                           Network
                                           IT
                                           POL Finance
                                           Fujitsu SUM
                                           Fuiitsu Secu
                                              itsu Technical Specialist
                                              itsu Technical Specialist

What is the issue?

Discrepancies showing at the Horizon counter disapp ear when the branch follows certain process steps, but will still show within the back end branch
account. This is currently impacting circa 40 Branc- hes since migration onto Horizon Online, with an ov erall cash value of circa £20k loss. This issue wil
only occur if a branch cancels the completion of the trading period, but within the same session continues to roll into a new balance period.

At this time we have not communicated with branches affected and we do not believe they are exploiting this bug intentionally

The,problem occurs as part of the process when moving discrepancies on the Horizon System into Local Suspense.


When Discrepancies are found during Stock Unit roll over into a new Transaction Period, then the User is asked if the discrepancy should be moved to
Local Suspense. If the branch presses cancel at this point the Discrepancy is zeroed on the Horizon; System.




                                     Page I of 5           •
                                                                             _iMrnM




                                                                                       IncMrc
                                                                                                                                                       POL00028838
                                                                                                                                                  POL00028838




              III                                   Receipts/Payments Mismatch issue notes
      *•
                                                                                                                                 F      TSU
Note at this point nothing into feeds POLSAP and Credence, so in affect the POLSAP and Credence shows the discrepancy whereas the Horizon
system in the branch doesn't, So the branch will then believe they have balanced.


If at the next screen the rollover is completely cancelled, then no harm is done. However if the Rollover is re-attempted at this point, the rollover will
continue without any discrepancy meaning Horizon doesn't Match POLSAP or Credence                    I
This has the following consequences:
■    There will be a Receipts and Payment mismatch corresponding to the value of Discrepancies that were "lost"


Note the Branch will not get a prompt from the system to say there is Receipts and Payment mismatch, therefore the branch will believe they have
balanced correctly..


■    When the Branch begins the new Branch Trading period the discrepancies will show at Zero, however the Receipts and Payment mismatch will carry
     over into the next period.


_Imapct

• The branch has appeared to have balanced, whereas in fact they could have a loss or a gain.
• Our accounting systems will be out of sync with what is recorded at the branch
• If widely known could cause a loss of confidence in the Horizon System by branches
• Potential impact upon ongoing legal cases where branches are disputing the integrity of Horizon Data.
• It could provide branches ammunition to blameHorizon for future discrepancies

Identifying the issue and forward resolution


                                     Page2of5
                                                    i     C   MftfIarInt
                                                                                                                                                POL00028838
                                                                                                                                             POL00028838



                                                        I                                                I

             11                                     Receipts/Payments Mismatch issue notes
                                                                                                                                  co
                                                        j                                                                           ►U
 H                                                                                                                            FUJITSU
 The Receipts and Payment mismatch will result an error code being generated which will allow' Fujitsu to isolate branches affected this by this




                                                   in
 problem, although this is not seen by the branches. We have asked Fujitsu why it has taken so long to react to and escalate an issue which began in
 May. They will provide feedback in due course.

 Fujitsu are writing a code fix which stop the discrepancy disappearing from Horizon in the future. They are aiming to deliver this into test week
 commencing 4th October. With live proving at the model office week commencing 11' October. With full roll out to the network completed by the 21St of
 October. We have explored moving this forward and this is the earliest it can be released into live.

 The code fix will on stop the issue occurring in the future, but it will not fix any current mismatch!at branch.

Proposal for affected Branches

There are three potential solutions to apply to the impacted branches, the groups recommendation is that solution two should be progressed.

SOLUTION ONE - Alter the Horizon Branch figure at the counter to show the discrepancy. Fujitsu would have to manually write an entry value to the
local branch account.
IMPACT - When the branch comes to complete next Trading Period they would have a discrepancy, which they would have to bring to account.
RISK- This has significant data integrity concerns and could lead to questions of "tampering" with the branch system and could generate questions
around how the discrepancy was caused. This solution could have moral implications of Post Office' changing branch data without informing the branch.

SOLUTION TWO - P&BA will journal values from the discrepancy account into the Customer Account and recover/refund via normal processes. This will
need to be supported by an approved POL communication. Unlike the branch "POLSAP" remains balance albeit with an account (discrepancies) that



                                                                                                    in
should be cleared.
IMPACT - Post Office will be required to explain the reason for a debt recovery/ refund even though there is no discrepancy at the branch.
RISK - Could potentially highlight to branches that !Horizon can lose data.

SOLUTION THREE - It is decided not to correct the data in the branches (ie Post Office would prefer to write off the "lost"
IMPACT - Post office must absorb circa £20K loss
RISK - Huge moral implications to the integrity of the business, as there are agents that were potentially due a cash gain on their system


                                     Page 3 of 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00028838
                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00028838




                                                          Receipts/Payments Mismatch issue notes
                                                                                                                                                                               FU IT U


Action Point Summary

           .            ,h           .:     k   t F, -r   f                                                                                  ",       l   i,
      k.       Title.                                         *J ..4 x             r   ~¶   w tr1p9   QM   fi   ~   b ~-         t   ~Cy w                      , `. '    :~
                                                                         Prf                                               {'.                                 y               *:Kll   ,.•s~~' 1{   ,: 2~       _




    Audit accounts           Audit of Credence and POLSAP to check both systems match.                                                            '                      8th October                AW

     Isolate branch issues   Provide list of Horizon Desk calls made by affected branches to see if any other issue                                                      8th October                MS
                             impacting branches
     Forward Fix plan        Provide timeline for permanent for fix introduction to branches                                                                             6th October                 MS'

    Branch Performance       Confirm with Shaun Turner any future audits for Branches and any performance issues
                                                                                                                                                                         8th October                JM
    review                   flagged
    Branch Investigation     Confirm any existing of future investigations for impacted branches                                                                         8t" October                AS
    review
    NBSC Script              Confirm NBSC scripts for receipts and payments                                                                                              6th October                TJ

     HSO Script              Confirm Horizon System Desk script for receipts and payments                                                                                6th October                MS

    Branch weekly report     Fujitsu to provide a weekly report updating the affected Branches until migration of fix is                                                 8th October                GJ
                             completely rolled out
    Further Branch           Provide Fujitsu a list of branches to carry out further investigations                                                                      6th October                EL
    investigation




                                          Page 4 of 5
                                                                               rrnn*nnED(1M _iMM_rnMMrin=MMnc
                                                                                                                                  POL00028838
                                                                                                                         POL00028838




                      iI
                                           Receipts/Payments Mismatch issue notes
                                                                                                          J'UJIT`SU
_______________
   Title               Details                                                                           Target              Ow
                                                                                                          completion   ner
                                                                                                     date
     _




                                 r
  Fujitsu          Fujitsu to supply output, of further investigations                               8'h October             fU
  investigations
  Communications   Engage Post Office Communication teams to understand what should be shared with   6` October              TJ
                   Branches                                                           j
  Stakeholder      Produce report for Post! Office Stakeholders                                      6th October             TJ
  Report




                            Page 5 of 5
                                                  rnenenr Drina
                                                                                                                             POL00028838
                                                                                                                           POL00028838

                                                                                          Appendix 2 to Cs' Responsive Note




                   Correcting Accounts for "lost" Discrepancies
     Ref: g:\gij documents\notes\lost discrepancies.doc
     Author: Gareth I Jenkins
     Date: 29/09/2010 10:50: 00

     1.      Introduction
              This note relates to Peaks PCO204765 and PCO204263 (and also PCO203864 which is
              a duplicate of PCO204263).
                   Are these really duplicates? I'm a bit confused as to which one to refer to. Can one be closed
                   as a duplicate of the other?

            PCO204263 describes a problem with SU Balancing that will result in a Receipts
            payments mismatch. A fix is available for this peak which needs to be scheduled via
------- ----                             -                    -
                      owever-any ranc cncountertng-t e pro em wi - avecorrupte -accounts
            and Peak PCO204765 is a Master Peak to record al affected branches and also to
            define the process for correcting the accounts.
               The purpose of this note is to:
               ■ Summarise the problem in terms that are meaningful to Post Office Ltd
               •   Define a process for identifying all affected branches
              ■ Explain what analysis is needed on each affected branch
               •   Define what ongoing monitoring is required to pick up further occurrences of the
                   issue until the root cause of the problem is fixed
               •   Provide a basis for agreeing the necessary data fixes with Post Office Ltd and how
                   they are to be applied
               •   Explain how each problem branch can be fixed

      1.1      Chance Control

               Initial version 28/09/2010 12:49:00: This version of the note is an initial draft for
               discussion within development.
               Updated version 29/09/2010 10:50:00: Updated following feedback from Dev to be
               distributed to SSC

      2.      Overview

               The problem occurs as part of the process of moving discrepancies into Local
               Suspense.
               When Discrepancies are found when rolling a SU over into a new TP, then the User is
               asked if they should be moved to Local Suspense (MSG31316). Should they Cancel
               at this point the Discrepancy is zeroised in the Local Cache (but nothing is written to
               the BRDB). Note that there is no corresponding Balancing Transaction generated in
               the Local Cache and so the Local Cache is in an Unbalanced state.


      c:\documents and settings\jamail.a.singh\local settings\temporary internet files\olkl 8\lost discrepancies
      290910.doc                             Printed at 16:38:24 on 8/10/2010                                Page 1 of 4
                                                                                                                        POL00028838
                                                                                                                      POL00028838




        If at the next screen (where the options are to: print or preview the trial balance again;
        to re-attempt the rollover; or to cancel the rollover) the rollover is Cancelled, then no
        harm is done. However if the Rollover is re-attempted at this point, the rollover will
        continue with the corrupted Local Cache. This has the following consequences:
        ■ There will be a Receipts and Payment mismatch corresponding to the value of
          Discrepancies that were "lost"
             Note that if the User doesn't check their Final Balance Report carefully they may
             be unaware of the issue since there is no explicit message when a Receipts and
             Payment mismatch is found on the Final balance (the User is only prompted when
             one is detected during a Trial balance)
        ■    The Local Suspense will have no knowledge of this specific Discrepancy
        ■    The Opening Figures for Discrepancies in the new Period will be zero rather than
             the actual value of the Discrepancy
         ■ The data used for the BTS will also have a zero value for Discrepancies at the end
        -----of theperiod.When the BTS is produced this will-result in a similar Receipts-and-------
             Payment mismatch
             Note that if the bug was not present, then the Discrepancy would have been
             transferred to Local Suspense and that would have been cleared, so there are a
             number of things wrong with the BTS. However the impact of the bug is that the
             discrepancy is lost and so the simplest way to correct it is to re-introduce the lost
             discrepancy in a subsequent period and allow the normal rollover process to
             correct it.
             Note that if more than one SUhas the issue then the value will be the total value of all errors.

         ■   The level of Discrepancies when viewed at the Branch will no longer match the
             level as seen in POL SAP or POL MIS



3.      Identifying Affected Branches

        TheReceipts and Payment rnismafichwillresult inan    —NTevent~ieinggenerated.
        These use Event id of 902 when detected during SU balancing and 903 when detected
        during BTS production.
         Processes should be in place such that SMC pick up these events and raise a peak for
         each occurrence of these events.
             I don't believe that this has happened and this needs to be investigatedfurther.

         Therefore a check of the Event archives is required to produce all occurrences of these
         events from HNG-X.
             Mark Wright has produced a list of 16 occurrences of event 903 in the last 30 days. This
             needs to be extended

         Also application event 116                     or     117      should       be     written      to     the
         BRDB RX REP_EVENT DATA.



c:\documents and settings\jarnail.a.singh\local settings\temporary internet files\olkl8\lost discrepancies
290910.doc                              Printed at 16:38:24 on 8/10/2010                                Page 2 of 4
                                                                                                                            POL00028838
                                                                                                                          POL00028838




                 Looking at the BRDB when Dev reproduced the problem only 117 events werefound I need
                 to check what the difference is between 116 and 117.

             Therefore an extract from BRSS of all instance of Events 116 and 117 will provide a
             further check.
             Please can SSC arrange to get extracts of the relevant NT and Application events asap
             (before things get archived) so that we can get the scope of the problem.

     4.     Analysis Required for each Affected Branch
             For each Branch need to ascertain the following:
             •    When the Receipts Payments mismatch occurred
             •    What is the value of the Lost discrepancy
             ■ Is it a gain or a loss?
--                Is there                      ApplicationE
                           a




                               corresponding




             a    Affected SU, TP and BP
             ■ Has a call been raised by the Branch?
             •    Has a call been raised by SMC?
             a    Has the Branch rolled over to a new TP?



     5.     Ongoing Monitoring
             We need to ensure that SMC processes are changed such that Peaks are generated for
             each occurrence of events 902 or 903.
             As a backstop we should also ensure that a monthly check as described in Section 3 is
             carried out to ensure that nothing has been forgotten. Note that this check shouldn't
             come up with any new branches if the processes have been      in place correctly.
                                                                                      put




     6.      Communication with Post Office Ltd
             Once we have the information from Section 4 which will enable us to identify the full
             scope of the issue we need to communicate this to Post Office Ltd through the
             problem management mechanisms. We will then need to get Post Office Ltd to agree
             if / how we should be correcting the data.
              Post Office Ltd should also be able to check up on POL SAP to confirm that these
              discrepancies are still visible even though they have been lost in the Branch.
              It should be noted that as Discrepancies are normally Losses, then a Lost Discrepancy
              would normally work in the Branches favour and so there is no incentive for the
              Branch to report the problem. Also if we do amend the data to re-introduce the
              Discrepancy, this will need to be carefully communicated to the Branches to avoid.
              questions about the system integrity.



     c:\documents and settings\jarnail.a.singh\local settings\temporary internet files\olkl8\lost discrepancies
     290910.doc                              Printed at 16:38:24 on 8/10/2010                               Page 3 of 4
                                                                                                                       POL00028838
                                                                                                                     POL00028838




                Of the cases so far identified there is one for £30,611.16, one for £4,826,00 and the
                rest are all less than £350.
                   1v been unable to work out yet if these are losses or gains!                            1

7.                      the Data for each Affected Branch
       Fixing




                The data can be corrected by adjusting the appropriate Opening Figures and BTS Data
                that relates to the current TP. This will result in the Discrepancy needing to be
                processed when rolling over into the next TP.
        I propose that if we are to do this then we take a copy of the data for one branch and
        check out the proposed changes on a test system and then rollover the branch on the
        test system to ensure that the discrepancy is handled correctly before we attempt to
        correct Live data. Having done one example in this way, we then need to agree a
—     --timetable with-Post- Office Ltd-to conect- the- otherbranchesandensure that this-is
        communicated with the Branches to ensure that everyone involved is happy.
                Note that if it is decided not to correct the data in the branches (ie POL would prefer
                to write off the "lost" discrepancy), then adjustments will be required to the
                Discrepancy account in POL SAP to align this with the actual level of discrepancy
                seen at the Branches.




c:\documents and settings\jamail.a.singh\local settings\temporary internet files\olkl8\lost discrepancies
290910.doc                             Printed at 16:38:24 on 8/10/2010                                Page 4 of 4
