POL00141416
POL00141416

To: Jarnail A Si
Ce: Andy Cashf,
Subject: RE: Horizo:

Jarnail,

This appears to be what we want.

Hopefully Helen will confirm that the Horizon system has never been successfully challenged. I have yet to see
any sign of any experts briefed on behalf of the defence.

When she has completed her exercise she should prepare a summary of those cases where there is a proper
attack on the system rather than a gripe that the system is at fault (although she should record these cases so that
we can say that they have been kept under review - they will become more numerous as the band wagon picks
up speed)

The expert will need to address the report to the following issues:

1) A description of the horizon system (In laymens' terms so that a jury can understand what it is and what it
does)

2) A declaration that it has yet to be attacked successfully.

3) A summary of the basic attacks made on the system concentrating on any expert reports served in past cases.
If there are none then state that no expert has yet been found by any defence team civil or criminal to attack the
system. (at the moment there seems to be little more than griping by defendants that the system must be at fault
without saying how)

4) Plainly, like all accounting systems, there is room for human error (Keying in wrong amounts etc) but the
expert should be able to state that innocent human error is unlikley to produce the types of dicrepencies of many
thousands of pounds over many months.

A decent report along these lines will go a long way to putting this issue to bed.
Any problems please get in touch

Harry

From: Jarnail A Singh [mailto:
Sent: 06 August 2012 09:46
To: Harry Bowyer

Cc: Hugh Flemington
Subject: FW: Horizon integrity project

Harry— It was good to chat with you. I confirm that Helen Rose has been given the task to gather the data .Please find her email
and spread sheet .It would be useful at this stage if you could look at what information Helen has provided and advice accordingly
in readiness to instruct an expert as part of providing an advance pack disclosure.

Regards.

Jarnail singh

from: Helen Rose

Sent: 03 August 2012 11:02

To: Jarnail A Singh

Subject: Horizon integrity project

Morning Jarnail

| have made a start putting together any offices that we know have had horizon mentioned. This list is made up from various
sources and there is still a lot of work to be done with some offices to be added, and possible some to be removed if not showing in
our casework reports (Alison Bolsover supplied me with a list and some of those may not be related to us directly) (some of the
details have been completed by others and | will work through these and check/amend the detail accordingly)

POL-0142801
POL00141416
POL00141416

| have sent an email out to ‘old’ security personnel to see if they can remember any specific offices where horizon was questioned
and it may take a week or so for response as there are quite a few on leave at present.

| am working through the list and putting in as much detail as | can find out from old reports/case closure forms etc. | am then
planning on looking at the past year or two for offices not on this list to ensure none of the recent cases are missed.

This is a time consuming project reading through various reports and documents. In our previous phone call you mentioned where
sometimes there would be bargaining and some cases would be charged with false accounting rather than theft and false
accounting on the proviso that the horizon system is not brought into question. Do you have any names of offices where this will
have been the case please, or where this would be documented (case closure/legal memos etc)

| have attached the spreadsheet so far, could you please confirm to me if this is what you are wanting. Columns D, E and F are
designed to be a first glance check list, with further details about the case in columns G to M. If there is anything you think | should
include to assist you in future could you please let me know.

Do you have any time scales in which you would like this returning by and who you would like keeping up to date with the progress.

Once this is completed my thoughts are that, any time horizon integrity is mentioned at any part of the interview/prosecution
process the spreadsheet is automatically updated with details completed as the case progresses.

regards

Helen Rose

Security Team
3rd Floor
Clippers Quay
SALFORD
MSO 3NW

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named recipient, you must not use,
disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication. If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and
then delete this email from your system.

ROYAL MAIL GROUP LIMITED registered in England and Wales at 100 VICTORIA EMBANKMENT, LONDON EC4Y 0HQ with the
registered company number 04138203

POST OFFICE LIMITED registered in England and Wales at 148 OLD STREET, LONDON EC1V 9HQ with the registered company number
02154540

POL-0142801
