POL00029114
POL00029114

This DRAFT document contains confidential information relating to Post Office Limited. It is
intended for the named recipients only and should not be disseminated further.

Review of Key System Co

Horizon in Horizon

System

Controls Post Office Limited

Legally Privileged & Strictly Confidential

Draft Report: 11/005 Assurance Review

February 2012

Internal Audit & Risk Management
Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential

Confidential
POL00029114

POL00029114

aaa RRR Ri aeeereererreeeeereeeeeereeereeeereeere ERR

The Post Office Limited (POL) network of approximately 11,000 branches processes client and business transactions in excess of £100 billion annually. The
majority of transactions are conducted on behalf of third parties, for example, receiving payment for domestic utility bills and paying out from National Savings
accounts.

Customer transactions are captured on the Horizon (HNGX) electronic point of sale system in branches and transmitted to central systems (utility payment,
‘external banking and POL finance systems) throughout the day. Overnight, dally summaries are transferred into the central accounting system, POL SAP. The
translation process between the two systems is enabled by the Reference Data System (RDS). An overview of the component parts of the HNGX system is
provided at Appendix A.

The overall objective of the review was to provide assurance that appropriate IT management disciplines provide a stable IT platform, and that suitable internal
controls operate over HNGX transactions and the extraction of these for central systems. In the area of management disciplines the|review assessed controls
‘over: access to software; change management; capacity monitoring; and system resilience and disaster-recovety. With Fegards to internal controls over
transactions the review covered: master data controls; transaction data; SAP Middleware;/and batch updates:

The review also assessed the degree to which actions to address the issues raised in the 2011 Ernst & Young (E&Y) Management Letter regarding the HNGX
control environment have been progressed by management:

rclusion

Key Findings and C

IT Management Disciplines and HNGX Transaction Controls,
The following control weaknesses were identified:

1. System access: Access to HNGX in branches is by means of individual user accounts and passwords. However, particularly in sub-post offices, the same user
accounts and passwords are often shared between branch staff. The use of individual user accounts is not always practical, e.g. in the case of single
terminal branches where time would be lost continually switching between user accounts, and the number and geographical spread of sub-post offices
makes it difficult for POL management to ensure access controls are enforced.

Implication: The audit trail for identifying the source of any transaction discrepancies could be unreliable.
2. Resilience and Disaster Recovery: Fall-over from the live data centre to the back-up has not been tested since June 2009, although disaster recovery

arrangements were tested during the migration to the new system in October 2009. Testing of the business continuity plan has been scheduled for the 24""
and 25" of March 2012.

Implication: The period of any inability to trade as a result of a major system outage may be greater than anticipated.

EEE Internal Audit & Risk Management oe

Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential Page 2 of 8

Confidential
POL00029114

POL00029114

3. Master data: No audit trail exists for change requests received by Fujitsu from the Network Business Support Centre (NBSC]. Not all ‘approved! requesters
are documented or referred to on receipt of a change request. The membership of the Lotus Notes email groups, which are used to authorise the Master
Data Teams to make changes to standing data, is not known and has not been subject to recent review. One of a sample of 10 change requests was found
to have been handled via the “Fast track” process when it should have come through the normal process, resulting in reduced oversight of the change.

Implication: itis difficult to detect and prevent inappropriate changes being made to master data.

4, Transaction data: One of a sample of § monthly reconciliations between HNGX generated client transaction summaries and those created by the clients
‘themselves was found not to have a second level review signature. Period-end Senior Management review is not formally signed-off, although it appears to
be undertaken.

Implication: Errors may not be identified, leading to possible discrepancies in client balances.

Conclusion: IT disciplines around functional changes and capacity monitoring were found to be appropriately designed and also-operating effectively. However,
‘access to the system in branches, particularly sub-post offices, can be by means of shared accounts. In addition, fail-over from the live data centre to the back-up
centre has not been tested since June 2009. This requirement is of particular importance, as highlighted by an outage in the system in December 2011, Testing
of the business continuity plan has been scheduled for March 2012, Controls desigried to maintain the completeness, accuracy and integrity of transactional data
flows within HNGX were effective, with minor weaknesses noted around manual-processes for the validation of master data and transaction data. No evidence
was found of material discrepancies arising fram these issues,

Control Environment: Some improvement required.

E&Y Management Letter 2011

‘The 2011 E&Y Management Letter identified @ fumber of ateas for improving HNGX and other POL IT system controls. This current Internal Audit & Risk
Management (IA&RM) review assessed the degree-to which management action plans have progressed to address the issues which related to HNGX. Progress
has been made in completing the actions arising from the E&Y Management Letter. The E&Y recommendations that require most additional work relate to’
inappropriate access to software change management duties (incomplete segregation between software development and migration roles); the process for the
Identification and resolution of incidents; the recommendations that POL undertakes an architectural review, configure passwords in line with policy and perform
periodic scan of passwords as part of a penetration testing schedule. The penetration testing originally planned for January 2012 has been postponed to March
2012 as the business had to prioritise a test to meet Payment Card Industry (PCI) compliance during January,

‘The findings, summarised in Appendix B on page 9, have been shared with ERY and reflect our assessment as at the end of January 2012.

OE ————

‘We agree with this report and its findings, and will act to progress the action plan within the agreed timescales ~ Lesley J Sewell

EEE Internal Audit & Risk Management oe

Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential Page 30f 8

Confidential
POL00029114
POL00029114

What was done

Summary Findings - IT Manat

What was found

ment Disciplines

support staff.

completed changes.

Access to Software: HINGX access in branches, particularly sub-post offices, is often
Walked through and sample tested access via shared accounts. Access security controls over the “back
arrangements for branch, POL and Fujitsu technical_| | end” HNGX environment (including Credence / T!) were found

Inspected testing and release management
processes, walked through and sample tested

to be effective, as were physical security controls.

Functional changes are initiated and progressed via agreed
processes and appropriately approved and tested prior to
‘migration to the live environment

Reviewed and sample tested arrangements for
monitoring processing capacity.

‘Transaction processing capacity, including processor
utilisation, disk space etc, is proactively managed and
‘monitored by Fujitsu including forecasting of future
requirements.

recovery.

Inspected, walked through and sample tested individual components and sub-systems. “Warm” fail-over
arrangements for ensuring resilience and disaster arrangements exist between the two dat

System design resilience is high with frequent failure testing of

centres, although
these have not been tested since June 2009,

Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential

Note: For details of systems and data flows, see “HNGX System Overview” at Appendix A,

Internal Audit & Risk Management ——
page of

Confidential
POL00029114
POL00029114

Summary Findings

‘Master Data:
Inspected master data input process and data
validation routines and tested via walkthroughs and
‘sample testing of changes.

‘Transaction Data:
Reviewed and sample tested arrangements for the
reconciliation and validation of transaction dat

Inspected data validation controls and tested the
reconciliation of inputs to and outputs from
Middleware (which translates HNGX data to POL SAP
readable format).

Internal Controls Over Transaction:

What wi und

Minor weaknesses were found around: helpdesk:
change requests; documentation and verification of
“approved” requesters; and use of “fast-track” requests. Data
validation routines have been designed and implemented
effectively.

tiated

Client account reconciliations are reviewed by team leaders
‘and balances >£400k are reviewed by second line
management. However, no formal senior manager sign-off
‘exists for month-end probity reviews.

‘A detailed functional specification has been defined and
‘agreed with Fujitsu, covering controls to validate the
completeness / accuracy of the interface to POL SAP. Controls
relating to data transfer between SAP Middleware and POL
SAP appear to be designed and operated effectively.

Batch Update:
Verified data flows across key interfaces to assess
whether batch updates are completed accurately and
‘on time by means of walkthroughs and sample.
testing.

Effective batch processing / interface monitoring controls are
in place, automated and managed via Tivoli Workflow
Scheduler (TWS). Automated error alerts are raised by TWS to
the Service Management team who escalate to either the
Logica Application Management team or Fujitsu for resolution.

Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential

Internal Audit & Risk Management

Note: For details of systems and data flows, see “HNGX System Overview” at Appendix A,

fl

Page Sof 8

Confidential
POL00029114

POL00029114
‘that accounts and passwords must only be used in accordance with Post Office policy. Priority 2 (John Scott — April 12)
3. Develop and deploy a formal process for change requests identified and communicated by the NBSC Helpdesk. Priority 2 (Lesley Sewell — April 12)
addresses are includéd. Priority 2 (Lesley Sewell — April 12)
wae
—$—$—<—<—$———— Internal Audit & Risk Management _S ooo
Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential Page 6 of 9

Confidential
POL00029114

POL00029114
susan Crichton, Legal and Compliance Director Derek k Foster, Internal Audit & Risk Management Director
Christopher Day, Finance Director Moya Greene, Chef Executive
Kevin Gilland, Network and Sales Director Matthew Lester, Chief Financial Officer
‘Andy Jones, Quality and Standards Manager Emily Pang, Chief of Staff
Neil Lecky-Thompson, Head of Programmes and Planning ipeter Tenissay, Hesd ot Risk Assurance:
Lesley J Sewell, Head of IT and Change Esta Young
Paula Vennells, Managing Director
Mike Young, Chief Operating Officer
——<——<—< internal Audit& Risk Management
Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential Page 7 of 9

Confidential
POL00029114
POL00029114

SSE

EEE Internal Audit & Risk Management SS
Legally Privileged and Strictly Confidential Page 8 of 9

Confidential
POL00029114
POL00029114

Appendi ing from 2011 E&Y Audit
E&Y
Finding Summary Status
8 Rating

1 tiign | Sovernance of outsourcing arrangement with Fujitsu POL is responsible for the governance and riskand control | Substantial

18h | frameworks and should have visibility and assurance over their design and operating effectiveness. progress made

3 High | S28regation of change management duties: Inappropriate access shoul be revoked and roles for developmentand | Further work
migration to live environment should be segregated. required

3 High | Change management process: All changes should be appropriately authorised, tested and approved priot to Substantial

18h | deployment to live environment. progress made

5 Substantial

4 High | Privileged access: Privileged access to IT functions should be'réviewed to determine whether itis appropriate, progress made

; eq | Periodic POL-owned review of user accounts: To assist in the identification of inappropriate access and Substantial

potential segregation of duties conflicts. progress made

é Med) /_) Useradministration: Review the current user access policy arid strengthen the existing user administration process | Substantial

Within POL and third party service providers: progress made

z u Infrastructure logical secuiity settings: Undertake architectural review and periodic scan of passwords as part Further work
‘OW | of a penetration testing schedule. required

a Low | Password parameters: Review and update the Information Security policy and configure all aplicationsin line with | Further work
policy requirements. required

° Meg | Aceessto generic privileged accounts: Review across all applications. Consider replacing with individual Substantial

accounts and implement monitoring controls. progress made

io Low | Incident identification and resolution: Regular review of the problem and incident management process to ensure | Further work
incidents are identified, classified and resolved on a timely basis. required

fe Internal Audit & Risk Management 2

Legaly Privileged and Strictly Confidential Page 9 of 3

Confidential
