                                                                                           POLOO180894
                                                                                      POLOO180894




IN THE NEWCASTLE MAGISTRATES COURT

                                        REGINA

                                           -v-

                               KIM ELIZABETH WYLIE



                               ADVICE ON EVIDENCE



1.   This defendant is accused of stealing some £38,000 from Wirilaton Post Office

     where she was sub postmistress. The facts are set out in my initial advice of 28th

     October 2010. In interview she attempted to blame the shortfall on the Horizon

     accounting system. In my early advice I advised that we would need to prove the

     integrity of the Horizon system as there was apocryphal evidence on the internet

     and elsewhere that the system was leading to injustice.

2.   The position of Post Office Ltd has, up until now, always been robust. When the

     system has been challenged in the criminal courts the system has always been

     successfully defended. I understand that the Post Office has announced that it has

     appointed independent forensic accountants, 2nd Sight Ltd, to conduct an

     independent review of 10 cases based on the Horizon System. Whether this

     announcement was well considered or not is not an area that I intend to address but

     the bell cannot be unrung and there will be consequences that will have to be dealt

     with.

3.   The first consequence is that we have now given ammunition to those attempting to

     discredit the Horizon system. The argument will be that there is no smoke without

     fire and we would not have needed to audit a bomb proof system. We can expect

     this to go viral in that any competent defence solicitor advising in a case such as
                                                                                             POLOO180894
                                                                                           POLOO180894




     this will raise the integrity of the Horizon system and put us to proof as to its

     integrity. As all of our cases depend on the system to compute the alleged losses

     this is likely to affect a considerable percentage of our cases.

4.   The extra evidence which we will be obliged to gather will be as nothing in

     comparison to the potential disclosure problems that we may face. Until the 2nd

     Sight investigation is concluded we will be in a limbo. It is essential that this

     enquiry is completed as soon as possible and we can live by its findings. We will

     have to find out when this enquiry will report in order that we can choose our

     strategy. If it is a matter of weeks then cases can be put over until after it reports. If

     we are talking months then the courts will not wear such delays.

5.   I assume that we still contend that the system is fool proof in which case we should

     defend it aggressively. I understand that the manufacturers have not been helpful

     up until now. My understanding is that they will not provide expert evidence

     without large fees being sought. This will not do. If the integrity of the system is

     compromised then the consequences will be catastrophic for all of us including

     them. The financial consequences of convictions and confiscation orders being

     overturned and confidence in the Post Office book keeping being restored for

     future prosecutions will be astronomical. They should be made to understand that

     this is a firefighting situation and its not just our house that would be burned down

     if the system were compromised.

6.   In my view we should attend to the following:

     (i)    We should identify the contested cases, civil and criminal, in which the

            Horizon system has been challenged. We should identify the areas of

            challenge and how we neutralised them. Any expert reports should be
                                                                                            POLOO180894
                                                                                          POLO0180894




             retained for evaluation. An expert should be identified and instructed to

             prepare a generic statement which confirms the integrity of the system and

             why the attacks so far have been unfounded. This expert should be deployed

             in all cases where the Horizon system is challenged and he should be

             prepared to be called to reply to defence experts on a case by case basis.

     (ii)    The material gathered should be monitored and added to on a case by case

             basis for disclosure. It would be sensible to have a nominated individual in

             charge to whom the case officers can come. There is little point in weaving a

             web without having a spider in it.

     (iii)   We should ascertain why we have decided to instruct 2nd sight Ltd. I

             presume that it was not because of any doubt that we had in our system. If

             so we should be robust in stating that that is so. I presume our thinking was

             that as we have nothing to hide we have no objection to our practices being

             scrutinised in which case we should say so.

7.   I can appreciate that the above might be expensive but it will be as nothing should

     the integrity of the Horizon system be compromised.

8.   Please do not hesitate to get in touch if I can be of further assistance.




                                                                                 11th July 2012

                                                                           H. M . M. Bowyer

                                                                             Cartwright King
