                               POLOO136717
                             POLOO136717




From: Dave Posnett
Sent: 10 June 2013 11:29
To: Sirnon Baker
Subject: RE: SR021 and 022

Sinniun_
                                                                                                                      POLOO136717
                                                                                                                   POL00136717




I've read the associated document and would say there were issues ... the scratchcard process worked but some SPMRs
had trouble getting to grips and understanding it. The volume of TC's across the network were, I recall, a concern. I
owned Scratchcards as a fraud risk programme when I was a Fraud Risk Manager up until around May 2010. The
problem was that Scratchcards were the only product which wasn't simply remmed in and then sold. Instead, they had to
be accepted on the Lottery Terminal as received and then activated as and when required on Lottery Terminal and
remmed in on Horizon when activated, then sold, and then prizes/stock holdings recorded on Horizon ... as well as on line
sales.

I ran a number of interventionieducation initiatives and associate a zip file of two such initiatives (1 & 2) ... both of which
featured Hightown (so they weren't left to flounder as seems to be the insinuation). There are also help guides and
comms articles included and I would think that POL sent out many more comms to branches and the Lottery Team made
numerous TP calls each month, as well as the Ops Manual as a point of reference in branch.

Also in the file is my (then) monthly holdings overview spreadsheet (3). From this data we determined branches that
would be telephoned and branches that 1. would request an audit. If you see the `branches of concern' tab you can get a
sense of the concerns around perceived scratchcard holdings. There were many audit shortages and scratchcard holding
concerns seemed to highlight other problems at branches,

Also associated is a powerpoint describing scratchcard process at the time (4) and the Ops Manual at the time (5) and
proposed new system of dealing with scratchcards (6) .. . though I had long gone by the time the new system came in and
I can't say if this was the actual system.

I've only sent this to you for fear of bogging everyone down with data (sorry!) ... up to you if you want to use in any way
shape or form.

Regards,

Dave Posnett I Accredited Financial investigator




From: Simon Baker
Sent: 09 June 2013 13:59
To:                                                                                       Dave


Subject: FU's': SR021 and 022

All

We now have a new spot review -- SR022.

Please can you come to the dial-in on Wednesday having reviewed and your comments on how to approach this one.

Pete, it would be good if you could join us so we can get the request into Fujitsu for the XML data so it is ready for when
Gareth when he gets black.

Simon
