POL00028507

POL00028507

( ae

On gk Sop. Prpceaut « . 31 JAN 200)

+2357
Electronic memo
To: Keith K Baines/POCLIPOSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE
ce: Graeme Seedall/POCLIPOSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE
Hard Copy To
Hard Copy cc
From Min Burdet#POCL/POSTOFFICE
Date 31/01/2000 15:30
Subject: Fwd: Receipts Not Equal to Payments B
Keith

For information, see below. I'm not sure that my advice on the Acceptance aspect was accurately
represented. | asked Dave Pye, to help any commercial discussions, to try to differentiate between
where there was a deficiency in service (which seems to be the case with the migration tool) and
where there is a change in POCL requirements.

have briefed Graeme that you want to be aware of commercial issues before entrenched positions
are established. He is also going to contact you to arrange the meeting around closure of Al376/TIP
checking. As Martin was also at the Al211 meeting, you might want to tack this onto your agenda.

Min

To: Min Burdett/POCL/POSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE, Graeme
Seedall/POCL/POSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE

ce:

Hard Copy To

Hard Copy cc

From Mark Burley/POCL/POSTOFFICE

Date 31/01/2000 15:11

Subject: Fwd: Receipts Not Equal to Payments

Graeme / Min

Please see the attached output from our meeting on Wednesday which gives the proposed way
forward to finally close this Al once and for all.

Happy to discuss

Mark

To: David R Stevenson/POCLIPOSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE, julie dart, phil turnock,
dave pye, martin o'toole

ce: Martin Box/POCL/POSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE, Ann A
Clarke/POCLIPOSTOFFICE@POSTOFFICE, sue m harding

Hard Copy To

Hard Copy cc

From Mark Burley/POCLIPOSTOFFICE

Date 26/01/2000 04:06 PM

Subject: Receipts Not Equal to Payments

POL00028507

POL00028507

All,

Marton O'Toole, Dave Pye and myself have just finished our meeting with Pathway who were
represented by John Pope, Steve Warwick, Phil Hemmingway and for the first hour of the meeting by
Martin Taylor.

We started out by expressing our requirements to Pathway as decided at the meeting held in
Chesterfield on Monday 24th January 2000. In summary these were stated as:

1) The miman tool to be enhanced such that for each stock unit, the HFSO also enters the balance
brought forward. This is compared to the derived balance and if there is a difference the HFSO is
presented with a warning. The HFSO then has the option of changing any of the details entered OR
accepting the error. In the latter scenario where the HFSO chooses to accept the error, the balance
brought forward to be used would be that entered by the HFSO. The existing office check of balance
brought forward would also continue. (Note it was agreed that there was no requirement to change the
MiECCO tool as these checks are effectively already managed via the ECCO software - the process
with MiECCO is, from this point on, the same as with Miman)

Steve Warwick advised that conceptually this was a straight forward change to action and implement.
The only concern raised was around the fact that HFSO's may deliberately force a balance by entering
spurious data. Whilst it was agreed there was a slight risk from this, there were controls in place,
namely that users have to accept the migrated data from HFSOs.

2) For any receipt and payment mis-balances, including those from migration, we would like the value
to be posted to a discrete line on the appropriate receipt or payment table but that this must be
controlled such that users cannot influence the value and that the ability to create the entry can only
be achieved via authorisation or input of some type of PIN number from the Helpdesk. We would
therefore require the warming currently presented when there is a Receipts and Payments misbalance
to be extended to say ‘please contact the NBSC on xxxx yyyyyy'.

Firstly, there was a suggestion from Pathway that this was significantly different to the suggestion that
had been made two weeks ago when it was suggested that we would want the office to be prevented
from completing the problem until the root cause was identified and resolved such that the error could
be corrected before the cash account was completed and rolled over. | informed them that this was not
our requirement as there would be no guarantee that all the errors would be resolved in time for the
following cash account to be completed and we would therefore risk outlets being out of alignment.

necessary security features to provide a facility to only give access to certain buttons via a password.
This would be a major system change. The ability to restrict access to a system calculated value was
however a feature that could be introduced. He added that the posting of a Receipts and Payments
discrepancy to a discrete line was ‘relatively straight forward’ if the error occurred at stock unit level.
However at cash account level, he suggested this would be considerably more difficult because of how
these differences are identified. At stock unit level, the error would be identified during the compilation
of the figures to be printed and therefore the value could easily be posted to an agreed line. At cash
account level, a receipt not equalling payment error Is only identified when actually printing the trial
cash account. This is because the system calculates all the individual lines as part of the preparation
time to printing but only calculates the Receipt and Payment totals when actually printing. As a result,
to force the error onto discrete lines would need the system to force the user to re-start the cash
account process which could result in the user incurring an additional 15 minutes (approx) of balancing
time.

{ Based on our stated requirement, Steve Warwick advised that the current design does not have the

Note that any Receipt equal Payment errors from the stock units that had posted to a line as part of
the stock unit balance would feed through onto discrete cash account lines in the same was as all
other transactions. It is only for problems encountered at office level where this problem arises;
however it is not possible to identify the likelihhod of either, nor understand from the results to date,
where the errors have occurred although intuitively the larger proportion are likely to be identified in

Shag
Werk

POL00028507

POL00028507

»s

@ |

stock units.

If we were to proceed with this proposal, POCL would be required to develop relevant products with
the correct cash account mappings and correct attributes.

Steve did suggest that there could be an alternative to the 15 minutes, namely that as part of the cash
account preparation, the system also calculates the table totals and performs the check before
printing. He suggested this would take about 2 minutes of additional time. However the risk with this is
that it would apply to all outlets not just those with the errors and based on the current error rate of 3%
- the overall impact to the Business would be less going with the 15 minute option (i.e. 3 times 15 is
less than 100 times 2). John Pope stated that there is no way they could guarantee actual time
impacts without doing a paid study which would be necessary as part of any CR raised. Steve
admitted that the real impact could be anywhere from a few seconds to longer than those suggested.
Indeed he added that we may never truly know until it is out in the network as only there do they have
‘real message stores and other activity to contend with’.

Steve suggested that the invasiveness of the change, i.e. the risk to other areas, was relatively high,
for example they would have to make changes to the new Reconciliation software which currently
identifies a Receipt and Payments misbalance from the fact that the lines have different totals,
whereas with this proposal it would need to pick them up from the discrete lines. Pathway agreed that
their responsibilities to investigate errors and their ‘correction obligations’ would not alter as a result of
any changes suggested.

We then talked about the warning that is presented to the User where there is a Receipt and
Payments difference. Steve explained that this is the same warning at both stock unit and office level
and basically said something along the lines of:

WARNING
You have a receipts and payments misbalance.

You may be able to correct this.
OK

The user being required to select OK to continue. Steve agreed that this message could be changed
to include something along the lines suggested and said this was not an intrusive change.

The question was raised about lead times for the delivery of any changes given John Dicks had
previously suggested 10 weeks. John Pope stated that this could only be fully identified from a paid
study. .

Conclusion & Recommendation

1)The proposed change to the Miman tool should be pursued and Martin has agreed to raised the CR
for this. However, as Min Burdett has suggested that this should be delivered as part of the
outstanding Acceptance Incident 211, he would re-affirm this view with her and also with Horizon
Commercial. Martin agreed to circulate the draft CR before submission.

2)On the proposal that any errors are posted to a discrete cash account line, | suggest we no longer
proceed with this for the following reasons:

a) there is likely to be an adverse impact in terms of time to some OR all outlets;

b) the invasiveness of change is quite high and therefore there is a risk that we could gain
additional problems as a result. (Whilst | acknowledge this should be resolved through testing,
experience has shown this to not always be the case).

c) we could opt to just have those errors from stock units posted to a discrete line (which intuitively
is likely to be the largest percentage). However | recommend against this as itis likely to cause

POL00028507

POL00028507

confusion if we deal with the same problem in different ways.

d) from the meeting on Monday, there was only a marginal preference for this option and the main
issues were around the need to demonstrate that the Business (TP) was managing the errors and
the ‘neatness' of the solution. | would suggest that posting to a discrete line does improve
neatness but does nothing to enhance or prove that the errors are being managed. Even if in the
future we have an increased number of these errors, posting them to a discrete line will not help
TP to manage them.

e) the cost of any change is likely to be quite high (with a paid study and the actual change to be
paid for). It is highly likely based on Min Burdetts advice that PONU will have to bear these costs.

f) the introduction of these lines would need to be explained to users and in reality may not be
seen by them as any better than the current situation.

3) The change to the warning message is requested and included in the CR to be raised by Martin.

4) The advice given out by the NBSC to be reviewed and changed if required.

The Way Forward

1. As empowered individuals, we need to agree, (or otherwise), the recommendations set out above. (I
believe that after already discussing these with you over the phone, these are already agreed.

However please reply to this e-mail for formal confirmation.)

2. Martin to raise the Change request covering recommendations 1 and 3 and to make any necessary
internal changes, e.g. HFSO training.

3. Phil to detail exactly what is said by the helpline and all to propose any changes. Phil to then
circulate any revision to the advice given for agreement.

4, Julie to continue monitoring within TP.

That's about all | think. | await any comments,

Mark

