                                                                                                   POL00147157
                                                                                                 POLOO147157




                                                                            GRO !
Private & Confidential                                                 jj
Mr Glenn Chester
Agent Contract Manager
Post Office Ltd
Upper Floors, The Markets Branch
6-16 New York Street
Leeds LS2 7DZ                                                                 31st July, 2013


Dear Mr Chester,

Re: Martin Griffiths     Hope Farm Post Office.

I write to you as the parent of Martin Griffiths, despite knowing that you say I am not part of the said
sub post office. My son has been wider severe pressure and I have personally had to take on more
work in the retail side of the business, including providing financial support for the shortages.

The so-called shortages over many, many months have been repaid mainly by myself and husband.
Although you can continue to say there is no fault in the I-Iorizon computer system, we eagerly await
the results of the ongoing investigation being undertaken by Second Sight regarding software errors.

Your letter of 3"d July, stating termination of Martin's contract, I feel is very harsh. Kevin Bridger
has compounded the severe problems adding insult to injury (and I mean injury), by requesting a fine
of £.7,600 which represents 20% of the robbery with violence which occurred in May. It was due to
the identification of the culprit by a member of staff, that the Police were able to make a quick arrest
and subsequently the robber received an 8 year jail sentence. This request for £7,600 suggests
insufficient security at the Post Office and we will seek legal advice to refute this.

If as stated, my son is terminated on 3rd October, what is the position for the incoming sub
postmaster regarding the £18,000 a year overheads? At present, this is shared between the Post
Office and the retail business, therefore a legal arrangement needs to be made before a replacement
takes place.

With the regards to your outstanding figures for repayment, only £3,666.82 remains, as the £3076,07
plus £200 was repaid at the end of June.

I await to hear your continents,

  ----- -------
Yours sincerely,

                   GRO
Doreen J Griffiths (Mrs.}'~




                                                                                           POL-BSFF-0006280
