                                                                                                   POL00099210
                                                                                                 POL00099210


                                 Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential

              POST OFFICE LTD BOARD MEETING (Company Number 2154540)

                        Meeting to be held at 9.30 am on 16th July 2013
                   at 148 Old Street, London, EC1V 9HQ in the Board Room

  The Board will be preceded by a breakfast for Non-Executive Directors at 8.15am at Bistrot
  Bruno Loubet, 86-88 Clerkenwell Road, London, EC1 M 5RJ',       GRO

0930   1    Board Effectiveness Review                                         Alice Perkins

1000   2    IT Supply Chain Procurement activity                               Sue Barton! Lesley Sewell
                • Programme update and Strategy
                • Data Centre tower award positioning
                • Service Integrator tower award positioning
                • Transitional support services

1100        BREAK

1110   3    Progress report on Government Funding and Strategic                Sue Barton! Chris Day
            Plan

1140   4    Horizon Update                                                     Susan Crichton/Mark
                                                                               Davies

1210   5    FS Strategy including:                                             Nick Kennett! Chris Day
               • investment required and effect on state aid/funding
               • insurance proposition

1255        LUNCH

1315   6    Financial Performance Update                                       Chris Day

1335   7    Chief Executive's Report                                           Paula Vennells
            (including Network IR update)

1350   8    Pensions Valuations                                                Chris Day/ Virginia Holmes

1405   9    Group Structure                                                    Susan Crichton

1415   10   Minutes of Previous Meeting and matters arising                    Alice Perkins
            Minutes for noting: Remuneration Committee
            Status report update

1420   11   Items for Noting
                • Significant Litigation Report                                Alwen Lyons
                • Health and Safety Report
                • Sealings

1425   12   Any other business                                                 Alice Perkins

1430        BREAK

1445        Mutualisation Sub Committee                                        Sue Barton
              • Public Purpose Statement

1600        CLOSE
                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                     POL00099210



                            Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


                                ~•     is           ~ ".~+'~:.




The Chairman's Board evaluation report is attached as appendix 1. The areas proposed for
discussion at the Board and for action are covered in section 13.


                                                                          Alice Perkins
                                                                              July 2013
                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                           POL00099210



Annex 1




The Chairman interviewed al l the Board Directors and the Company Secretary on a one-to-
one basis using the Discussion Guidelines, attached at Annex 2, between 20 June and 3
July. A list of interviewees is at Annex 3. The Chief Executive had consulted her ExCo
colleagues and included their views in her feedback.

This report summarises al l the points made. There were many common themes and where
the same points were made more than once, they have not been repeated. Al l the
suggestions made for improving how the Board works are included and brought together in
section 13.

The process included peer feedback for all members of the Board which the Chairman wi ll
communicate separately on an individual basis. Concurrently, the SID has conducted a peer
review of the Chairman's performance which is being fed back separately to her.

The Board will discuss this report at its July meeting and it will then be sent to the
Shareholder Executive.




Alice Perkins took over the Chairmanship of the Post Office Board from Donald Brydon in
October 2011. At that time the CEO, CFO, SID and Company Secretary were all in their
present roles. The other NEDs joined the Board over the period from [March] to September
2012. So at the time of carrying out this evaluation, the Board has been in existence for less
than a year. It is early days in its life.




The creation of a new PO Board has gone remarkably well in a very difficult context and
challenging environment. The Board is maturing. It has come a long way since autumn 2011
and is operating very well (8 out of 10). We can be pleased with where it has got to and the
Shareholder should be pretty pleased. The issue now is how to make it even better.

This is a well-functioning Board. The Directors have a wide range of skil ls and experience
from different backgrounds. We have the key bases covered. We are working together
effectively; it's fun and real ly challenging.

This is a disparate set of Directors who have come together and are pointing in the same
direction most of the time; there is a sense of team work. We do listen to each other and can
agree to disagree or agree on what we are prepared to live with. It can feel uneven as
between the respective contributions of the Executives and the NEDs.

The Board has got better as it has matured. People have become feistier; they are
challenging but very respectful of each other and of the business. Board members come well
prepared; they are good at listening. They don't always agree and sometimes issues get re-
opened when people thought they had been settled. The debate can be circular and hard to
close down but it is helpful if people speak up if they disagree.

The Board is quite different from a year ago. It is stimulating, vibrant, pro-active and
searching for solutions in its determination to fix the business. It is extremely positive and
helping the Executives to improve. It adds value.
                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                             POL00099210



Annex 1



The Board provides a good balance between support and challenge — it is giving clear
direction and has a clear mandate and has stopped diving into the detail. It feels like a team
which is great. ExCo feels very positive about it — should they and the Board meet a couple
of times a year?

The Board has been the most amazing improvement for the PO. The recruitment of the
NEDs has gone really wel l — they have very different skills and have the ability to
contemplate working in a different environment from what they are used to. The company
has adjusted well to the new Board. Thank goodness we went in that direction.


  •i ,ti.i UtiTTIII!1:r      Tl

Overal l, this is very good. The Company Secretary, supported by Jorja Preston, provides
excellent support to the Board including looking after the hygiene factors, real ly well. The
electronic papers are great and one Director commented positively on the Reading Room
while another wondered whether it is as useful as it could be?

The meetings are held at the right frequency, for the right length of time and they run to time.
The quality of the papers has improved but there is further to go — some should be crisper
and they should always arrive in time for Board members to digest them properly before
meetings unless there is an emergency to report.

A common theme was that the Board could use its time even better. There is still a tendency
for Executives to repeat what is in the papers. The Board could get better at taking papers
as read if there are no issues to discuss. For instance, while retaining a paper on financial
performance and key indicators at each Board meeting, should the Board discuss this at
alternate meetings and without any introduction from the CFO unless it is to add something
new? This would release time which could be spent on the substance of the business such
as mai ls and financial services.

Several people commented on the nature of the debate. The Board does not need to be led
by the Executives to a conclusion - this is not a good use of the Directors' expertise. It is
getting better at having a robust debate. One person commented that it is a very respectful
Board and another Director suggested that it should become more hard-edged and wi lling to
call a spade.

The Board is not a talking shop. It takes decisions al l the time but the Chairman could be
even clearer about when decisions have been made and they could be recorded in a
decision log at the end of the minutes. This should flush out outstanding differences and the
Board would be able to decide explicitly how to handle these rather than finding that the
issues were being unexpectedly re-opened by one member of the Board to the surprise of
the others.

Should the Board make more use of the NEDs in creative ways so that they are generating
ideas rather than reviewing ideas which have come up from the Executives? (e.g. the
session on Outsourcing at the recent Awayday.)

The recent Awayday had been good (though the session on Mai ls had been a wasted
opportunity). How many of these should there be in a year (in the last year there have been
two — Shoreditch and Kingston)?

Should the Board meet outside Head Office more often e.g. at a large Crown or a call
centre?
                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                           POL00099210



Annex 1


Should the Board meet the ExCo on a regular (but infrequent) basis? And what about the
SLT?

Should the Board have a dinner with partners?

One Director asked that dates for future Board meetings in 2014 and even 2015 should be
fixed now.

It was also suggested that the Board should have a regular opportunity to review the forward
programme of agendas as it has in the past.

There is sometimes an absence of follow-through (e.g. the delay in circulating the updated
Rothschild's work). While this has got better, there is further to go.




The right Committees are in place. The Board has only just set these up so their roles should
be clear and they are.

The Committees have been feeling their way on the frequency and timing of their meetings.
There is a need to find a schedule which works and is more settled. This is especially true of
the ARC and the RemCom.

The RemCom is the Committee with the most difficult business in practice and it has not
always felt as though it is in control of it. This should improve with experience of the
interaction with the Shareholder, better forward planning and better professional support
from the business.

The ARC initially felt too much like the main Board but that is better now that membership
has been reduced to three NEDs. It is discharging its responsibilities properly and has
handled the two year-ends extremely well. One Director commented that it might be trying to
do too much and might need to be more flexible in its use of time. There is important and
urgent work for it to do on risk, which is in hand for the autumn. Several Directors
commented that that it was the next major priority after settling the strategy.

The Mutualisation Committee has been less effective than the Board although it has the
same membership. It should review its future programme in the light of the strategy.




The Board has spent a great deal of time on the Strategy since it has been fully formed and
this has been helpful in terms of its understanding of the business and its development as a
team.

The Directors all think the Strategy has been well developed and are happy with the
substance of what they have agreed. At the time of writing, this is subject to negotiations
with the Shareholder.

However, the process got off to a shaky start at Shoreditch. Lessons were learned from that
and by the end the NEDs all felt satisfied that they had been able to make the contribution
they wanted to make. There was universal recognition that Sue Barton's role in this had
been invaluable.

One Director commented that there was further to go in articulating the vision of what the
Post Office would be in 2020.
                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                           POL00099210



Annex 1




C   :4::   r   rlf   r r   •',


There is universal agreement that the Board has a great mixture of skills and experience.
Almost al l the key aspects of the business are covered and several people commented that
whatever came up as an issue, there would be at least one member of the Board who had
the relevant experience to make a valuable contribution to its resolution. The areas where
additional expertise would be valuable were large-scale operations including change
management, industrial relations and IT.

Some people also commented on the mix of Directors in terms of their styles and
temperaments. There is a good balance between the entrepreneurial and the risk conscious
and between those whose glasses are half ful l and those whose are half empty. It would be
important in future to ensure that any changes in the Board did not result in the balance
being skewed too far one way or the other.

The Board is well balanced in terms of gender. In future it would be good if there were also a
greater diversity of ethnicity.




The Directors' knowledge of the business was generally thought to be sufficient for their
roles, though individual Directors raised areas which they it would be helpful for them to
understand better e.g. the economics of the network including SPMs' pay.

There had been a tendency in the early days for NEDs to appear to "meddle" in the business
and dive down too much into the detail but this had diminished over time. This needs
watching as it is always tempting for NEDs to fall into that trap on any Board.

All the NEDs commented on how willing the Executives were to engage with them outside
Board meetings and were impressed by the extent to which most of them, and especially the
CEO, were open to challenge. In return, the Executives commented that the NEDs were very
generous with their time outside the Boardroom.

The relationship between the Chairman and the CEO appeared good, supportive but also
challenging with no obvious tensions.

One NED wondered whether they should become more involved by e.g. opening new PO
branches and/or developing relationships with key stakeholders (see next section). The CEO
wondered whether they could contribute to interviewing key candidates for ExCo positions.




There is general recognition that there is more to do here. The Board needs to understand
its shareholder's position better, especially that of the Minister concerned. The session with
Mark Russel l had been extremely useful ("formative"!" an eye-opener") in that context. It was
excellent that he had agreed to come again in the autumn and there should be more
sessions to help the Board understand this area.

It is also recognised that more time should be spent forging relationships with other key
stakeholders inside and outside the business. The Forum at the recent Awayday had been a
good use of time.
                                                                                              POL00099210
                                                                                            POL00099210



Annex 1




The Directors believe that they are carrying out their fiduciary duties appropriately overall.
Several people commented on the need to do more work on risk management as noted
above. More than one NED commented that the financial and performance report could be
improved further. Is there sufficiently robust reporting of the delivery of key projects,
including cost-cutting — is there a danger of the Board being lulled into a false sense of
security over these?

There is also a need to satisfy the Board that the right compliance measures are in place in
financial services as the company expands its business in this area. This is something for
the ARC in the first instance; there is a need to spend more time on this.




Directors are concerned about the quality of the pipeline for the top posts, especially for the
CEO's position. This is something which has already been identified and work is underway
under the direction of the NomCo to address it. Progress is being made in relation to the
ExCo positions and job specifications for new recruits to the ExCo are targeted at candidates
with the potential to be future CEOs. This is a real weakness which NomCo and the Board
need to keep actively under review.

The induction of the NEDs had been done well and everyone was satisfied with this. The
Board needed to decide now what additional development was needed, for example, visits to
branches (should each NED        commit to visit a certain number every year?) or
workshops/Board sessions on particular issues?

It will be important to manage the tenure of the NEDs so that there is no bunching of
retirements.




The Directors thought that the Board got the balance right between fulfilling its fiduciary
duties and making a positive, substantive contribution to the business. Looking back over the
last year, one Director commented that the Board's agenda had felt as though it had lurched
in an unplanned way but that once the Strategy was settled, it should be possible to get
more stability into the business and focus on key elements of its delivery.

The right balance has been struck between support and challenge. But the Board has now
"formed". It has been "quite kind" to the business. It can now be more challenging and
expect more; it needs to be more demanding e.g. about cost-cutting, and tougher with
failure.

Generally the Directors were satisfied with the qual ity of the external advice received e.g.
the auditors, and Rothschi ld's, but one Director commented that the business did not always
seem to be clear about what it was using advisers for, or doing that well.


               r        . ;i . iii
                                                                                          POL00099210
                                                                                        POL00099210



Annex 1


Discussion

What is the right balance amount of rigour and chal lenge? Does the Board agree that it
should be more forthright than it is now? How would that affect the balance between the
NEDs and the Executives?

Does the Board agree that time should be saved in meetings by moving more briskly through
agenda items and discussing financial performance and key indicators only every other
meeting (assuming things are on track?) If so, what would it like to spend more time on? Is
giving more time to our key stakeholders, including understanding the Shareholder better, a
key priority?

How could the NEDs be used more creatively?

What does the Board want to do outside Board meetings e.g. branch visits (an annual target
for NEDs?), workshops, meetings with key stakeholders, or with ExCo/SLT?

Are two Awaydays a year right?

Would the Board like a dinner with partners?

Should the Board meet outside Head Office more frequently e.g. at large Crowns or call
centres?

Is the Reading Room as useful as it could be?



The Chairman to sum up discussions even more clearly. Board members to speak up if they
disagree or register clearly that they are willing to support the majority view despite
remaining reservations.

Executives to assume as a matter of course, that their papers have been read and not to
repeat material already covered unless asked to do so. The Chairman to move more swiftly
through each item unless there are questions or issued raised by the Board.

Company Secretary to fix Board dates for 2014 and if possible, 2015; to record decisions
taken in a "log" at the end of the minutes of each meeting; to continue to work with the
Executives to raise the standard of papers and ensure they are sent out in good time; to
ensure all follow-up action is taken timeously and circulate a forward programme of Board
agendas every 6 months.

All Committees to keep the cycle of their meetings under review and follow-up on the key
issues identified in this report e.g. succession planning for NomCo and risk for ARC.
                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                POL00099210




Annex


POST OFFICE BOARD VALUATION SUMMER 2013



DISCUSSION
EhSCUSSON GGUDEUNE


   .1. Overall impression of the Board

               Shared understanding of the Board's role
               Dynamics of the Board
               Culture and climate in the Boardroom
           *   Sense of teamwork
               Use of time
               Quality of discussion and listening
           a




               Decision -making

   2. Organisation of the Board

               Agenda
               Meeting frequency one length
               Formal ;processes and duties
           s




               Infor€mat processes
               Information and support materials
               Servicing of the Board

   3. Committee organisation

               Clear remits
               Agenda:
               Meeting frequency and length
               Membership, attendees and advisers
                €;:err}ati or and support materials

   4. Strategy

               Development
               Understanding
               Agreement
                     unic:ation
               Communication
               Review

   5. Peer reviews

        Feedback on contribution of individual Board members

               Executive Directors
               Senior Independent Director/Committee Chairmen
               Other Non- xecutives
                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                  POL00099210




I rsCUstON GUOELNE


  6, Board composition

             Balance of skilLa and experience, including diversity
             Future requirements

  7. Board it volvemant
             Directors




                          knowledge




             Pe€ationsi rip Chairman and CEO
              alit errs ii as xaith management
             Contact outside boardroom

  8. Board relationship with key stakeholders

             Sharehcder relations
             Era ployeelFranchisee relations
             Other key stakeholder reLatLans

  9. Risk, compliance, financial monitori g

             Identification
         •




             Monitoring




         •   Openness
             BaLance with performance
             Responsibility

  10. Looking forward

         •   Succession planning for board members; non-executhfe and executive
             Directors' development needs
         •   Future remuneration for non-executives
             Induction and training
         a




  11. Overall Board effectiveness

         •   Fulfilment of fide is , duties
         •   Contribution to bu€siness
         •   Checks, balances an.d support
         •   Short and Hang term health of business
         •   S 1 ap `rtlindpo en n t advice
                                                   POL00099210
                                                 POL00099210



Annex 3



                         List of Interviewees

Neil McCausland    Senior Independent Director
Tim Franklin       Non-Executive Director
Virginia Holmes    Non-Executive Director
Alasdair Marnoch   Non-Executive Director
Susannah Storey    Non-Executive Director
Paula Vennells     Chief Executive Officer
Chris Day          Chief Financial Officer
Alwen Lyons        Company Secretary
                                    POL00099210
                                 POL00099210




iii:   i'E#   :Ti U~   iii   !
                                                                  POL00099210
                                                               POL00099210




                                                               OPflCE
  Agenda




               [2      liii.][.Ifl!l1111. W10111AY111Y1[1'Y1




               [4

                    Summary




                    IT Separation



Post Office®                       IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                                POL00099210



           The decisions made over the past year in progressing our
  strategy                    ell to deliver against our refreshed
  20 Business strategy

   Over the past year we have involved the Board in our strategic Technology journey, the business drivers we are
   responding to and our delivery plans.
   Previous decisions have supported our approach to:
       IT supply chain~ procurement of our supply chain driving value for money, flexibility and a smaller IT function
       through our new IT supply chain model including:
       - Consulting, Products and Solutions frameworks'.
       - Services Integrator and Towers model for the provision of our future operational technology.
        improve our IT Operating model: meeting business demand including:
       - Improved integration and collaboration with business units
       - Reorganisation of IT& Change
       - Reduction in the size of our retained organisation
       - Increasing the maturity and skill levels of our people.
        Risk and Resilience: Protecting branch counter service through to 2015 through investment in Horizon (our
        branch counter service) to address end of life equipment in our data center in Belfast.
        Separation: endorsement of our plans.



   1: Our frameworks have been procured and are delivering value today.



Post Office®                                                    IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                               POL00099210



  Updating our strategy: We have updated our technology strategy
  take account of the changes              our refreshed business              OPflCE
      tegy




          The newly refreshed 2013-20 Business strategy incorporating:
          -    Customer service focus.
          -    Speed to market.
          -    Continuing to focus on cost control.




Post Office®                                          IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                    POL000992
                                                                                                                 POL00099210



  Board      owls. At the July 2013 Board      are brhigng
                                                        i
  forward r owls for contnued Branchcounter support and
  provdng
  providing advancednotification
            ad                    of deci i n      in Septernber.




                                                                 •• i                .   r • •:   - • •   I •        •
                                                                                                                1LX.1III
       Transitional support services with u tt u




                                                                             •r•.,
                                                                 --




                                                                         •
       Approve the two year transitional support
       agreement with Fujtisu Services.                               Data Centre
                                                                      - For provision of our strategic capability.
       This will enable us to:
       - Protect branch counter services beyond 31St                  Services
                                                                             e.s n to r°a t r°
         March 2015.                                                   - Includes the provision of Service Desk




                       J               ir       lirw




Post Office®                                   IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                   POL00099210
                                              PO L 009910

                                                       s
                                              e~

                                          ~




                                         v % §




Post Office®   IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                             POL00099210


The Post Office Today




                                                         Legal &
      Marketing         Supply chain   Procurement                    Finance   1           Property
                                                       compliance




            Help desk                    Application                Network         Data centre
                                                                                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                                                                                  POL00099210


Post Office                                                                                                                                 POST
                       OO                                                                                                                  OFFICE
Lai                                      x           a




     \             -    i h ' alee    L o elue
         Spacast                                                     e[f:service
          Branch          ranch        Branch

    SALESFORCE                Horlzon'                    ..._..,, ....._ . .   ...u..... ._...._.
                                                            .. ... .........

                                                             AEI


                                             Govenment                                                T&epnny &                Travel
                                              Se x=tccs                                               Brodbnd
                                                                                                           a~3




                                                       Legal                                   Vii;                             Pn. ;nty
                                                     Compliance                              POLSAP                POLHR
                       POLSAP                                                                ES-FS                Sharepoint
                                     eSourcing                                              Credence                 IRIS
                        Swift
                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                    PO L 009910



                                                                    Po\




                                             \    :                 y

                                                      ~ ~ t


                                         •       \' \\ a
                                                              x ~
                                                              t




Post Office®   |N STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                                POL00099210



                                                                                                                POST
   IT supply chain. Post Officesiegacy commercal contracts have been                                           OFFI E
   estabUshed over many years with inconsistent terms       i i0 .


      •    90% of Post Office IT contracts and services terminate within the 2012-2015 strategic term.
      •    Our legacy contracts and services have been established over many years and do not provide the optimal
           vehicle for us to compete commercially.
      •    We are moving to a new contractual model providing flexibility, speed to market and value for money whilst
           meeting the demands of public sector bodies.




Post Office;»;,                                    NNE STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                          POL00099210
                                                                                                                       POL00099210




Post Office IT will be:
• a smaller organisation,                                                                  ,
•  business focussed and driven,
• fit for purpose and more responsive.
Frameworks will help xis:
•  leverage innovation,
•  access an increased range of skills and
                                                                                           Services hitegator
   s pecia Iisms from the market,                      I
•  avoid supplier lock in
•  procure solutions efficiently,                      I                     ]


•  improve speed to market.                                                                                   ~►              W
The Services Integrator will:                          I
• augment
     g       Post Office skills,                                                    '
•  provide flexible resources to meet demand,     re                                           '                   s
                                                                                                   o
• assume responsibility for the delivery of
   business solutions.
The Towersmode! will:                                                   .,                                0
•  provide access to lower cost operational
      technology,
                                                           Frameworks                                   Towers
•     provide industry standard components and
      solutions,                                 .... , Completed
•     rationalise our technology estate,
                                                       Award 2013-14 financial year.
•     provide more integrated solutions.
                                                       Next contracts for consideration.


Post Office;»;,                                   IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                                                             POL00099210



     IT Operating        To enab'e us to meet the business objectives of
     our 2O132O2O strategic pan, PostOffice needs              the abifity
     and fiexbmty
             i    of our peopei
       r




                                           r
           •,




                '•




                                               •




                                                   r




                                                                         •o   •                             r
                                                                                  •.'.




                                                                                         -..




                                                                                                      •..
                '.
       r




                 •




                         •'..




                                      '•




                                                       •'.




                                                             •




                                                                 r




                                                                     r




                                                                                               •




   • The Post Office IT operating model is being
     transformed to provide:
                     -          Improved speed to market.
                     -          Cost efficiency.
                     -          A more capable, forward thinking and
                                innovative workforce.
   • We have worked with Deloitte, ISG', Gartner2 and
     others to develop the optimal model for Post Office.
   • We will use the capabilities of the Services
     Integrator to provide us with additional skills and
     workforce flexibility.

'ISG: Leading advisory services company specialising in business optimisation.
2Garfner: IT research and advisory company.

 Post Office®                                                                                      IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                                                          POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                      POL00099210




   Q< Our Technology Strategy builds on the robust and cost effective IT supply chain for the solutions needed to deliver our 2013-20 Business
    strategy.
    Our common technology platform, based on open systems products, provides a low cost and flexible ability to integrate our existing
    systems with the applications and services needed in the future to deliver our strategy.
   O providing great applications on robust technology, backed up with strong service and support from our suppliers we will deliver credible
    By
    products and services, with the customer experience that will support business growth.




                          :... ..... .::. ....:
                                               .




                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                  ... . .............................   Deliver Cost effective technology.
                                                                                                                        Seed to market.



Post Office®                                                IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                                                                         POL00099210




                                                                                                                                         POST ` ,
                                                        w
  Innovation. Our future busness capabHtes wU be underpnned                                                                             OFFICE
  innovative dehvery of a muftchannel retailing  rl   .




                                    •             •       •       ! •               •                      •         :••                              •   •




                                             ••       •r ,             enabling              • avoid           ••'   ,.   lock   -in,    •   '    r
                                        ..    ..                           .                           .             i•
                                                      •       r    •           ~.   `   •,    •




Post Office®                   IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                              POL00099210
                                                                           POL00099210



                                                                            POST
   Innovation. The technology               ins our MutChanne              OFFI E
   Digta BranchStrategy is cost effective, flexible and fit for purpose%




 • New branch counters & devices will help:

        engage our customers.




 • Customer service systems will help us engage in
   meaningful conversation with our customers.

 • Our technology will be able to deliver across
   existing and new channels seamlessly, interacting
   with our customers when and where it is most
   convenient for them.




Post Office<,>;,                               NNE STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                                  POL00099210



                                                                                                  POST
  POS (Point of Service 2020: deUverng the Post Office                      l                    OFFICE
  experience.
                               POS 2020 will define the point of service (including branch counter)
                               experience and capabilities going forward.
                               We are undertaking work to:
                                   Provide a modern Point of Service (POS) capability across all our
                                   channels.
                                   Open up Horizon through integration, using open and internationally
                                   recognised standards.
                               •   Allow services built once can be utilised across all our channels including
                                   branch.
                               •   Enable us to provide basic counter services through standard integration
                                   points and common services.
                               •   Use industry standard processes.
                               •   Ensure we only customise processes essential as market differentiators.
                               •   Provide a consistent and excellent customer experience across channels.
                               Capabilities of our new solution might include:
                                    -~- single customer account,
                                       Omni-channel shopping baskets,
                                       Pricing engine,
                                       Product bundling and promotions.

Post Office®                       IN STRiCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00099210

    j    .
             Future Board engagement:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )
n




                                               move forward over the next year we
             will be seekhig further Board approva's in support         i
             our Technoogy strategy.



                                      ••
                  -




                       •-




                                  •




                                           •




                                               •
               • • •        • • 1 ''-4 'IiLi                                        Transitionalsupportservices

                                                        Horizon
                                                       Services Integrator & Service Desk award
                                                   ..... . ................. .................... .................. .............__.                  .... ..................... .............
                                                                                                                           ............. ... ...........                                                        ........... ......................... ........._...__..
                                                                                                                                                                                                ..... . .........__.._
                                                                                                                                                                                           .........           ......                                           .. ..._.....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ....... .........._.....
                                                                                                                           ... .. ....._...      ........_...
                                                       Data Centre award                                                                                                                                                 V'
                                                        Risk and Resilience
                                                   ......... ........... ..... ............ ....... ..... ...........
                                                                                                          ................               ....... ... ..............
                                                                                                                      .... ....................              ......... . .....                   ................. ... ...........
                                                                                                                                                                               ............ ..........                             ..... ........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ................       ....... ........... ......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ....... ..........                      . ......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ...........
                                                   .....          ...........       .............                                                                        ...........                                        ............                              . ... ....            .. ....__.
                                                        Technology Strategy Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Apr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .,
                                                        Network procurement                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tbc
                                                   ..... .. ..............
                                                                    ........... ............
                                                                                      ....  ...
                                                                                     ...............
                                                                                             ....... ... ..........             .........
                                                                                                                    .... ............
                                                                                                         ................      .............      .............
                                                                                                                                       ....... ... ..............           ....  ....
                                                                                                                                                                 .... . ...........
                                                                                                                                                                             ............ .........
                                                                                                                                                          ..........                      ................... . .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ...........           ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..... ........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ................
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ............            ..  ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ....... .......... . ........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ....... ...........                    ........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ............... ........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..... ..........       ... ..........  .. .......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .............  . ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .....
                                                        Other Application & Infrastructure                                                                                                                                                                                                           tbc

                                                       POS Application procurement                                                                                                                                        /                                                                              tbc




        Post Office                                    IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                     POL00099210



                                                                      POST
                                                                     OFFICE
  Summary



  0
       have a significant programme of work,

       are continuing to update our strategy in line with our
       2O1 -2020 Business strategy,




       will continue to progress our [F supply chain
       procurements,




Post Office®                                IN STRICTEST CONFDENCE
                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                               POL00099210




                                                                                               OPflCE
  Conclusions & Ask




               •   Approve the two year Transitional Support Services agreement with Fujtisu
                   Services.




               •   SI/SD award.




Post Office®                              IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
   POL00099210
POL00099210
                                 POL00099210
                              POL00099210




                          .
IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                                                                           POL00099210



     Branch Counter. Fujtsus currently Post Offices largest techncilogy
     partner provdng critical services ncuthng our branch counter service                                                                OFFICE
     (Horzon)•
 Branch Counter Systems (Horizon)
 •         Horizon is a bespoke solution operating out of resilient data centres in
           Northern Ireland.
                                                                                                 • The contract under which services are provided is
 •        Our plan is to migrate Horizon to our new IT supply chain over the
                                                                                                   known as HNG-x
          strategic term.
                                                                                                 • HNG-x contract ends 31 st March 2015.
 •         Horizon was originally created in 1995 in partnership between the then
           DSS1, Post Office and CL2.                                                            • The branch counter service known as Horizon is
                                                                                                   the most significant service provided under the
 •        The system is in all our c.11,800 Post Office's nationwide, operating
                                                                                                   HNG-x contract.
          some c.30,000 counter positions.
                                                                                                 • A range of services are provided through the
 •        The service has not been tendered under public procurement law since
                                                                                                   HNG-x contract including:
          that time.
                                                                                                   - Horizon, our Branch Counter system
 Delivering our 2020 vision:                                                                       - Core Finance (SAP)
 •         It is prudent in selecting a way forward to recognise the significant                   - Management Information (Credence)
           investment Post Office have already made in Horizon over its lifetime.                • Contract value to Fujitsu circa £65m pa plus BAU
 •         Early in 2013 we identified a number of routes forward.                                 change.
 •         All options are dependant upon public procurement law and                             • There is no automatic extension capability written
           negotiations with Fujitsu                                                               into the contract.
 •         We are undertaking further work this financial year to establish the                  • We are required by Public Procurement Law to
           requirements for and market test our options for continued channel                      offer the services to the market.
           services post 31st March 2015..
 •         Our precise path forward will not become clear until this work comes to
           fruition.
     DSS: Department of Social Security.
 2 ICL: International Computers Ltd, subsequently bought by Fujitsu.




Post Office"?                                                          IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                   POL00099210
                                                                                               POL00099210



    Managing                      consderng how we continue to provde
    Post Office branch counter servces we have estabflshedthe foUowng                         ~r
    prncpes and path forward.

 Principles
In considering how we continue to provide branch counter services we must take
account of a number of key requirements including:
•     De-risking the network and crown transformation programmes.
•     The Horizon transitional support services are designed to guarantee business
      stability while the Post Office implements a modern, fit for purpose Point of Service
      solution.
•     The services provided under this agreement will amongst others include:
      -   Branch communications data network
      -   Data centre hosting in Fujitsu's Belfast data centre.
      -   Horizon application support.


 Moving forward
The major tenets comprising our future plans require us to:
•     Conclude commercial negotiations with Fujitsu to agree on a 2 year Transitional
      support service.
•     Begin procurement for our future POS solution.
•     Commence procurement for our Network Tower. This tower will assume
      responsibility for the provision of the branch communications network at March
      2017.



Post Office®                                              IN STRICTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                        POL00099210
                                                     POL00099210



                                                  PQST
                                                 OFFICE




                                            IT
                                        Separation




Post Office®   IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                              POL00099210
                                                                         POL00099210



                                                                         r~

  Separation Context: HstorcaUy Post Office have benefitted from   ors
  T services provided across the Roya MaD Group.




Post Office®                     IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                                                                  POL00099210



                 Post          I Mail Group wU separate our IT systems
                                i
   and services by September 2014 as agreed i         Mail Group                                                                !►
   under the Master Senñces Agreement

    We have well developed plans for delivery of separation.
    In line with the Master Services Agreement:
          business services will be separated by the end of March 2014.
          IT services will be complete by end of September 2014.
     The Independence and Separation Programme, comprised of a joint Post Office
     and Royal Mail Group team, is working well .
    We will use the new IT supply chain where possible to deliver value for money
    technology required for the 21 projects.
                                                                                               There were 131 business services provided
    We should recognise that Post Office, as a smaller independent organisation,
                                                                                               by Royal Mail Group on behalf of Post
    may not be able to achieve the same economies of scale afforded to Royal Mail
                                                                                               Office.
    Group.
                                                                                              85 have now ceased, leaving 46 remaining;
    Technology which will be re-provisioned includes:
                                                                                               Post Office uses a wide range of IT
          Finance systems including Treasury.
                                                                                               applications from within the Royal Mail
          HR                                                                                   Group estate.
          Desktop hardware, software and other productivity tools.                             Circa 20 application services have been
          Supply chain and Fleet management.                                                   completed to date.

          Customer facing web site and services (:yvyvy t   s=
                                                                                    ._..__...._........._.........
          Internal websites (intranet).
     The current major
                   1 suppliers
                        pp     contracted by Royal
                                               Y Mail` Group for these services      ~!"~%
     include: CSC, CapGemini, BT , and Steria;                                        j/               ,



Post Office"?                                           INS STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                          POL00099210



                                                                                           POST
  Current Status: Work     r r s                                       are currently on   OFFI E
  target      i t to the agreed Umefrarnes


 •    The programme is on track to complete by the end of September
      2014.




                         '•            • •          •• • I •• ,..




Post Office®                                  IN STRCTEST CONFIDENCE
                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                                POL00099210



                               Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential




The purpose of this paper is to:

       1.1     Update the Board on the current status of the procurements for a Service
               Integrator and a strategic Data Centre.

       1.2     Inform the Board that a request for approval to award both contracts is expected
               to be presented to the Executive Committee and Post Office Board in September
               2013. The Service Integrator award will also need approval from the Shareholder
               Executive



       2.1     As previously agreed by the Executive Committee and the Board, Post Office is
               re-procuring its IT supply chain to meet the demands of our business strategy,
               Royal Mail Group Separation activities and support our end of life IT contracts.

       2.2     As we progress our IT supply chain we will be asking for approval to award
               contracts to our selected bidders. Due to the size of award, Post Office financial
               governance requires some of these approvals to be sought from the Board and
               Shareholder Executive.

       2.3     The Service Integrator and Data Centre procurements will be the first contract
               awards. We will be presenting these to the Executive Committee and the Post
               Office Board in September for approval.

       2.4     We are currently refreshing the business case for IT supply chain procurement
               and this will be presented to POLIO in July.


                             Service Integrator and Service Desk (SISD).

3.     Overview

       3.1     Given the volume of change required to support our IT and business
               transformation journey the Post Office needs a trusted partner.

       3.2     The Service Integrator, which will encompass our IT Service Desk, will fulfil this
               role and is pivotal to the success of our new IT supply chain.

       3.3     The SISD will be the single point of contact for Post Office colleagues on all
               aspects of Information Technology (IT).

       3.4     They will be accountable for the end-to-end management and delivery of current
               and future IT services.

"Service Integrator and Data                Lesley Sewell                             Page 1 of 4
Centre Procurement Update"                  9"' July 2013
                                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                                            POL00099210



                                   Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

        3.5      The key aims of this procurement are to optimise the IT supply chain to:

                 • Reduce operating costs.

                 • Improve Post Office speed to market for business and product change.

                 • Offer an improved user experience.

                 • Drive innovation in process, service and cost management.

                 •   Improve our identification and management of technology risks.


                 •   Improve our ability to benchmark our services against the market to ensure
                     continued value for money over the life of the Tower contracts.


        3.6      Our new IT Operating Model balances the responsibilities between the Post
                 Office and the SISD, with Post Office retaining the commercial relationships
                 while the SISD takes accountability for delivery.

        3.7      Following contract award a number of current Post Office staff will move to work
                 for the Service Integrator (under TUPE).

        3.8      The key challenge that we face is establishing the new contractual relationships
                 within a short period of time. The sequencing and alignment of contract awards
                 is crucial to our success.

4.      Current Status

        4.1      We are following a Competitive Dialogue procurement process.

        4.2      We have completed an extensive period of dialogue with 3 suppliers (CGI, Cap
                 Gemini and ATOS) to clearly define the Post Office's current, transition and
                 future operating models.

        4.3      A formal Invitation to Submit Final Tender (ISFT)2, which defines Post Office's
                 requirements to the bidders, has been approved by the programme board and
                 issued. Issuing an ISFT enables the three suppliers to submit a bid detailing their
                 final contractual and commercial terms.

        4.4      Submitted bids will be evaluated on cost and the quality to which they meet the
                 defined requirements, resulting in the selection of a preferred supplier in August.

        4.5      Approval will be sought from the Executive Committee and Post Office Board in
                 September for contract award.




1
  Competitive Dialogue is a Public Procurement Law (PPL) procedure used where there is a need to develop
solutions and requirements with assistance from the market.
2 The ISFT does not commit us to contract, but does form the basis of the contract. PPL procedure prevents any
negotiation or changes to contractual or commercial terms following issue of an ISFT

"Service Integrator and Data                       Lesley Sewell                                   Page 2 of 4
Centre Procurement Update"                         9`h July 2013
                                                                                                                   POL00099210
                                                                                                             POL00099210



                                   Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

        Commercial Terms

        5.1      The contract is being offered on an initial term3 of 4 years with an option to
                 extend for up to 2 years at Post Office's discretion.

        5.2      This contract is shorter than the initial term for other Tower contracts. This is to
                 facilitate early re-procurement of the Service Integrator as they will then assist
                 Post Office in selection for future Tower providers.

        5.3      Based on dialogue, the cost estimates are in the range of £10m to £12m per
                 annum, £40 to £48m over the initial term. Cost estimates will be refined during
                 the evaluation of ISFT responses.

        5.4      These costs are in line with industry benchmarks for the services we are looking
                 to procure.


                                                      Data Centre.

        Overview

        6.1      Data Centres provide the facility to host and operate the IT systems required to
                 support the Post Office.

        6.2       Post Office currently has multiple Data Centres including some services provided
                  by Royal Mail. Many of these Data Centres are reaching end of life.

        6.3      Procuring a strategic Data Centre will allow us to consolidate our current data
                 centres which will lead to a reduced cost base. In addition we will have access
                 to technologies, such as Cloud4, which will enable us to adjust our costs in line
                 with varying business demand.

        6.4      Our strategy is to consolidate our Data Centres into one operational facility
                 supported by a resilient backup.

        Current Status

        7.1      We are currently in the final stages of dialogue with Fujitsu.

        7.2      Dialogue will complete during August and subject to its successful conclusion we
                 will recommend the contract award to the Board in September.

        Commercial Terms

        8.1      The contract is being offered on an initial terms of 5 years with an option to
                 extend for up to 2 years at Post Office's discretion.

        8.2      Based on dialogue the cost estimates are in the range of £3m to £4m per
                 annum, £15 to £20m over the initial term6. Cost estimates will be refined during
                 the evaluation of the ISFT response.

3 The term was defined in the initial OJEU (Official Journal of the European Union) notice and cannot be changed
without restarting the procurement process.
4 Cloud: enables Post Office to reduce its overheads by using shared third party IT facilities.
5 The term was defined in the initial OJEU (Official Journal of the European Union) notice and cannot be changed
without restarting the procurement process.

"Service Integrator and Data                       Lesley Sewell                                    Page 3 of 4
Centre Procurement Update"                         9`h July 2013
                                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                                  POL00099210



                                    Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


         8.3      These costs are in line with industry benchmarks for the services we are looking
                  to procure.

9.       Summary

         9.1      The Board is asked to note the status of the Service Integrator and Data Centre
                  procurements.



                                                                                                    Lesley Sewell
                                                                                                        July 2013




6 This excludes the capacity that supports the Horizon Point of Sale solution as this is not a committed spend.



"Service Integrator and Data                        Lesley Sewell                                     Page 4 of 4
Centre Procurement Update"                          9`h July 2013
                                                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                                                      POL00099210




                                       Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential




                                 Transitional Support Services with Fujitsu
          M

    The purpose of this paper is to:

    1.1 Seek approval from the Board for a 2-year agreemen ' with Fujitsu for Transitional
        Support Services (TSS), so ensuring continued provision of Horizon` counter services.

    1.2 Gain approval to submit this paper to the Shareholder Executive in July 2013 for
        approval to sign the TSS agreement before the 301' September 2013.



    2.1    Fujitsu has developed and run Horizon for the Post Office since 1995. It is a highly
           complex, bespoke system which given its structure is inflexible and costly to change.

    2.2 During the last 12 months, we have initiated the following programmes of work to
        enhance Horizon and better support our business strategy. These include:
        • Horizon Anywhere: allows Horizon to run on any Microsoft Windows device.
        • Branch Counter Refresh: identifies how we replace out dated counter hardware to
          enable new services such as internet and email .
        • Horizon Business Services: reduces the cost and time for Post Office to connect
          business partners and clients to Horizon.

    2.3 In parallel we have conducted market activity to understand how other Postal
        organisations have transitioned away from their legacy Point of Service (POS) solutions.

    2.4 Having completed this activity we now better understand the challenge and time
        requirements to del iver a future POS solution for an organisation of our size and
        complexity.



    3.1    Extend the existing Fujitsu contract for Horizon via a 2-year TSS agreement to:
           • Secure the continued provision of core Horizon services to 31 0 March 2017 so
             allowing time to procure a future POS solution which will either evolve or replace
              Horizon.
           • Acquire a Horizon Intellectual Property (IP)3 license from Fujitsu so that any new
             suppliers have the choice to incorporate elements of this solution within their
              proposal.
           • Al low time to deconstruct and transition Horizon services into the new IT supply chain
             (Towers model).




1
  The Transitional Support Services agreement is a contract change note, or CCN, which varies the existing Horizon contract.
2
  Horizon Online e.ectronic counter services are provided by Fujitsu Services under the HNGx managed services contract which
  provides end-to-end services to all Post Office branches. The Agreement was originally signed 281h July 1999 and has been
  extended. It expires on 31`t March 2015.
3 Intellectual Property or Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).



"Transitional Support Services                       Lesley Sewell                                            Page 1 of 3
         with Fujitsu"                               9th July 2013
                                                                                                                          POL00099210
                                                                                                                       POL00099210




                                       Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential



    4.1 Horizon costs c £68M inclusive of VAT each year, comprising OpEx of c £58M and
        development business as usual CapEx of c £10M. This expenditure represents
        approximately 70% of third party IT OpEx spend.

    42 Given the business criticality of Horizon, a risk constrained approach to any
       transformation impacting counter services is essential .

    4.3 The HNGx contract with Fujitsu includes a provision for Post Office to request an
        extension beyond 31 51 March 2015. Unless otherwise agreed, formal notification must
        be provided to Fujitsu by 301h September 2013.



    5.1    Post Office branch counter operations are protected during the 2-year TSS period,
           reducing our risk profile during Crown and Network transformation and separation from
           Royal Mail Group.

    5.2 Post Office price points have been maintained and in some cases improved whilst the
        scope4 with Fujitsu has been reduced.

    5.3 Horizon services wi ll be transitioned to the Towers model during the TSS period and
        additional partial termination rights5 have been negotiated with Fujitsu to support this
        approach_

    5.4 Inclusion of additional transition and col laboration principles will allow Post Office to
        leverage the benefits of its Service Integrator to manage this activity.

     5.5 Post Office wi ll have sufficient time to implement our future POS solution, engaging with
         the market to ensure an effective competitive process.



    6.1 Should transition to our future POS solution extend beyond 31't March 2017, Fujitsu
        have indicated that additional investment in the Horizon data centre will be required. As
        a result of this we have already begun the process of determining our future POS
        solution and preparing to go to market.

    6.2 Horizon is a complex solution comprising multiple services that are currently provided by
        Fujitsu. Any transition of these services adds additional risk. A 2-year TSS has
        therefore been selected as affording the best balance between risk and cost.

    6.3 There is a risk that we may be unable to agree an IP License with Fujitsu on reasonable
        terms. Post Office is continuing to meet with Fujitsu and the Board will be updated as
        discussions develop.

7. Financials

     7.1 OpEx for the proposed TSS agreement is up to £41.5M inclusive of VAT per annum.
         This does not represent incremental expenditure beyond the on-going cost of
         maintaining our Branch counter service.



°   Some Horizon services will transition to Towers during FY2014-15 including Service Desk and Engineering Services.
    Post Office can partially terminate for convenience many individual Horizon services. Alternativey, the whole Agreement
    can be terminated prior to full term. Any early termination is subject to early termination charges.

"Transitional Support Services                        Lesley Sewell                                            Page 2 of 3
         with Fujitsu"                                9th July 2013
                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                               POL00099210



                                 Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

   7.2 At the point of signature, Post Office's liability to early termination charges is increased
       by c £8.3M. This incremental liability reduces during the term of the TSS agreement.

   7.3 As we conclude the Tower procurements, we will progressively plan transition of TSS
       services to the Towers model to optimise our OpEx position.



   8.1 The Board is requested to approve a 2-year Transitional Support Services Agreement
       with Fujitsu valued at up to £83M.

   8.2 The Board is asked to note that approval for authority to contract the TSS agreement
       with Fujitsu will also need to be sought from the Shareholder Executive in July. This will
       allow us to conclude negotiations and execute the TSS with Fujitsu before the 30 th
       September 2013.




                                                                                      Lesley Sewell
                                                                                          July 2013




"Transitional Support Services              Lesley Sewell                                Page 3 of 3
         with Fujitsu"                      9t" July 2013
                                                                                                   POL00099210
                                                                                                 POL00099210



                             Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential



                            Financial Services Strategy Update

      Background
      1.1     At the March 2013 meeting the Board supported the Financial Services (FS)
              strategy (the Plan) and asked management to provide an update on progress,
              in particular that the assumptions on the new insurance model remained valid.

      1.2     The Plan identified the opportunity for the Post Office to become the leading
              challenger FS brand, with five million customers and gross income of £530
              million by 2020. The Plan also confirmed that to deliver the growth, the Post
              Office needs to enhance its business fundamentally, in particular to:
              •   Build the brand, so that customers are aware of the Post Office FS offer;
              •   Ensure our products are simple, transparent and offer value for money;
              •   Improve the sales model and people capability;
              •   Enhance the sales and service experience for customers, including
                  leveraging branch and on-line capabilities'.

      1.3     The Plan also highlighted the opportunity to change the role that Post Office
              plays in insurance, taking more value from the transaction. The initial focus for
              this strategy was on the travel insurance business as the current
              arrangements expire shortly; subsequent phases encompassed acquiring the
              Bank of Ireland (UK) plc's (Bol) interest in insurance and taking over the
              broking activities currently performed by Junction/BSL.

      1.4     This paper provides an update on progress on the core components of the
              strategy after three months and is tabled for noting.

2.    Travel insurance
      2.1     To provide customers with travel insurance, Post Office currently utilises a
              single underwriter (Ageas) via a broker (Aon). This structure is cumbersome,
              expensive and slow to market and is not capable of delivering the 2020 vision.

      2.2     Establishing a new model for travel insurance requires:
              •   Confirming the proposed model to establish an MGA2 (see 2.3 - 2.5);
              •   Extending the existing travel insurance arrangements (2.6);
              •   Identifying and procuring an appropriate insurance platform (2.7);
              •   Assessing the future operating model for the Aon call centre (2.8 - 2.9).

      2.3     Since March, management has been stress-testing the proposed model and
              engaged Miller Insurance Service LLP, its corporate insurance adviser, to
              review the model and validate the assumptions3.



     This change program is largely funded from the £4.0 mi llion annual investment commitment that
     Post Office made in Eagle. This does not include Post Office brand investment, or acquiring the
     insurance businesses. Bol provides £15 million    annum in marketing spend.
                                                    per




     The MGA would control the process of the insurance del ivery, giving Post Office significant
     operational and commercial flexibility.
     Including comparing the MGA model to alternatives.
                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                                POL00099210



                            Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

     2.4     The Miller report confirmed that utilising an MGA is both workable and
             appropriate for Post Office, providing operational flexibility and increased
             control on product and pricing. Miller also confirmed that it would create
             income in line with projections and that the model overall was of low, and
             manageable, risk. In particular Miller stated that:
             ".. .we believe that setting up an MGA is a viable option for POL as this would
             give you full control. An MGA would also give you enhanced economic value
             through additional profit commission, whilst allowing you the underwriting
             ability, flexibility around the coverage and pricing mechanisms to drive
             change'.

     2.5     The business case for the overall travel insurance program is being finalised
             and will be tabled to POLIC in July; preliminary assessment confirms that the
             financial projections are consistent with those set out in the Plan.

     26      Management is in negotiations with Aon and Ageas to continue cover to
             October 2014, thereby allowing a managed transition to the new models.
             While management is confident that agreement will be achieved before the
             end of July, Aon have also been instructed to seek alternative underwriting
             arrangements should agreement not be reached with Ageas.

     2.7     The delivery of the MGA requires uti lising a scalable multi-product insurance
             platform. Management is in the process of identifying and procuring the
             appropriate platform. This process wil l be completed in October 2013.

     2.8     The Aon call centre employs up to 120 staffe and is dedicated to Post Office
             travel insurance. With the migration to a new provider triggering TLJPE'`,
             management is assessing the appropriate operating model and procurement
             process. This evaluation will be complete by October 2013.
                              •




     3.1     The Eagle contract established clear parameters for the Post Office to buy out
             the insurance business from Bol, being:
             •   One way call option from September 2014 to September 2016;
             •   Option price based on Bol's discounted cash flow from the business.

     3.2     At the March meeting, the Board agreed that management could seek to
             advance this strategy with Bol ahead of the option period.

     33      To assist accelerate the acquisition, management has engaged KPMG8 to
             develop a financial model and negotiating strategy. The KPMG report will
             conclude in mid-July; initial feedback confirms that the indicative valuation
             remains at c£20 million identified in the Plan.

     3.4     Nick Kennett has had a preliminary conversation with the Bol Distribution
             Director to ascertain Bol's potential interest in pre-option discussions. He


4   Mil ler report 14" June 2013: "Commercial Travel Insurance — Options and del iverables for
    creating a long term commercial ly viable and robust risk financing platform".
5   While a quicker transition is achievable, migrating during the summer hol iday season would add
    considerable risk to the program.
6
    The number varies through the year, with the peak occurring during the summer hol iday period.
    Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006.
8
    KPMG provided expert assistance during Eagle, including on the creation of the insurance
    buyout option.
                                                                                                     POL00099210
                                                                                                   POL00099210



                              Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

               confirmed that Bol would entertain an offer, while seeking to ensure that "the
               value of the insurance business is maximised over the long term for the
               benefit of both partners".

      3.5     It is anticipated that management will be in a position to propose an
              acquisition strategy in August.

4.    Removing Junction from the Post Office Insurance Program
      4.1     The Plan assumed that Post Office would no longer use Junction for general
              insurance broking from 2015/16. Further analysis, in particular following
              negotiations with Junction to confirm the extension of their services beyond
              2014, it is now apparent that transition would occur in 2016/17.

      4.2     This delay does not impact the 2020 outcomes, but does have timing
              implications in 2015/16 and 2016/17 years.

      Financial Services Sub-Brand
      5.1     Final market research on various FS sub-brand options is underway, with
              results due in mid-August. The rollout of a new sub-brand could occur from
              September, although the rollout strategy and timings have yet to be finalised.

      Financial Services Sales Model
      6.1     To support the growth of mortgage sales, c50 mortgage specialists have been
              trained and deployed in Crown branches, ahead of 100 planned by October.
              The team will then be trained to perform under the new advised sales
              regulation (Mortgage Market Review) that applies from April 2014.

      6.2     The deployment of the new FS area and supervisory structure is well
              underway with all three Regional Managers and 27 of the 36 Area Managers
              recruited (with nine Area Mangers already in training). The full rollout of the FS
              sales structure will be largely completed by October.

      6.3     While it is very early days, the establishment of a dedicated and focused sales
              structure alongside Crowns has shown improvements in both attitude and
              outcome.

      6.4     The current FS sales incentive scheme does not encourage and reward
              effective sales performance. Management, supported by Mercer LLC a
              specialist HR consulting business, is developing a new incentive structure. It is
              planned that this will be deployed from October, but will require sign off from
              Bol and is subject to agreement with the CWU. The plans will also be shared
              with the Financial Conduct Authority.



     A few examples of the changed approach seen:
     The Mortgage Specialist (MS) in Derby travel led to an agency for an appointment made by the
     Financial Special ist (FSS) from Chesterfield on a Saturday; not only did she achieve the sale,
     but used the conversation to sell two life insurance policies and booked a further appointment
     for the FSS to discuss credit cards and travel insurance when the customer returns to complete
     the documentation.
     The MS in Manchester has achieved 15 mortgage applications since April (1.25 per week) by
     engaging with local branches, attending their team meetings and sharing his mortgage
     knowledge.
     In the first six weeks of the Polo pi lot, Diss Crown office averaged 2.3 appl ications per week.
     After a direct coaching session through the new support structure sales have recently averaged
     7 per week.
                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                           POL00099210



                            Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

                                a i .

     7.1     The current customer experience while purchasing an FS product is often
             poor and inconsistent by channel, leading to a high level of non-completion of
             applications. Management is undertaking a review of all FS product journeys,
             mapping the existing processes, seeking customer feedback on their
             experience and requirements, and then building new processes. All FS
             journeys will be mapped and new process agreed by 01 2014115. Changes
             will be implemented as they are finalised, although some changes depend on
             Post Office and partners' systems development.

     7.2     The credit card and personal loan processes have been mapped and new
             models are being finalised; a review of the mortgages journey has been
             completed and the review of savings products is about to commence. In all
             cases, quick wins wi ll be implemented immediately.

     7.3     To confirm that these changes are benefiting customers' experience baseline
             surveys will have been completed by September to create a scorecard of FS
             Net Promoter and effort scores, by product and channel.

     7.4     Customer analytics work is behind schedule due to the audit of the Brands
             database not being completed and the procurement risks being unresolved.
             Management is seeking ways to bring this critical program back on track.

     Product update
     8.1     Current account
             On 13`h May the Post Office launched the current account in 29 branches.
             Press coverage generated almost 650 separate articles across national
             newspapers, regional press and broadcast media as well as online. The key
             messages were successfully delivered and Nick Kennett was quoted 111
             times. The story led on BBC and Sky with rolling coverage all day on both
             channels. 95% of coverage was positive.

     8.2     After 6 weeks, pilot applications are slightly ahead of target, although sales
             are behind forecast as referrals for identity verification are higher than
             anticipated. We anticipate reaching the sales threshold in September 2013.

     8.3     Pre-paid debit card (PPD) — Project Penguin
             Post Office is seeking to launch a new PPD card 1° for Christmas 2013.
             FRESH has won a tender to launch a reloadable, general spend PPD card
             branded "Post Office Money Card'. It wil l be available in branches and online.

     8.4     Investments & Pensions
             A strategic working group has been established with Bol to launch simple
             investments products. Research is underway to assess demand, customer
             requirements and delivery models. The target is to launch in early 2014.

     8.5     Post Office is also investigating offering retirement solutions to respond to the
             growing demand for planning products, in particular annuities. Management is
             in discussion with market providers to offer a white label on-line solution, with
             a view to a possible launch in late 2014.




°   Post Office already issues a Sterling PPD within the family of Travel Money Cards.
    First Rate Exchange Services Ltd — Post Office owns 50 percent.
                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                           POL00099210



                           Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

      8.6     Payment Services Provider (PSP)92
              The Plan highlighted the opportunity for Post Office to offer payment services
              to SMEs, leveraging their high branch footfall. This service, which is the first
              stage of the FS SME strategy, is on target for launch in October with Post
              Office acting as an agent of a global payments provider13. The sales and
              delivery model will be largely on-line and managed by the provider, minimising
              systems build and branch impact. The business case will be completed in July
              and is targeted to generate income of £500,000 in 2013/14.

9.    Conclusion and Recommendation
      9.1     There are a significant number of initiatives underway across FS to build a
              sustainable business and deliver the long term strategy and revenue growth.
              Initial results confirm the growth opportunity.

      9.2     While these initiatives are broadly on track, it is critical that they complete
              during 2013/14 to ensure that the business is positioned to deliver the higher
              targets for 2014/15 and beyond

      9.3     The Board is asked to note this paper.



                                                                           Nicholas Kennett
                                                                Director, Financial Services
                                                                                   July 2013




12
     A PSP enables businesses to accept card payments, either where their customer is present
     with a card or where the transaction is completed remotely ("card not present" or CNP)
13
     The shortlisted candidates are Global Payments and WorldPay.
                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                              POL00099210



                               Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential




                                  •
                                1lL     I            0




                                            ,




                                                a
      1.1    At the meeting in May 2013, Directors asked management' to table the criteria
             agreed with the Bank of Ireland (UK) plc (Bol) to confirm the success of the Polo
             proof of concept (PoC). The satisfactory achievement of the criteria will confirm
             the intent of Post Office and Bol to proceed to full rollout, and in particular for Bol
             to procure a full scale current account platform.

      1.2    This paper is tabled for noting.

2.    Background
      2.1    The current account is critical to Post Office's ambition to build a successful
             financial services business. The PoC will enable the Post Office and Bol to:
             •   Confirm the demand for a Post Office bank account and Post Office's ability
                 to sell it;
             •   Understand customers' behaviours and market reaction; and
             •   Assess the impact of these findings on the enterprise business case2,
                 product offering and sales processes.

3.    Key Success Criteria
      3.1    Prior to commencing the PoC, the parties agreed the criteria that would be used
             to confirm the success of the PoC and hence enable the project to proceed to
             full rollout. The assessment is based on four broad criteria and would apply once
             1,500 accounts have been opened.

      32     Volume and Type of Accounts — Do the accounts acquired reflect the expected
             profile - volume, product type, channel of acquisition: has the sale of other
             financial services products been impacted?
             Measurement criteria - Sales volumes reach minimum threshold; less than 20
             percent of sales arise through the contact centre3; account types broadly reflect
             the wider market .

      3.3    Customer profile — Do customers' behaviours with the product reflect that
             anticipated?
             Measurement criteria —Net Promoter Score exceeds 20 (confirming strong
             customer satisfaction).

      3.4    Prudential risk — Are there adverse product risks being experienced?
             Measurement criteria — There are no significant credit or fraud losses and no
             significant reputational damages for either party.



'    Action item 3k.
2
     The EBC is the joint business case built by the Post Office and Bol.
3    These occur where an application is not completed in branch.
4    Assumed to be Standard account 66%, Packaged account 16% and Control account 18%

Project Polo Success Factors                        Nicholas Kennett July Board        Page 1 of 2
                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                               POL00099210



                               Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential

      3.5    Commercial viability — Does the performance of the PoC meet both parties'
             financial expectations as set out in the EBC.
             Measurement criteria — The overal l performance of the PoC is broadly consistent
             with the EBC.

      3.6    In agreeing the criteria Bol acknowledged that the assessment should take
             account of the lite' version of the current account being offered in the PoC5.



      4.1    After six weeks, PoC applications are slightly ahead, although sales are slightly
             behind forecast as referrals for identify verification are higher than anticipated.
             While the parties are assessing process changes to reduce the referral rate, the
             parties anticipate that the sales threshold of 1,500 will be reached in September
             2013.

      4.2    As a result, Post Office is finalising its requirements for the full rollout for
             discussion with Bol.

      4.3     Initial conclusions from the PoC do not highlight material variations from the
              EBC.

      4.4    Post Office and Bol are assessing the opportunity to expand the PoC to
             additional areas, ahead of full rollout. This would uti lise the existing platform.




                                                                                    Nicholas Kennett
                                                                         Director, Financial Services
                                                                                            July 2013




5     For exam le , the PoC does not include an SMS or mobile app,  pp, which could lead to more
      enquiries, and does not allow internet account opening, as customers can only sign-up via a
      branch in the target region.

Project Polo Success Factors                Nicholas Kennett July Board                   Page 2 of 2
                                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                                           POL00099210



                                                        Strictly Confidential




                                        For Queries & Comments Contact : Sarah Hall or Kam Bassra




Period 2 Pe formance Pack - Chris Day                             16th July 2013                    Page 1 of 18
                                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                                    POL00099210



                                                            Strictly Confidential




                                                                           Contents
                                                                                       Page
                     Headlines                                                          3
                     Profit & Loss Statement                                            4
                     Cashflow Analysis & Balance Sheet Summary                          5
                     Net Income By Pillar vs Budget                                     6
                     Net Income By Channel                                              7
                     Crown Profit & Loss Statement                                      8
                     Business Scorecard                                                 9
                     Cost Management Report
                     Staff Cost By Directorate                                         11
                     Non Staff Cost by Directorate & Type                               12
                    Transformation Delivery Heat-map                                    13
                     Network Transformation Scorecard                                   14
                     Appendices
                     Network Transformation Scorecard Metric Definitions/ Rationale     16
                     Cashflow Statement                                                 17
                     Income By Product Groups & Pillar                                  18




Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                 16th July 2013          Page 2 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P O L00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POL00099210



                                                                                            Strictly Confidential
Headlines
May 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                    POST
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OFFICE
    Financials - YTD                                                                                                                                     Cumulative EBIT pre exceptionals
                                                                                                                               fm
    Prof€t                                                                                                                                ®e        4, ,mil
                                                                                                                             100
      P :-nod 2 YTD operating profit was £7.6m, which was £6.4m adverse to budget of £14.0m, and £10.2m
      adverse to prior year of £17.9m. There were a number of timing issues which will unwind next month                       80
      and the underlying variance is close to budget.
                                                                                                                               60
    • Net Income was £144.5m which was £4.3m adverse to budget and £9.3m adverse to prior year
      - Versus budget - driven by Mails. Specifically International Mails, 1st class labels and Lottery, all c. Elm            40
      below budget.                                                                                                            20
      - Versus prior year, driven primarily by the buy forward last year prior to the Mails price increase.
    • Staff costs were £0.6m adverse to budget and £1.8m adverse to prior year. The actual costs include
      £0.7m for the £100 payment to all staff up to middle manager level which will be cleared against year
      end accruals in period 3.
    • Agents costs were £6.0m favourable to budget. £3m of this relates to lower sales income. The                                          Total Net Income - Budget to Actual Bridge
      remainder is made of smaller variances related to some timing and recovered VAT from 2012/13
      greater than accrued. £7.7m favourable to prior year, due to lower sales, predominantly Mails buy                       £m
      forward pre price increase.
    • Non people costs were £2.Om adverse to budget, and £3.3m adverse to prior year. The overspend is
      largely driven by the timing of the charge for Microsoft licences taken in full, but which will be reversed                                                                      0.1
      next month and spread over the life of the licences. Versus prior year: it is the licence payments and
      increased marketing expenditure.                                                                                                    (3.1)                (0.2)        (0.0)                  (1.1)
    • Interbusiness expenditure was £0.5m favourable to budget and £0.4m favourable to prior year due to
      lower mails costs versus budget and separation savings versus prior year.
    • Project costs were £5.4m over spent against the budget due to delay to the Brand expenditure planned
      for 2012-13.                                                                                                           2013-14      Mails &             Financial   Government Telephony     Other      2013-14
                                                                                                                             YTD Net      Retail              Services     Services                           YTD Net
    Cashfow                                                                                                                  Income                                                                           Income
     The YTD cashflow was an inflow of £262m which was £57m favourable to the £205m inflow budget                            Budget                                                                            Actual
     (period 1 was £157m favourable).
     The £57m favourable variance was due to the increased DVLA creditor resulting from the proximity of
     the accounting month end to calendar month end and new contract terms.                                                                                                                        Year to Date
                                                                                                                        Financials                                                         Act 5     Target        Var
    Crown Profit - YTO                                                                                                  Total Net Income (excl NSP) Em (Bonus)                           144,         _ [.ate-
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
      The Crown profit is £1.0m adverse to plan with income flat and Direct Product costs driving the                   Operating profit Em (Bonus)                                        7.6        14.0
      variance. This variance relates to costs paid earlier than planned and is expected to unwind over the                                                                              262.4        205.3
                                                                                                                        Free cashflow £m
      coming periods.
                                                                                                                        Crown Profit (Loss) Em (Bonus)                                    (6.8)        (58)
    Non financials - YTD                                                                                                Non Financials
    • Queue time in branches (less than 5 minutes) was 3.5% favourable.                                                 Queue time % < 5 minutes - Top 1k branches                       73.0;        74.5%        3°5%
      YTD Network conversions were 16 ahead of the 1531 target.                                                         Network Conversions (Mains & Locals) (Bonus)                     1531         1515          16
e




         Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                         16th July 2013                                                                                          Page 3 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POL0009921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POL00099210




                                                                                                                           Strictly Confidential
Profit & Loss Statement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POST
May 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CE
                                                                      Current Month                  Prior Year Period                      Year to Date                Prior Year YTD                     Full Year                  Prior Year
                                                                                                                                                                                               Current
Em                                                          Actual         Budget     Variance       Actual      Variance        Actual       Budget       Variance     Actual    Variance                  Budget      Variance         Outturn
                                                                                                                                                                                               Forecast
External Income                                               47.4          46.5         10           50.0         (2.6)          105.5        106.5                    108.3       (2.9)        643.3       643.3        03      !       651.3
Interbusiness Income                                          26.4          27.3        (0.9)         25.5          0.9            58.6         61.5                     65.2       (6.6)        368.9       368.9        00              372.3
TOTAL GROSS INCOME                                            73.8          73.8         0.1          75.5        (1.6)          164.0        168.1                    173.5        (9.5)      1,012.2     1,012.2        00 °«,        1,023.6
Cost of Sales                                                 (9.3)         (8.8)       (0.5)         (9.0)        (0.3)          (19.5)       (19.3)                   (19.7)       0.2        (112.2)     (112.2)       0 0 . ''       (121.2)
TOTAL NET INCOME                                              64.5          64.9        (0.4)         66.4        (1.9)          144.5        148.8                    153.8        (9.3)       900.0       900.0         00             902.4
Staff Costs                                                  (21.3)        (20.6)       (0.7)        (20.4)        (0.8)          (44.8)       (44.1)                   (43.0)      (1.8)       (256.1)     (256.1)       00 ;?'         (257.4)
Agents Costs                                                 (33.4)        (36.2)        2.8         (35.6)         2.2           (76.5)       (82.5)                   (84.2)       7.7        (480.0)     (480.0)       00    ,,       (478.1)
Non-Staff Costs                                              (15.1)        (10.7)       (4.4)         19.9)        (5.2)          (27.5)       (25.5) I        II       (24.2)      (3.3)       (160.0)     (160.0)       00    ,',      (162.3)
Interbusiness Expenditure                                     (6.2)         (6 7)        0.5          166)          0.4           (14.2)       (14.7)                   (14.6)       0.4         (83.9)      (83.9)       00              (83.6)
Depreciation                                                  (0.0)         (0.1)        0.1           0.0         (0.0)           (0.1)        (0.2)                    (0.1)      (0.0)
Total Expenditure (pre POOC)                                 (76.1)        (74.3)       (1.8)        (72.6)       (3.5)          (163.1)      (167.0)                  (166.2)       3.0       (980.8)      (980.8)       0.0            (981.8)
FRES - Share Of Operating Profits                              2.2           2.6        (0.4)          3.3         (1.2)           4.6           5.2                      5.3       (0.7)       31.5         31.5         0.0              31.9
EBIT Pre Overhead Allocations                                 (9.4)         ',6.3)      (2.6)          2.8)        (6.6)          (" 4 O)      (13 0)                    (7.0)      17 0'       ('93)        (49 3)       03              1475)
Group Overhead allocations                                                    ^ 11       00                         03                                       00          1 '         02                                   00              1"h 91
EBIT - BAU                                                   '1;. )          7 9)       (2 5)         4.1)        ( .5)          (17 J)        (1>. }       (0.9,        (9.5)      (4 8)       (13.0' ;    (63.0)        0.0             ('2 k , .
Cnc off F o,c     o~ cOLC)                                                                                          01                                                                                                    00
EBIT - Post Project Costs                                    1..„            9,2,       (4.7}           a)        (5.4)          {c7.0)       (23. )       '(u,4,       4,.8)        1,. )     (18.3;       ( a. )^       0.0           (a1 .£
(\e:;;ork°a+rert                                             1',.4         1tS.ti        0.0         l' .0                        ~4.5          ,a6        'OU                          .       _00.0        -00.0        0,0'           210.0
EBIT pre`exceptionals items "                                 1.5 '         6.2         (4.7)"        8.4          (6.9)           7.6         14.0         (6.4)       17.9        (10.2) `   102.0        102.0 "       0.0            94.2
Interest                                                      1.0           .1 Ui        2.0           a )          1.6            1.0          (i L         2.0         (0 6)        1.5        5 0',         i0         0.0
Impairment                                                    (1.8)         (8.9)        7.1                        0.8            (6.3)       (15 )         93         (16.2)        9.9      (157.5)      (1n7.5)       00              (76.6)
Exceptionals & Redundancy & Severance Costs                   (9.2)        (10.0)        0.8            .0)        (7.2)          (15.3)       (22 6)        73          (4.1)      (11.2)     (189.4)      (159.4)       00              (77.0)
Government Grant Utilisation                                 24.4          24.4          0.0          5.1          19.3            53.4        50 0          34           9.1        44.3       316.9        316.9        0.0              98.2
Pr of,*✓(Loss) On Asset Sale                                   2.5           0.0         2.5          0.0           25              2.5         00           25           0.0         2.5        0.0           0.0        03              (27.7)
Colic
Colleague   Share/ Busi- ess Transformation °al merts          0.7           0.0         0.7          0.0           0.7             0.7         00           0.7          0.0         0.0        0.0           0.0        00                 .31
Total Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                               19.1          10.7          8.5          8.3          10.8           43.6         24.8         18.8         6.1         36.7       57.0          57.0 ''     0.0              7.0

 Period vs. Budget                                        YTD vs. Budget                                                                                     YTD vs. Prior Year
 Operating profit (EBIT) of (£1.5m) was £4.7m             Operating profit (EBIT) of £7.6m was E6.4m adverse to budget.                                      Operating profit (EBIT) of £7.6m was E10.2m adverse to prior year.
 adverse to budget.
                                                          BAU variance of £0.9m was mainly due to:                                                           Like for like adverse variance of 6.8m was mainly due to:
 BAU was £2.6m adverse:                                   • Lower income of £4.3m,                                                                           • Lower net income of £9.3m primarily due Mails and Government Services,
 • Lower income of £0.4m,                                 • Higher staff cost of £0.6m due to the £100 payments made which will be cleared against           • Lower agents costs of £7.7m mainly due high stamp volumes prior to the 2013
 • Higher staff costs of £0.7m due to the £100              accruals next month,                                                                               price rise, reduced fixed pay and WHS incentives, and
   payments made which will be cleared against            • Higher non staff costs of £2.0m due to the timing of the charge for Microsoft licences taken     • Lower I B and overhead allocations of £O.6m due to separation.
   accruals next month, and                                 is foil out whicii will be reversed next month and spread over the life of the licences, and     Offset by
 • Higher non staff costs of £4.4m mainly due             • Lowe - JV income of £0.6m timing and not considered a concern at this stage.                     • Higher staff cost of £1.8m due to £100 payments this year, increased pension
   increased IT fees, and timing of Microsoft Licence     Offset by                                                                                            payments and increased headcount,
   payments.                                              • Lower agents costs of £6.Om due to; £3m of this is related to lower sales income. The            • Higher non staff costs of 03.3m due Microsoft payments this year and higher
 Offset by                                                  remainder is made of smaller variances related to some timing and recovered VAT from               marketing costs, and
 • Lower Agents costs due to reduced income and             2012/13 greater than accrued, and                                                                • Lower income from JVs of £0.7m.
 • Lower I B expenditure.                                 • Lower IB and overhead allocations of £0.5m.
                                                                                                                                                             Non like for like adverse variance of 03.4m was due to:
 One-off variance of £2.0w adverse was due to:            One-off variance of £5.4m adverse was all due to:                                                  • Higher Network payment of £1.0m, and
 • Higher project costs primarily relating to Brand and   • Higher project costs, specifically Brand related costs delayed from 2012-13.                     • Higher project costs of £2.4m.
 marketing.
                                                          Below EBIT                                                                                         Below EBIT
 Below EBIT                                               The main variance were the slower pace of capital spend and operating exceptionals,                2012/13 capital expenditure included £11m property transfers from Group. NT
 Impairments were favourable due to slower progress       including agents compensation, compared to budget. Government grant utilisation follows this       exceptionals including compensation were ahead of the equivalent pace in 2012/13.
 than plan on NTP. The profit on sale related to the      trend, but also included utilisation against the remaining 2012/13 exceptional costs.              2013/14 grant utilisation includes £30m against 2012/13 exceptional costs not
 lease surrender of Midway House.                                                                                                                            covered by the 2012/13 grant.


        Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                        16th July 2013                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00099210



                                                                                                                     Strictly Confidential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POST
                                                             Cashflow to period 2 was a cash inflow of £262rn versus a budget of £205m inflow resulting in a favourable variance of £57m.                                           OFFICE
May 2013                                                                This includes £415m received on 2 April fo- the Network Subsidy Payment and additional grant funding.


                                               YTD Cashflow                                                                                                YTD Cashflow Variances
                                                                                                                                                                                            9               11
                                                                                                                   fm                                      44
                                             215                                                                                                                                                      t1;


                                                              (38)            (6)
                                                                                         (16)
                                                                                                                                         (6)
                    165
     £m


                                165)

          8
                       r.




    Operating      Network     Client &   Govt Fending      Working        Capital    Redundancy, Free cash flow
   profit before   Payment   Network Cash                  Capital Inc   expenditure provisions and
   exceptional                                            Interest, tax,              exceptionals                    YTD Budget   Operating profit     Client &   Working Capital        Capital      Redundancy,     YTD Actual
                                                         pensions, other                                                                              Network Cash Inc Interest, tax,   expenditure   provisions and
                                                                                                                                                                   pensions. other                     exceptionals



Balance Sheet                                                           P2
£m                               Mar-13            Actual            Budget         Variance
Fixed Assets                        71               76                 76              0
Debtors                            122              143                116             27             The YTD cashflow was an inflow of £205m which was £57m favourable to the £205m budgeted.
Cash                               870              906                910             (4)            The £57m variance was mainly due to:
                                                                                                      • EBIT £6m adverse to budget.
Client Balances                   (288)            (259)              (219)           (40)
                                                                                                      • Client balances and Network Cash combined were £44m favourable chiefly attributable to the increased
Trade Creditors                   (362)            (673)              (665)            (8)
                                                                                                       DVLA creditor resulting from proximity of accounting month end to calendar month end and new contract
Pension (deficit)/surplus           97               97                 72             25              terms, which have increased the number of days to be settled.
Provisions                         (26)             (26)               (21)            (5)            • Capital expenditure is £9m favourable driven by lower than planned expenditure on NTP.
investments, Funding                95               67                 86            (19)            • Exceptionals are £11m favourable primarily due to lower than planned NTP and CTP expenditure.
soar                              (291)               0                (771            77



Reserves                         Mar-13            Actual            Budget         Variance
Capital and Reserves              (288)            (331)              (278)           (53)

                                                                                                                        Management

£m                             Prior Year       Mar-13                                P2                           r Retail and Cash Centre cash (manageable cost) - £10m favourable to budget. Versus prior
                                   P2           Opening              Actual         Budget             var           year, the variance was £153m adverse. Of this variance, branches were £39m adverse due to
Retail, Cash Centres              560            650                  713            723                10           holdings as a contingency for industrial action and cash centres were £114m favourable
Bureau                             78             59                   72             77                 5           due to Treasury positioning.
                                                                                                                   r Bureau (manageable cost) - £5m favourable to budget, and £6m favourable to prior year.
Cheques, debit cards               94            161                  121            110               (11)
                                                                                                                   • Cheques and debit cards (customer driven) - £11m adverse to budget and £27m adverse to
                                                         1            •1.                1
                                                                                                                     prior year.


Headroom', (Ens)                   862              861


          Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                16th July 2013                                                                                         Page 5 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL00099210




                                                                                                                                                         Strictly Confidential
Net Income By PRIar vs Budget
May 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OFFICE

                                            Period                                  Prior Year Period                               Year to Date                                  Prior Year YTD                                         Full Year                             Prior Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Current
Net Income {£m)             Actual          Budget            Variance             Actual         Variance            Actual          Budget               Variance          Actual            Variance                                  Budget           Variance        Outturn       Variance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Forecast
Mails & Retail               28.4               281               0.2              28.4               (01)            64.1             67.2                  (3.1)            71.5               )7. )           414.6                    414.6               0           404.0           10.7
Financial Services           20.1               19,9              0.1              20.7               (0.6)           44.7             44.9                  (0.2)            42.9                1.7            277.4                    277.4              0.0          279.6           (2.1)
Government Services           9.8                8.0              1.8              10.7               (0.9)           20.9             20.9                  (0.0)            24.9               (4.01           115.9                    115.9             10.0)         133.2          (17.4)
Telephony                     3.6                5.6             (2.0)              3.5                0.1             8.9              8.8                   0.1             7.3                 1.6             50.4                     50.4              0.0           45.0            5.4
Other                         2.7                3.2             (0.6)              3.1               (0.4)           6.0              7.1                   (1.1)            7.2                (1.21            41.7                     41.7            10.01           40.7            1.0



                                  Mails & Retail Services                                                                                                                          Financial Services                                                                       Pillar Performance vs YTO Budget
  For             0-0
                                                                                                                               £m                                0.5             0.3                                                                                        MaiLs & Retail Services - (£3.1m)Adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            International - £1.0 adv due partly to lower volumes and partly to
                              (0.3)         (0.6)                                                                                          1'1               IRi-.                                                                                                          the budget being stretching - £0.6m higher than prior.
                                                              (6.7)                                                                        }                                                   (0.2)          (0 2)                           ®                             1st and 2nd Class labels - £0.8m adv driven by lower 1st class
                                                                            (0.8)                                                                                                                                                                                           volumes being down by 25X.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ®




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '3)
                                                                                                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                    l.
                                                                                          ®




                                                                                              (1.0)                                                                                                                                               (1.4)                     Other Mails - £0.7m adv due primarily to lower than planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            volumes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lottery - £0.6m adv due primarily to lower than planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            volumes. The income is higher than prior year, indicating a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            stretching target.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Financial Services - (£0.2m) Adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Banking Services - £0.3m adv driven by lower volumes from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            banking services, both against budget and prior year.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Payment Services - £0.2m adv driven by lower Gift voucher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            volumes.
  2013-14 YTD     PFW      Stamps (1st&Retail&Lottery Other Mails        Labels(1st& International 2013-14 YTD                                                                                                                                                              ATMs-£0.2madv driven by lower volumes than planned,but
   Net Income               2nd Class)                                    2nd Class)                Net Income                                                                                                                                                              higher than prior year.
     Budget                                                                                           Actual              2013-14 YTD         PFS            Bill Payment Travel Services      ATMs         Payment       Banking                 Other     2013-14 YTD     Other- (£1.4m)adv due to unassigned income targets including
                                                                                                                           Net Income                                          (inc                         Services      Services                           Net Income     Sales Effectiveness still to be allocated to products.
                                                                                                                             Budget                                        MoneyGram)                                                                          Actual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Offset by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PFS - £1.lm fav driven by savings products, specifically Growth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            bonds.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bill Payment - £O.5m fav driven by lower decline than planned.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Travel - £0.3m fav due to increased higher Bureau and Travel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            insurance volumes than planned.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Government Services -Flat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Check & Send -£0.8m fav - Higher than planned volumes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ID services - £0.2m fav - Higher than planned volumes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            offset by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Motoring - O.5m adv - Higher than planned volumes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gov Services Other - £0.5m adv driven by smaller variances,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            including rod licences.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Telephony Services - £0.2m Fav
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Homephone - £0.2m fav - Current customer numbers stand at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            474k, which is 5.1k higher than budget, driving the favourable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            variance.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Other- (£1,1m) Adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            This -elates to the unassigned income stretch.


     2013-14 YTD Check and Send   ID Services          POCA           Other Gaul       Motoring         2013-14 YTD
      Net Income                                                                                         Net Income                        2013-14 YTD Net Income Budget               HomePhone/Duat & brcadberd      2013-14 YTD Net Income Actual
        Budget                                                                                             Actual                                                                             Customers
                                                                                                                      J


        Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                                                        16th July 2013                                                                                                                                          Page 0 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00099210



                                                                                               Strictly Confidential
Net Income By Channel                                                                                                                                                                                                   OST
May 2013                                        Period 2 - Focus products were £1.Om favourable and Standard products were £3.9m adverse, with the Agency network driving                                         E     FICE
                                                                                                     both variances.


£m                                                                        Month                                                                   Year to date                                      Full Year
Targeted Income                                       Actual              Budget                    Variance                 Actual                 Budget                 Variance                     Budget
 Focus Products
                Crown Offices                          2.8                     3.0                   ((J.2)                    6.4                    6.6                   (01}                         39.0
                WHS                                    0.5                     0.5                    0.0                      1.2                    1.2                    0.1                          6.7
                Agents - Managed                       5.7                     5.5                    0.1                     12.9                   12.2                    0.7                         74.0
                Centrally Supported                    3.4                     3.6                   (0.2)                     8.1                    7.9                    0.1                         49.6
                Direct Sales                           0.8                     0.7                    0.1                      1.8                    1.5                    0.3                          9.0
                Central                                0.0                    0.0                     0.0                      0.0                   0.0                     0.0                         0.5
 Focus Products Total                                 13.2                    13.4                   (0.2)                    30.5                   29.5                    1.0                        178.8
 Standard Products
                Crown Offices                          3.9                     3.9                     0.0                     9.2                    9.1                    0.1                        58.1
                WHS                                    0.8                     0.8                     0.0                    1.8                    1.8                    (0.0)                       10.6
                Agents - Managed                      13.6                    14.2                    (0.5)                   30.9                   32.8                   ( ',.9)                    191.2
                Centrally Supported                   13.3                    14.0                    (0.6)                   31.1                   33.1                   (0.0)                      198.1
                Direct Sales                           0.3                     0.3                     0.0                     0.8                    0.8                   (C.0)                        6.5
                Central                                0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                    0.1                   (30,                         0.6
 Standard Product Total                               32.0                    33.1                     1.1                    73.9                   77.7                    3.9                       465.3
 TOT3 €~                      ( . ...,                               ,        fi t .. .:'          <:: f1.3 .. ,.            1134.4.                107.2                                 ..... ,   ... .
 Other Income
                Cash Services                          1.7                     1.7                    (0.0)                   3.6                     3.7                   (0.0)                        22.0
                Gamma                                  0.8                     0.8                     0.0                    8.8                     8.4                    0.4                          8.4
                Fixed Income & Other                  15.0                    13.8                     1.2                    22.8                    24.8                  (1.9)                       185.0
                Retentions                             1.8                     2.1                    (0.3)                    4.9                     4.7                   0.2                         40.6
                                                                                                      r                                                                                                 °rr r
                   Network Fa 'ment                   15.4                    15.4                    0.0                     34.6                    34.6                   0.0                        200.0
 r         r                                                                  a                       r                                                                                                   rr r

     Centrally Supported Net               Account Mgd Net Income YTD                       Crown Offices Net Income                     Direct Sales Net Income YTD               WHS Net Income YTD
        Income YTD (£m)                               (Em)                                         YTD (Em)                                         (Em) *                                (fm)




 F u Standard   s Focus   % of target    s Standard   ■ Focus   % of target          5 Standar 3   s Focus     % of target           s Standard   s Focus    % of target     a Standard       ■ Focus     % of target

                                                                                                                                             * Both target and actual exclude lead
                                                                                                                                             generation income
      Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                  16th July 2013                                                                                             Page 7 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POL00099210




May 2013


                                                                   Period
                                                                                               Strictly Confidential




                                                                                          Prior Year Period                        Year To Date                 Prior Year YTD       Full Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Prior Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CE


      £m                                               Actual     Budget      Variance    Actual     Variance          Actual          Budget     Variance   Actual     Variance     Budget       Outturn
  Income and Distributions
    Variable income
      - Mails                                           2.8        3.0         (0.2)       3.1         (0.3)            6.4             6.8        (0.4)      7.8        (1.4)        43.2         44.8
      - Financial Services                              2.1        2.3         (0.1)        2.4        (0.3)            4.8             4.9        (0.2)      5.2        (0.5)        29.6         30.4
      - Government Services                             1.8        1.6          0.2         2.0        (0.2)            4.3             3.8        0.6        4.5        (0.1)        19.9         26.4
      - Telephony                                       0.1        0.1         (0.0)       0.1         (0.0)            0.2             0.2        (0.0)      0.3        (0.2)         1.3          1.3
    Fixed income                                        2.0        1.9          0.1         2.1        (0.2)            4.4             4.1        0.2        4.9        (0.5)        24.8         28.2
    Gamma/ Other                                        0.9        0.9          0.0        0.8          0.0            1.8              2.1        (0.3)      1.8        (0.0)        14.8         10.9
    Renewals and Retentions                             13         1.3          0.0        0.7          0.6             2.8             2.6         02        1.2        1.6          16.5         11.1
  Total liicome including Gamma/other                  10.9       11.0         I ; ''     11.2         ; ;i            24.6            24.6        0.0       2S.8
    Direct Product Cost                                (1.0)      (l .5        (0. )       (0.8)       (U.5)           (1.6)           (0.9)       (0.?)     (1.1)       (0.5)        (5.0)        (8.3)
    Branch costs
      - Staff                                           (8.7)      (8.6)       (0.2)       (9.1)        0.4            (19.1)          (19.2)      0.0       (20.2)      1.1         (106.0)    1117.9)
      - Property                                        (2.7)      (2.7)       (0.0)       (1.9)       (0.8)            (6.1)           (6.1)      (0.0)      (4.4)      (1.7)        (35.4)     ;36.91
      - Other branch costs                              (0.3)      (0.4)        0.1        (0.C)        0.2             (0.8)           (0.9)      0.1        (0.9)       0.1          (4.7)      { ..:
    Infrastructure costs                                (1.7)      (1.4)       (0.4)       (1.1)        0.0             (3.3)           (3.0)      (0.3)      (3.7)       0.4         (2            '.5)
    Allocated central costs                             !0.7)      (0.7)        0.0        ('1.0)       0_3             (1 7)           _1°)       0.0        (1_7)      (0.12         (s./+)     (7.'7)
                                                                         ..    ;...9)..
              nctrture                                             1.4.                   (14',5)      (2::7°          (x .7) ''       (3 9)          6)     {32.T ':            ;   1182 '' "l
  Tote.




                                                                                                                                                   co
        Share                                                                              Q9                           1_3             1_-                   14         (0.0)          91        9.6
                 ---- - -   --  - - -                 -- -      -- - - - -- - -
    Statutory PBIT                                      _.6i      12'6, )      (J.0)      (2.4)        (1.2)           (6.8)           (5;8)       (tO)      (5.0) :     { 8         (23. 1)'     ( 37 0)....:

          Summary
          • Income is on target, both in period and YTD:
                • Pillar income is on budget. Main drivers of favourable Government income are UKBA and Passports, with £O.3m due to timing of targets for ID Services that will unwind next
                   month. Adverse Mails performance has been impacted by a change in customer behaviour as a result of size based pricing, This has impacted on a number of products.

          • Costs are £0.8m greater than plan:
                 • Direct product costs are adverse by £0.7m as a result of Brand spend early in the year.
                 • Staff costs - A small delay in CTP savings have been offset by industrial action savings.




           Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                         16th July 2013                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210



                                                                              Strictly Confidential
FI si f         Scorecard
May 2013                                                                                                                                                                    POST
                                                                                                                                                                           OFFICE:
                                                                        CurrentMonth                            Year to Date                 Prior             Full Year            2012-13
Key Performance Indicators
                                                                Act        Target    Var                Act       Target        Var          Year     F'cast    Target     Var       Outturn
Growth
Total Net Income (excl NSP) £m (Bonus)                           64.5       64.9           (0.4)       144.5       148.8        (4!3)        153.8    900 0      900.0      0.0       902.4
Operatingprofit £m (Bonus)                                       1.5         6.2                        7.6         14.0                      17.9    102.0      102.0      0.0        94.2
Earnings before ITDA and Subsidy £m*                            (13.8)      (9.1)                      (26.9)      (20.4)                    (17.7)   (97.2)     (97.2)     0.0      (115.4)
Free cashflow £m                                               (123.1)     (22.9)                      262.4       205.3           1' .(     431.7    (18.3)     (18.3)     0.0       132.2
Customer
Customer Satisfaction**                                          87%        88%                         87%         88%                       87%      88%        88%       0%        87%
Easy to do business with (Bonus)**                               45%        44%                _        45%         44%                       N/A      44%        44%       0         N/A
Net Promoter score**                                              (4)        5                           0            5                       N/A       5          5         0        N/A
Queue time % < 5 minutes - Top 1k branches                      81.0%      76.0%           5.£)        78.0%       74.5%        3.5%         74.6%    81.0%      81.0%     0.0%      80.7%
Horizon availability                                            99.9%      99.7%           0.2%        99.9%       99.73%       0.2%         99.8%    99.7%      99.7%     0.0%_.    99.8%
Branch - Compliance (new basket)                               100.0°1     98.0%           2.07,       99.8%       98.0%        1.8%         96.8%    98.0%      98.0%     0 0%      97.8%
People
Engagement Index % (Once a year) (Bonus)                        55%         567.           W%           55%         56%         (1}%          55%      56%        567.      07.       55%
(No.) % of BME appointments over total recruits at senior
                                                                17%          4%            13%          9%          47.          5;4          N/A      4%         4%        0;<       N/A
leadership and senior manager
(No.) % of Female appointments over total recruits at senior
                                                                17%         40%                         55%         40%         157           N/A      40%        40%       07.       N/A
leadership and senior manager
Modernisation
Crown Profit (Loss) £m (Bonus)                                  (3.6)       (2.6)                       (6.8)       (5.8)                     0.0     (23.0)     (23.0)     0.0      (37.0)
Network Conversions (Mains & Locals) (Bonus)                     42          26     ! 7J           €   1,531       1,515    €           ,y    210     3,000      3,000       0       1,450
Bonus worthy metrics
* ITDA Interest, Tax, Depreciation, Amortisation
** Monthly = 3 month average. YTD = 12 month average




      Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                 16th July 2013                                                                     Page 9 of 18
                                                                              POL00099210
                                                                         POL00099210



                                        Strictly Confidential




Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day             16th July 2013   Page 10 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                            POL00099210



                                                                                              Strictly Confidential
    Staff Cost By Dkectorate
    May 2013                                                                                                                                                      POST
                                                                                                                                                                   FICE

    fm                                                       Year to Date                   Prior Year YTD      Full Year                YTD Headcount

    Staff Cost by Directorate                     Actual          Budget      Variance     Actual   Variance     Budget          Actual     Budget     Variance
    Central (i d. MD's office)                     (1.4)            (1.6)           0.2     (0.9)     (0.5)        (9.6)          12           15          3
    Commercial                                     (1.3)                           (0.0)    (1.0)     (0.3)        (7.4)          110         111          1
    Communications                                 (0.4)            (0.4)           0.0     (0.3)     (0.1)        (2.3)           32          35          3
    Human Resources                                (0.8)            (0.8)           0.0     (0.9)      0.1         (4.8)          103         110
    HR - Centrally Held Bonus Payments             (3.0)            (3.0)          (0.0)    (3.0)     (0.1)       (18.0)
    Financial Services                             (0.5)            (0.7)           0.2     (0.3)     (0.2)        (4.5)           63          70
    Finance                                        (1.9)            (2.0)           0.1     (1.6)     (0.3)       (^_,11          242         264          22
    Network                                       (32,1)           (31.2)          (0.9)   (32.3)      0.1       ('7.'           6,993       7,211        218
      Supply Chaln                                 (9.9)            (9,6)          (02)     (9.4)     (04)        (551           1,585       1,574        (11)
      Crowns                                      (18.7)           (181)           (06)    (198)       1.1       (10,            4,511       4,497        (14)
      Other Network                                (3.6)            (3 5)          (0.1)    (3.1)     (0.6)       ('2             452         501          49
    CTP and NTP Heads (Costs in exceptionals)                                                                                     445         639         194
    Legal                                          (0.4)           (0.4)            0.0     (0.3)      (0.1)       (2._            28          30           2
    Security                                       (0.5)           (0.4i           (0.2)    (0.4)      (0.0)       (2.7)           56          57           1
    Strategy                                       (2.5)            2.3;           (C.1)    (2-0)      '0°)       ('14.1)         247         239          (8)
    Total Staff Costs                             (44.8)          (44.1)           (0.6)   (43.0)     ( .8)      (256,1)        7886         $.x4
                                                                                                                    PY Actual . 7 837
                                                                                                                  PY Variance     49)
              Human Resources      Staff Cost by Directorate
                 incl Bonus                                  Central (incl. MD's
                     8%               Strategy                    office)
                                                 Fina
                                                    4 ` 4e       ` .3%
                                        6x7       -                                                   YTD Staff Costs are £0.6m adverse to budget.
                                                                                                       This variance relates to the £100 payments paid to
                                                                                                        employees that will be offset against year end
                                                                                                        accruals in P3.

                                                                                                      Vs. Prior Year
                                                                                                        The staff costs are £1.8m adverse due primarily to
                                                                                                        pay awards a-id also to increased use of staff, both
                                                                                                        temporary and permanent such as FOoG and the
                                                                                                        new communications directorate.

                                                                                                      Headcount of 7,886 is 256 below plan and is due to
                                                                                                       vacancies with the Network directorate, of which the
                                                                                                       majority of vacancies are within the NTP followed by
                                                                                                       CTP. The adverse variance in Crowns is due to the
                                                                                                       delay to the duty reviews. Tight control of
                                                                                                       recruitment has partially mitigated this.

                                                                                                      Vs. prior year headcount has increased by 49
                                                                                                      primarily due to NTP.




Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                   16th July 2013                                            Page 11 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00099210



                                                                                                                        Strictly Confidential
Non Staff Cost by Dfrectorate & Type
May 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POSE`
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OFFICE

Em                                              Year to Date             Prior Year YTD        Full Year    Em                                                                Year to Date           Prior Year YTD     Full Year

Non- Staff Cost by Directorate         Actual    Budget     Variance     Actual Variance        Budget      Non- Staff Cost by Type                                Actual        Budget Variance Actual Variance        Budget
Central - Centrally Held incl.                                                                                  Computers & Telephones                              (1.2.6)      (10.8)      (1.3)   (1.1.4)   (1..2)    (75.9)
                                         0.0      (1._          1.1       (1.2,        13
                                                                                        .         2.7
Strengthening                                                                                                   Other Operating Costs                                (2.5)        (2.5)       0.0     (3.8)     1.3      (16.8)
Commercial                              (1.8)      (2.7)         0.8      (2.0)         0.2     (15.5)          Consultancy, Marketing & Legal Fees                  (4.7)        (5.1)       0.4     (3.4)    (1.3)     (29.5)
Communications                          (0.5)      (0.4)        (0.0)     (0.3)        (0.2)     (2.1.)          *Skills Group external contractors                  12.1)        (20)       (01)     (1.6)    (0.5)     (1.1.91
Finance                                 (2.3)      (2.3)        (0.1)     (1.2)        (1.2)    (12.6)            Remainder                                          (2.6)        (3.1)       05      (1.8)    (0.8)     (176)
Financial Services                      (2.9)      (0.7)        (2.2)     (0.1)        (2.8)     (5.3)          Finance                                              (5.2)        (3.7)      (1.5)    (2.6)    (26)      (17.2)
Human Resources                         (0.9)      (1.0)         0.1      (0.8)        (0.0)     (6.1)          Property Facilities                                  (1.5)        (1.0)      (0.5)    (1.1)    (0.3)      (6.2)
Network                                 (3.9)      (4.8)         0.9      (5.4)         1.5     (27.7)          Property Maintenance                                 (1.0)        (1.1)       0.1     (1.0)    (0.0)      (6.9)
  Supply Chain                          (1.5)      (24)          1.0      (34)          1.9     (154)           Vehicles                                             (0.4)        (0.4)       0.0     (0.5)     0.1       (2.4)
  Crowns                                (04)       (0.6)         0.2      (05)          0.1      (3.31          Compensation                                         (0.1)        (0.4)       0.2     (0.3)     0.1       (2.6)
  Other Network                         (20)       (1.8)        (021      (1.6)        (0.5)     (901           Collection, Delivery & Conveyance Charges            (0.1.)       (0.1)      (0.0)    (02)      0.1       (0.3)
Legal                                   (0.3)     (0.28)         0.0      (0.2)        (0.0)     (1.9)          Staff & Agent Related Costs & Consumables             0.5         (0.5)       1.0      0.0      0.4       (3.4)
Security                                (0.5)     (0.33)        (0.2)     (0.4)        (0.1)     (2.5)           *Skills Group off-charges to projects               ;O.3)        (0.9)       0.6     (1.0)     0.6       (5.4)
Programme costs                          0.1        0.0          0.1      (0.2)         0.3       0.0             Remainder                                           0.8          04         04       1.0     (0.2)       20
Strategy                               (14.5)     (12.0)        (2.5)    (12.3)        (2.2)    (90.1)
Total Non Staff Costs                 ;27.5)     (25.5?.       (2        (24.2)        (3.3)   (162k        Total N          ff Costs                              "27.5` _ (25.5'           (20)    (24 2)    (3,3)    4161.1


                                                                                               Variance                                                                               Non Staff by Type
                                                                                                                                                               Other operating
                            Non Staff by Directorate                                            YTD non people costs were £2.Om adverse to                        Costs
                                                                                                budget and £3.3m adverse to prior year.

                                                                                               By Directorate

                                                                                               Vs. Budget
                                                                                                 Costs were £2.Om adverse to budget The
                                                                                                 overspend is driven by a charge for Microsoft
                                                                                                 licences taken in full but which will be reversed
                                                                                                next month and spread over the life of the
                                                                                                 licences.

                                                                                                 Vs Prior Year
                                                                                                 Cost were £3.3m adverse to prior year. The
                                                                                                 increase is driven by the timing of the Microsoft
                                                                                                 licences expenditure and increased marketing
                                                                        xrengm    mg             expenditure.
                                                                            0%



                                                                                               By Type
                                                                                                YTD versus budget variance was driver by a
                                                                                                payment to HRMS which was budgeted to be
       The Central directorate has a positive prior year actual which relates to the            paid in P3.                                                 * Skills group is the internal consultancy' providing project
       WHS TOPE transfer provision release.                                                     Versus prior year it is the HMRC payment and                resource made up of a mixture of employees topped up with
                                                                                                increased marketing expenditure.                            contractors. If demand is high the contractor spend increases but
                                                                                                                                                            this is offset by higher recharges to projects.




        Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                     16th July 2013                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POL00099210



                                                                              Strictly Confidential
Transformation
May 2013
                                                                                                                                                ! POST
           -litah' Iqhts her :oap status of key tray >' orrnatJon prograrnrnes, and poin€t.. of escaldt. Of try Trano1ornI2on Board on selected
                                                                                                                                                 OFFICE
                                 )
                                     res€idtit r, T ran:,`orrrì,ati n             % gttidsr nit


                                                                                   FOeG - Identity assurance (IDA) I concIse motion boar :I (J Et) d i ,s:ur aid /15(100-1000 cti
                                                                                   revised apyr iadi to iDA market entry (i.e, bcv sei nre from e_ odd school IDA r ,pl r). Sup l ien
                                                                                     ny.rrrement r .OW commer,. i rte :n s€ oport of tl iii, .EI'. ) , es, . case requested `~irr approve
                                                                                   } r fire snotrijoonri o rtf:: t»v ernrnent I:gital 001 vices (duo Jury to rneet G ?v -rr.rnent
                                                                                   tirnenas) _::=rvice provision due to crarrrr?erne n Crctr3L?r.

                                                                                   IT €`T Jyctems Integrator fit,: r ,, c I_rc. vet           Ic iDi pros cren'ent curit:nue ss to pan v,,rrth
                                                                                       ;rd date (ci aria sdeE' ,1 doer rr r € eLir,c3, r S pter hr .. Ho .r . r sir. rr Trent Tr.unsiti
                                                                                   Support Servicee (1 05)  5) r:errr ti_ i rrr?5 cuntiriue to r ap_,r t the scope' and trrnnr of the Al tower.
                                                                                   Key decision on TSS options rerluested by programme and cviii be .agreed by sub set of TB.
                                                                                   I ,,Lit^tiny fray the :r revrseJ Poorness  ^ess case has been requested for review and for approval
                                                                                   rr the iu''ry (nv: ,timer€ l nrruni€lee

                                                                                   Finance Roadmap —1-8 concern_ a_,:ut robcr.'n . •s o plan':. o d.l iv:a be cc-re f r 3nrc:
                                                                                      cterr, liv Air 11 2014 eep, r -,ty 1 ssjerchn( doper: heir ::rct ca e IC __try € tIra Sot pl :'v Of
                                                                                   t ar.d:nr and 1 w1 i c and We- €rr:ie'i:n , urrurt ; 1 Lair, .' fur i1i5. (Ed ter uo_t d spotlight
                                                                                   mission ,i eb :ter, Flan two wooer to tee a, un p€,:icns.

                                                                                    Penguin f 51e 1 radon 10 contract vat r FEES On agency        l Eaec to soft ,a €nh pro'--- m u'l' card

                                                                                    betire Christnncc udcliop real-- tune boasting in March 2€ I. TI' c1i0c0501011 reed prcgrarnme
                                                                                     a011000 03 Itt b_S: r (earl CO r,a,_1J red ac:inrr . mart-nr   lessons .'earlrt 0 in this prcjirct...
                                                                                    requirements
                                                                                              ents scope seep and tile need for strom/rl c!i l^rrgr: t project board.

                                                                                   Digital Multi-Channel (DMC) - Common digital platform - Ff3 c' Fe.11enne on value of DMC
                                                                                   programme act mM hosing forward (post req nr rrierr_s fini€,_r n) q vet r . iae o€ r3_:3tians:
                                                                                          icri lr / :,f . o: rrr sr : Il qi€a ?latl 01111 deLi -' a' I. n in t • t.• support lilt c.r.-st ed re . . y- :r key
             Green                         Amber                        Red        rc'quireni:ent r,a Sri rns, onLine incu r cal -1. TB rc'qL:enteci' f r.r€ Her .,,r ,r''r               as, f C EL:'-1 r
                         Debvery to Baseline AlResrones                            ownerS, I i   Lla      ti: i .rr rr cn€ to          € rogramme approach and present back as part of a
                                                                                   spotl:d,rrt se5siror: or the programme.

                                                                                   Mails (Small Business) -• Devcdnprnrnt would allow SMEs to top-up and view detailed activity
             <; as   o cane€ €ror€'t last rerrd
                                                                                   fir Letup x r;u accounts 01 - line and ,rc noble )the p..i burr: WOli5I ,_:_;c 000010 rri5torners to
                                                                                   00001 Lake cn ,!ne parr e; payment tleneactlor'c _.lowing EMiL to curt:pct e w fire postage

                                                                                   rr:arked. Business Case agreement pending decision on approach to DMC (see above).




   Period 2 Performance Pack -Chris Day                                                  16th July 2013                                                                                                         Page 13 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POL0009921O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL00099210




                                                                                                                   Strictly Confidential
Network Transformation Scorecard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POST
May 2013           Reporting prior months data (i.e. one month in arrears)                                                                                                                                                           OFFICE
                                                           Sample size is still small but provides a starting point to build on. All branches in the financial section have been operating for greater than 12 months to allow for
                                                                          steady state, and branches that had previously received overscale / one off payments have been removed to provide a clear baseline.


                                                                                                                             Actual
                                     Key Performance Indicators                          Actual     Target       Var                                                              Commentary
                                                                                                                           Sample Size

                   MAINS
                                                                 Converted > 12 months
                   Finance Approved Investment per Mains £000                             (39        (39)         0              6           Mains
                   Total Income: Post vs Pre Conversion                                                                                      Financial performance
                                                                                                                                             Income - One branch has improved c40% due to a significant increase in lottery
                              Branches live 12-24 months                                  . 4%       (1)%        15%             5           income. Exclusion of this branch results in a 6% improvement which still compares
           POL                Branches live 24-36 months                                  (5%%       TBA           -             1           favourably to the target (control group).

                   Focus Income: Post vs Pre Conversion                                                                                      Agents pay - Excluding the branch above the average increase is 9%. Branches in
                              Branches live 12-24 months                                  18%         20%        (31!            5           sample receive new Mains pay rates that are favourable to previous rates.
                              Branches live 24-36 months                                  11%        TBA           -             1
                                                                                                                                             Non financial performance
                                                                                                                                             Encouraging results against targets for retail sales performance, opening hours and
                   Agents Remuneration: Post vs Pre Conversion                            19%        (4)%        23%             5           customer satisfaction.
        Agent
                   Operator Feedback on Retail Sales Performance                          15%         9%          6%             25

                   Average Increase in Opening Hours                                      34%         20%        14%            163
      Customer
                   Customer Satisfaction                                                  95%         90%         5%            601

                   LOCALS
                                                                 Converted > 12 Months    33
                   Finance Approved nvestment per Local £000                              (11)       (^_1)        0              0           Locals
                   Total Income: Post vs Pre Conversion                                                                                      Financial performance
                                                                                                                                             Income - Branch performance ranges from -58% to +49% so there isn't a consistent
           POL                Branches live 12-24 months                                 (10)3       (2)%        ( I,'          33           pattern in this population. The Local model assumption was that income would
                              Branches live 24-36 months                                   -           -           -                         reduce by c5% due to the removal or certain products. 17 branches are performing
                                                                                                                                             better than this and 16 are less favourable.
                   Annualised Agents Fixed Pay savings per conversion E000                10          10          0              0
                                                                                                                                             Agents pay fixed savings - Savings in line with strategic plan target.
                   Customer Sessions 12- 24 months                                         9%        (3)5        11',           33
        Agent      Customer Sessions 24- 36 months                                         -           -                                     Non financial performance
                                                                                                                                             Customer sessions - Strong performance compared to income. Implies greater
                   Operator Feedback on Retail Sales Performance                          11%         9%          2%            63           footfall but lower value transactions. Further analysis underway.

                   Average Increase in Opening Hours                                     117%        80%         37%            317
      Customer
                   Customer Satisfaction                                                  95%         90%         5%            523

   Financial targets reflect the equivalent performance of the control group (2967 Mains and 5030 Locals)

    603 live branches within the 1489 contracts signed - April 2013
     0-12 Months (May 12 - April 13) - 412
     12-24 Months (May 11-April 12) - 116
     > 24 Months (prior to May 2011) - 75
       Note: The scorecard includes 38 branches of the 116 (12-24 months) and 1 branch of the 75 (24-36 months).
             Branches with a break in customer session or branches that had previously received overscale payments have been excluded.




      Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                 16th July 2013                                                                                            Page 14 of 18
                                                                              POL00099210
                                                                         POL00099210



                                        Strictly Confidential




Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day             16th July 2013   Page 15 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210




                                                                                                                 Strictly Confidential
Network Transformation Scorecard Metrk efinitionsRationale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IP0571
May 2013            Reporting Prior Months data (one month in arrears)                                                                                                                                                                             nFFlr        ;



                                      Key Performance Indicators                                                                   Metric                                                                                   Rationale


                    MAINS
                    Converted> 12 months                                                                                   Source: NTP database                                                                       Source: NTP database

                    Finance Approved Investment per Mains £000                          Average investment spend approved for number of branches                                       Recognise investment spend
                    Total Income: Post vs Pre Conversion
                               Branches live 12-24 months                              Total Variable Income - Source: Credence*                                                       Review impact on POL income as a result of converting to new models
                L              Branches live 24-36 months                               Current month vs same period pre conversion
           PO       Focus Income: Post vs Pre Conversion

                               Branches live 12-24 months                              Total Focus Income - Source: Credence*                                                          Review impact on POL focus income to assess the sales model post conversion

                               Branches live 24-36 months                               Current month vs same period pre conversion




                                                                                       I
                                                                                         otal agents remuneration excluding overscale and NI,NAT.       Current month vs same period
                    Agents Remuneration: Post vs Pre Conversion                                                                                                                        Assess the impact on income for our agents as a result of POL business
                                                                                         re conversion
        Agent
                    Operator Feedback on Retail Sa',es aerformance                       ource: Operator survey issued to branches 2 months after opening starting in Aug 12           Indicative retail performance for Agents


                    Average Increase in Opening Hours                                   Based on systems data of open hours                                                            Assess the impact of extended hours for our customers
      Customer
                    Customer Satisfaction                                               Exit interviews conducted by research company Brass at recently transformed branches           Indication of customer experience


                    LOCALS
                    Converted 12 Months                                                                          Branches converted greater than 12 months                                                Branches converted greater than 12 months

                    Finance Approved Investment per Local £000                         Average investment spend approved for number of branches                                        Assessment of investment spend

                    Total Income: Post vs Pre Conversion
           PQ L                Branches live 12-24 months                              Total Variable Income - Source: Credence*                                                       Review impact on POL income as a result of converting to new models
                               Branches live 24-36 months                               Current month vs same period pre conversion


                    Annualised Agents Fixed Pay savings per conversion £000             Fixed pay saving per branch vs the strategic plan assumptions                                  Assess the savings to POL


                    Customer Sessions 12- 24 months                                     Source: MI Database                                                                            Measurement of footfall for an Agent

        Agent       Customer Sessions 24- 36 months

                    Operator Feedback on Retail Sales Performance                       Source: Operator survey issued to branches 2 months after opening starting in Aug 12           Assess impact of increased revenue from retail


                    Average Increase in Opening Hours                                   Based on systems data of open hours                                                            Assess the impact of extended hours for our customers
      Customer
                    Customer Satisfaction                                               Exit interviews conducted by research company Brass at recently transformed brarches           Indication of customer experience


                    * Same income factor used for each year. Performance is impacted by sales and product mix.




     Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                 16th July 2013                                                                                                             Page 16 of 18
                                                                                                                              P0L00099210
                                                                                                                         POL00099210


                                                     Strictly Confidential


May 2013
                                                          YTD                               Full Year

     £m                                    Actual       Budget        Variance   Forecast     Budget    Variance

     Operating Profit                       7.6           13.9           (6.3)    102.0       102.0     (102.0)
     Depreciation                            0.1           0.2           (0.1)       0.9         0.9      (0.9)
     Working Capital                       (.36.6)       (37..5)         (5.1)     (40.9)      (40.9)     40.9
     Client Balances                       (28.9)        (68.4)          39.5      (44.4)      (44.4)     44.4
     Network Cash                          (36.4)        (40.4)           4.0      114.6       114.6    (114.6)
     Dividends                              (4.6)         (5.2)           0.6       (4.5)       (4.5)      4.5
     Capital Expenditure                    (6.3)        (15.6)           9.3     (167.5)     (167.5)    167.5
     Government funding                    215.0         215.0           0.0       215.0       215.0    (215.0)
     NSP in advance                        165.4         165.4           0.0         0.0         0.0      0.0
     Exceptional Items                     (16.3)        (27.6)          11.3     (198.8)     (198.8)    198.8
     Pensions                                0.7           0.4            0.3        0.0         0.0      0.0
     Proceeds from asset sales               2.5           0.0            2.5        0.0         0.0      0.0

     Free cashflow before interest, tax    262.2         206.2           56.0     (23.6)      (23.6)      23.6
                                                                                   0.0
     Interest                               0.1           (1.0)          1.1       (5.0)       (5.0)       5.0
     Tax                                    0.0            0.0           0.0       10.3        10.3      (10.3)
     Free Cashflow                         262.3         205.2           57.1     (18.3)       (18.3)    18.3




   Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                       16th July 2013                                      Page 17 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210



                                                                                                   Strictly Confidential
Income By Product Groups & Pillar
                                                                                                         All close to budget, bar Mails which is £3.1m adverse.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OST
May 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FII
                                                                                                  Other income is £1.1m adverse a"d relates to the income challenge.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                  Current Month                         Prior Year                    Year to date                    Prior Year                    Full Year              Prior Year
                   Net Income £m                                                                  Period      Month (Yr                                                      YTD (Yr     Current                            2012/13
                                                        Actuals     Budget      Variance                                    Actuals     Budget Variance YTD Actual                                  Budget Variance
                                                                                                  Actual         On Yr)                                                       On Yr)     Forecast                            Outturn
Parcelforce                                               1.7         1.8           (0.1)            1.3           0.4         3.8        3.8            0.0       2.9          0.9         30.7      30.7       0             19.9
Special Delivery                                          4.0         3.7             0.3            4.1          (0.1)        8.9        8.5            0.3       9.0         .0.1)        50.0      50.0       0             53.2
International Priority & Standard                        2.39         2.6           (0.3)           2.53         (0.13)       5.42        6.4           (1.0)     5.88        (0.6)        37.28      37.3       0             34.9
Stamps (1st & 2nd Class plus other stamps)                1.9         0.7            1.2             1.9           0.0         4.2        4.5           (0.3)     10.2         (5.4)        33.8      33.8       0             35.2
Labels (1st & 2nd Class)                                 7.15         7.2           (0.0)           7.63         (0.48)      16.06       16.9           (0.8)    17.66        (1 t 9)      99.99     100.0       0            100.2
RM Mail Fixed                                             4.3         4.3             0              3.8           0.5         9.7        9.7            0         9,8         (0.1)        56.0      56.0       0             57.9
Retail & Lottery                                          3.0         3.7           (0.7)            3.0          (0.0)        7.7        8.3           (0.6)      6.8          0.8         51.6      51.6       0             45.7
Mails Other                                               3.9         4.0           i01',            4.1           02`i                   9.1           (0 %i      92           0'=)?       55.3      55.3       0             570
~atat.MailSra'vic~s                          ~,:;::..    2&.4 :. ... X8,1, °`   ;,.. 4+.2 .. . .. ..28.7►. ,.. ., a:1 _ .. .. 6k.1 ,.. . 67,2. ,,. : .. ~.~   .. .7145 -..    (7.4 . .. ;..A14,b . ..,y14.b.- .:.0 . ... ,.. .G©6.Q.. .

 Motoring Services                                        1.1         1.1          0.0          2.2         (1,1)           2.8       3.3        (0.5)         6.4          3 6)        21.4      21.4            0             31.8
 Card Account                                             5.3         3.9          1.4          5.5         (0.2)          10.4      10.4        (0.0)        11.8         (1.3)        59.4      59.4           0.0            65.8
 Check and Send                                           2.3         2.0          0.3          2.2           0.1           5.3       4.5         0.8          4.5          0.8         20.4      20.4            0             21.4
 AEI (DVLA & UKBA)                                        0.6         0.5          0.1          0.6         (0.0)           1.5       1.2         0.2          1.5          0 0)         7.9       7.9          (0.0)           10.1
 Other Government Services                                06          0.6          0.0          0.2           0.3           0.9       1.5        (0.5)         0.8          01           6.7       6.7           0.0             4.2
lotat Government Services ;                               9.8         8.0          1.8         10.7         (0(,9)         20,9      20.9        (0.0)        24.9         (4.01       115.9     115.9          (U. a)         133.2
 Bill Payment Services Direct                             0.7         0.8         (01)          0.9         (0.2)           1.9       1.8         0.1          2.0         (0.1)        11.1      11.1            0             11.8
 Bill Payment Services Reseller                           1.9         1.9         (O.0)        2.33        (0.41)          4.55      4.19        0.36          4.8         (0.3)        24.9      24.9            0             27.6
 Postal Orders                                            1.5         1.4          0.2          1.8         (0.2)           3.6       3.7        (0.0)         4.1         (0.4)        20.2      20.2            0             23.1
 Payment Services                                        0.34         0.3          0.1         0.45        (0.12)          0.89      1.1         (0.2)         0.9         (0.0)         8.9       8.9          (0.0)            6.3
 Personal Banking Clients                                1.71         1.8         (0.1)        2.00        (0.29)          4.69       4.2         0.5          4.7          0.0         25.4      25.4           0.0            26.4
 DWP Exceptions                                         (0.18)        0.1         (0.2)        0.34        (0.51)          0.02       0.1        (0.1)         0.8         (0.8)         0.1       0.1           0               3.9
 Business Banking                                        2.01         1.9          0.1         2.77        (0.76)          3.75       4.6        (0.8)         6.0         (2.3)        26.6      26.6            0             34.8
 ATM                                                     2.46         2.2          0.3         2.59        (0.13)          5.31       5.5        (0.2)         5.1          0.2         33.2      33.2            0             30.2
 PFS-Savings                                             3.97         3.7          0.2         1.04          2.93          8.22       7.5         0.7          2.1          6.1         50.5      50.5            0             40.6
 PFS-Insurance                                           0.44         0.5         (0.0)        0.29          0.16          1.47      1.1          0.4          0.7          0.7          6.7       6.7            0              5.3
 PFS-Lending                                             0.65         0.2          0.5         0.20          0.45          0.43       0.4         0.0          0.3          0.1          4.9       4.9            0              4.7
 Bureau (excl profit share)                              2.06         2.0          0.1         2.61        (0.55)          4.12       3.9         0.2          4.5         (0.4)        23.8      23.8            0             23.4
Travel Insurance                                         0.74         0.9         (0.2)        1.06        (0.32)          1 .85     1.8          0.0          1.8          0.1         10.1      10.1            0             10.1
 MoneyGram                                               1.19         1.2         (0.0)        1.14          0.05          2.70       2.7         0.0          2.4          0.3         16.6      16.6            0             15.4
 NS&I                                                    0.29         0.3         (0.0)        1.00        (0.71)          0.70       0.7        (0.0)         2.3         (1.6)         3.9       3.9            0             13.3
 Other                                                   0.21         0.8         (0.6)        0.21          0.0           0.42       1.8        (1 4)         0.4          0.0         10.4      10.4            0              25
total Financial Services                                 20.1        19.9 ;                                 (0 6)                      ~.....: .,029::        k2°9          1.7        277.1G" ' `2774           Q.0......     279.6
 Other Income                                             0.4         1.0         (0.6)         0.7      ;;(0.3)           1.1       2.2         (1.1)         1.9            :;          2.5                   {0.0}           -0
 Supply Chain                                             2.3         2.3         (O.0)         2.4                        4.9       4.9         (0.0)         5.3         (0.5)        29.2      29.2           0              30.0
                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                          !LAW                         '   t1 i     1            1 1           ' 1




       Period 2 Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                 16th July 2013                                                                                              Page 18 of 18
                                                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                                                    POL00099210



                                                                Strictly Confidential
                                                                                                            ! POST
                                                                                                             LOFFICE
                                                                                          iEn's




                                                For Queries & Comments Contact : Sarah Hall or Kam Bassra




Period 3 (Flash) Performance Pack - Chris Day                             16h July 2013                        Page 1 of 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00099210




                                                                                                                           Strictly Confidential
Profit & Loss Statement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POST
June 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OFFICE

                                                                     Current Month                 Prior Year Period                   Year to Date                    Prior Year YTO                     Full Year                      Prior Year
                                                                                                                                                                                           Current
fm                                                          Actual      Budget       Variance     Actual      Variance       Actual       Budget        Variance       Actual    Variance                 Budget       Variance             Outturn
                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecast
External Income                                              51.3        52.3         (1.0)        51.7          (0.4)      156.8         158.8                       160.1        (3.3)    643.3           643.3         R     is           651.3
Interbusiness Income                                         25.7        27.7         (2.0)        24.8           0.9         84.3          89.2                        90.0       (5.7)    368.9          368.9                             372.3
TOTAL GROSS INCOME                                          77.0        80.0          (3.0)        76.5          0.5         241.0         248.0                       250.1       (9.0)  1,012.2         1,012.2                    4     1,023.6
Cost of Sales                                                (9.1)       ;8.9)        (0.3)        (8.4)         (0.7)       (28.6)        (28.1)                      (28.1)      (0.5)   (112.2)         (112.2;                          (121.2)
TOTAL NET INCOME                                            67.9        71.1          (3.2)        68.1          (0.2)       212.4         219.9                       221.9       (9.5)    900.0          900.0                  a          902.4
Staff Costs                                                 (21.4)      ( e 7)        (0.7)       (20.0)         (1.4)       (66.2)        (64.8)                      (62.9)      (3.2)   (2561)          (2561)               eGi         (2.57,4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a:
Agents Costs                                                ( + '1             )       2.7        (36.1)         1.4        (111.3)       (119.9)         8(z         (120.3)       9.1    (480.0)         (480 0)               1t.        (4781)
Non-Staff Costs                                             (1 )        (1 2)          4.0         11.8)         1.6         (3T 7)        (39.7)         "0"          (36.0)      (1.7)   (160.0)         (160.0)                          (1623)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a         a            6)
                   p
Interbusiness Expenditure                                   (v '?             )        0.2         (5.3)        (1.0)       ( C5)          (~1.1)         O6't         (19.9)      (0.6)    183.9)          (834)         -I~                (830,
Depreciation                                                 (IiD)        0 ^_         0.1         (0.2)          0.1         (0 11         (0.3)         02; C         (0.2)       0.1      (0.9)           (0.9)              1 ; i'         0.4)
Total Expenditure (pre POOC)                                (72.6)      (78,8)         6.2        (73.3)         0.7        (235.7)       (245.8)        10.i.        (239.5)       3.8    (980.8)        (980.8)         I         t'      (981.8)
FRES - Share Of Operating Profits                             4.4         34          1.0           3.7           0.7          9.0           8.6          04             9.0        0.0      31.5            31.5              l, , i'        31.9
EBIT Pre Overhead Allocations                                (0.3)                     4.0         (1.5)         1.2         (14.3)        (17.3)         30            (8.5)      (5.7)    (49.3)          (493)         )', a 3 (.          a / ti)
Group Overhead allocations                                                             0.0          "?)           0.1          3,/'         ( (           0.0            3?)        03      I`_3.8)         (138)                3, -
EBIT - BAU.;              .;. -                             (1.5)         5.4)        4.0. . .     (2.8)         1.3         (17.7)        (20.3)         3.0          (12:3)      (541     (63-0)         (63.0)           0.0              (62.4)
C__ c>f'ro.ect costs (0000)                                                                                      ' S                                                   ;.1'                                                 00
COLT - Post Project Costs                                   (2.3)        (9.6)        6.8         (5 6)          2.8        (25.8)           (30.2)      0,4          (23:4)         (6:4)    (98.0)       (98.0)           0.0                  8)
hetworkPayment                                              _5 .         15.4         DC          15.8             JS`       50.0              500        0,0           5'S           i'_5i   1CG.0        2t'              00               210.0
EBIT pre exceptionals;:Items                                12.5          5.8         6.8         10,2           2.3         2Q.2             19.8        0.4           28.1          ( .9)   3172.17     102.0,            0.0              94.2
 merest                                                      0.0          0.0         00           03             0 3`        10               (1.0)      2.0                i        12       (5.0)        (5.0)           GO
Impairment                                                  (5.                        2.6         (4.2)         (0.9:      (11.4)           (23.3)      119           {'0 4)          9.0    (167.5)     (167 5)           00                76.n)
Exceptionals & Redundancy & Severance Costs                 (>, CJ         / 9}        2.1         (1.7)        (34.0(      (22.1)            (34.91.    12,3                        (16.2)   (189.4)     (189.4)           0 (1              r7.0)
Government Grant Utilisation                                 40.4        48.8         (3.4)         6.0         34.4         64.8               32                     15.'           49.7    316.9        3169             00                98.2
Profit/('' oss) On Asset Sale                                 0.0        0.0          0.0          0.0            0.0         2.5               00        2'S           00             2.5      0.0          C.0            00               ;277;
Colleague Share/ Business Transformation Payments            (C '1        0.0         (0.7)         0.0          (3.7)        0.0               G.0       00            00             0.0      0.0          0.0            30                (3.3)
Total Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                              11.5         9.0          2.5         10.6           0.9         55.0              33.8      21.3          16,8          38.3      57.0        57;0             0.0               7.0

 Period vs. Budget                                          YTO vs. Budget                                                                                      YTO vs. Prior Year
 Operating profit (EBIT) of £12.5m was £6.8m favourable      Operating profit (EBIT) of £20.2m was £0.4m favourable to budget.                                  Operating profit (EBIT) of £20.2m was £7.9m adverse to prior year
 to budget.
                                                            BAU variance of £3.Om favourable was mainly due to:                                                 Like for like adverse variance of 55.4m was mainly due to:
 BAU was £4.0w favourable:                                  • Lower income of £7.5m,                                                                            • Lower net income of £9.5m primarily due Mails and Government Services,
 • Lower income of £3.2m,                                   • Higher staff cost of £1.4w mainly due to bonus payments which are under investigation;              (last year included high stamp sales in period I ahead of the price rise);
 • Higher staff costs of £0.7m mainly due to higher than    More than offset by                                                                                 • Higher staff cost of £3.2m due to increased pension charges and increased
   expected bonus payments in the month (still under        • Lower agents costs of £8.6m due to; £4m of this is related to lower sales income. The               headcount and
   investigation)                                             remainder is made of smaller variances related to some timing and recovered VAT from              • Higher non staff costs of £1.7w due higher IT and marketing costs.
 More than offset by:                                         2012/13 greater than accrued,                                                                     Offset by
 • Lower Agents costs mainly due to reduced income;         • Lcve- non staff costs of £2.Om as favourable timing variances are outweighing an                  • Lower agents costs of £9.1m mainly due lower sales volumes.
 • Lower non staff costs of £4.0m mainly due timing           underlying adverse variance in IT costs, and
   (unwinds adverse variance in period 2).                  • Lower B and overhead allocations of £0.6m.
                                                                                                                                                                Non like for like adverse variance of £2.5m was due to:
 One-off variance of £2.8m favourable - relates to timing   One-off variance of £2.6m adverse was due to:                                                       • Lower Network payment of £1.5m, and
 of project spend.                                          • Higher project costs, specifically Brand related costs delayed from 2012-13.                      • Higher project costs of £1.0m.

 Below EBIT                                                 Below EBIT                                                                                          Below EBIT
 Impairments were favourable due to slower progress         The ma:- variance was due to the slower pace of capital spend and operating exceptionals,           2012/13 capital expenditure included £11m property transfers from Group. NT
 than plan on NTP.                                          i-cluding agents compensation, compared to budget. Government grant utilisation follows this        exceptionals including compensation were ahead of the equivalent pace in
                                                            trend, but also included utilisation against the remaining 2012/13 exceptional costs. The           2012/13. 2013/14 grant utilisation includes £30m against 2012/13 exceptional
                                                            profit on sale related to the lease surrender of Midway House.                                      costs not covered by the 2012/13 grant.




        Period 3 (Flash) Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                 16h July 2013                                                                                                       Page 2 of 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POL00099210




                                                                                                                                               Strictly Confidential
Net Income By Pillar vs Budget
June 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OFFICE

                                         Period                            Prior Year Period                                 Year to Date                               Prior Year YTD                         Full Year                               Prior Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                Current
Net Income (£m)            Actual        Budget          Variance        Actual          Variance              Actual            Budget          Variance         Actual         Variance         r             Budget            Variance       Outturrl      Variance
Mails & Retail              28.4           32.1           (3.7)           28.5               (0.1)             92.5               99.2             (6.8)           100.0           (7.5)         414.6            414.6             0             404.0           10.7
Financial Services          22.8           22.2            0.6            21.6                1.2              67.5               67.1              0.4             64.5            3.0          277.4            277.4             0.0           279.6           (2.1)
Government Services          9.9            9.8            0.1            11.2               (14)              30.7               30.7              0.0             36.2           (5.4)         115.9            115.9            (0.0)          133.2          (1 4)
Telephony                    4.0            3              0.1             3.9                0.1              12.9               12.7              0.2            11.2             1.7           50.4             50.4             0.0            45.0            5.4
Other                        2.8            3.1           (0.3)            2.8               (0.0)              8.8               10.1             (1.4)           10.0            (1.2)          41.7             41.7            (0.0)           40.7            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1111             '111                1           •1


                                Mails & Retail Services                                                                                                                  Financial Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pillar Performance vs YTD Budget
  £m
                0.2                                                                                                     £m                                                                                                                         Mails & Retail Services - (£6.8m)Adv I
                                                                                                                                                       0.8             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lot Class Labels - (£2.1m) adv driven by lower volumes following
                                                                                                                                     1.7                               iit                                                                         the change in parcel pricing.
                                                            (1-3)                                                                                                                (0-2)       (0.3)        1n a1                                    International - (£1.5m)adv due partly to lower volumes and
                                                                          (1.5)                                                                                                                                                                    partly to the budget being stretching - £1m higher than prior year
                                                                                     (2.2)                                                                                                                                                         actual.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Other Mails - (£1.3m) adv due primarily to lower than planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   volumes across the mails product range.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lottery- (£1.2m) adv due primarily to lower than planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   volumes. The new terminals are not yet generating the expected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   income growth.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Financial Services - £0.4m Fax
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PFS- £1.7mfavdriven by savings products (£0.6m fav),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    specifically Growth Bonds, insurance products (0.6m fav) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lending (£0.4m fav) specifically mortgages.
    2013-14   Special  Stamps (1st   PFW      Petaii &    Otherty ofs icfemat onai Labels (153 £     2013-14                                                                                                                                        Banking Services - £O.8m fav driven by higher personal
    YTD Net   Delivery &2nd Class)             Lottery                              2nd Gass)        YTD Net                                                                                                                                        withdrawal volumes and higher business banking volumes - both
    Income                                                                                           income        2013-14 YTD           PFS         Banking     BO Payment      ATMs       Payment       Trave§          Other    2013-14 YTD      are a catch up as actual volume data was higher than estimates
    Budget                                                                                           Actual         Net income                       Services                               Services   Services (inc                Net €name       used.
                                                                                                                        Budget                                                                          MoneyGram)                    Actual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bill Payment - £0.6m fav driven by lower decline than planned.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Offset by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other- (£1.4m) adv due to unassigned income targets including
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sales Effectiveness still to be allocated to products.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Travel - (£0.3m) adv due to lower pricing mix for Bureau, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    volumes are as expected.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Payment Services - (0.3m) adv driven by lower Gift voucher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    volumes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ATMs - (£0.2m) adv driven by lower volumes than planned, but
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    higher than prior year.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Government Services - Flat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Check & Send - £0.9m fav - Higher than planned volumes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ID services - £O.2m fav - Higher than planned volumes, possibly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    due to application backlog reducing.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Offset by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Motoring - £0.2m adv - Lower than planned volumes in line with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    latest DVLA forecasts.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gov. Services Other - £O.8m adv driven by smaller variances,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    including the target for new ID related income,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Telephony Services - £0.2m Fav
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Homephone - £O.2m fav - due to higher than planned customer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    numbers at 473k. above plan by 7k.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other - (£1.4m) Adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    This relates to the unassigned income stretch.



        Period 3 (Flash) Performance Pack - Chris Day                                                                                                      16h July 2013                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 3
                                                                                                      POL00099210
                                                                                                POL00099210




                                      Strictly Confidential




                                   Chief Executive's Report




     There have now been 7 strikes since the dispute with the CWU started just over 3 months
     ago, which compares with 13 strikes over a 5 month period during the last industrial action
     in 2007. The percentage of staff on strike continues to fall (61% for 20 June and 58% for
     29 June, compared to a peak of 72%). We chose not to deploy managers on either
     occasion but did nonetheless manage to keep over half of Crown branches open. The
     strike action continues to garner very limited media coverage at the national level, with just
     2 reports on 29 June and none on the 20 June.
     We are continuing to monitor the financial and service impacts of the strikes. While there
     is typically a dip in the levels of customer satisfaction with queuing times in the Crowns on
     strike days (from 83% to 63%), overall customer satisfaction levels have held up strongly
     at around 86%. The net financial impact is also positive in the short-term, with the
     reduction in Crown income more than offset by the wage savings and growth in nearby
     agency income. However, clearly we need to remain watchful of the potential for longer-
     term adverse income impacts which could undermine the breakeven target. We are also
     developing detailed contingency plans to ensure we are ready to cope with strikes during
     the summer (when resourcing would be stretched by staff holidays) and over the busy
     Christmas period, or alternatively if the supply chain also went out on strike. Our
     conclusion is that such scenarios are manageable but not without risk and some degree of
     customer detriment.
     Taking these considerations into account, our strategy at this stage remains focussed on
     implementing the CTP while redoubling our communications to employees to increase
     buy-in and counteract the CWU's messaging. However, given the risks of prolonged strike
     action, in parallel we are also reviewing the pros and cons of alternative options to resolve
     the dispute. The CWU have informally indicated that they would like to start negotiations
     afresh, and we have responded by saying that we would be open to discussing alternative
     approaches provided they are prepared to take their existing asks off the table which are
     incompatible with delivering the breakeven requirement. We will update the Board on the
     latest position next week.
     In relation to managers' pay, we resumed talks with the CMA on 3 July following a new
     counter proposal from Brian Scott, which would entail consolidating a proportion of the
     lump sum payments with effect from April 2015. While Brian is looking for us to make an
     unconditional commitment, clearly any offer of this kind would have to be consistent with
     the maintenance of profitability in the Crowns. We are currently modelling the costs and
     wider impacts ahead of a further meeting on 15 July, and will update the Board next week.
 •   In terms of the CTP itself, we have informed all 292 retained branches of when they will be
     visited as part of the modernisation programme. The aim is to have 45 branches
     completed before Christmas and 117 by the end of 2013/14. We have already started
     visiting the earliest waves of branches in order to consult staff on the proposed designs to
     seek their input. In parallel, the design and customer journey for the new self-service
     equipment ('Post & Go') are now finalised and ready for pilot later in 2013.

CEO Report                              Paula Vennells                                 Page 1 of 5
July 2013                                  8 July 2013
                                                                                                      POL00099210
                                                                                                POL00099210




                                      Strictly Confidential



     Our programme of 20 Vision events' across the country is nearly complete. This is a
     crucial part of our engagement plans, involving staff from every branch in interactive
     sessions on topics such as the branch redesigns, our plans for financial services growth
     and the new Crown Leadership Excellence Programme for managers. Feedback so far
     has been extremely positive with 96% of attendees saying the event has given them a
     better understanding of the Post Office vision.
     We have received 305 expressions of interest covering 69 of the 70 branches advertised
     for franchising, which we are now evaluating to identify our preferred partners. Work is
     ongoing to find potential partners for the one remaining branch.




     The programme has finished the first quarter 54 branches ahead of target at 1,600
     contracts signed. Most of these additional branches have come from independent
     conversions to mains, illustrating the continuing appeal of the model to sub-postmasters.
     No multiple contracts were expected in the first quarter after the large batches signed at
     the very end of last year. New operator contracts are broadly in line with target. The
     programme remains on track to reach 3,000 contracts signed by March 2014.
     As set out in the paper discussed with the Board on 22 June, we are actively progressing
     branch openings for all of the contacts that have been signed, but it is taking time for
     agents to secure available builders and prepare for their works. The programme mid-point
     forecast remains 1,950 branches open by year end. 'Beat rates' are expected to remain
     fairly steady through July and August at just over 20 per week, with an increase in
     September to over 30 as the number of multiple openings increases, followed by further
     increases in Q4. We are confident that we have the capacity to open branches when all
     parties are ready, with 37 branches opened in the last week of June.




     We are currently pursuing two main strands of activity with RM to seek to recover the
     parcels volumes lost as a result of the April tariff change. Firstly we have proposed an
     extended shoe box sized template to replace the current cube shaped exception to the
     medium parcel template, which would increase the number of items accepted as small
     parcels and thereby substantially reduce the price (by up to 50%) for customers who fall
     into this bracket. RM have indicated that they should be in a position to approve this
     change within the next two weeks with a view to announcing it by the end of July.
     Secondly we are working with RM on a price discount of up to 20% on certain formats
     through the Drop & Go service, which we are aiming to implement alongside the roll-out of
     the service to the entire network on 29 July. We are also investigating with RM what
     changes could be made to Drop & Go to enable a franking style permanent discount,
     which would require regulatory approval and is therefore unlikely to be achievable until
     autumn 2013 at the earliest.
 •   Good progress is being made with RM in lining up retailers to use our new click and
     collect service. Of particular note is the fact that MetaPack (a widely used delivery
     management intermediary) is now close to completing the platform required to enable
     their clients to link up with the service, opening up access to a wide range of retailers with
CEO Report                             Paula Vennells                                  Page 2 of 5
July 2013                                 8 July 2013
                                                                                                   POL00099210
                                                                                             POL00099210




                                     Strictly Confidential



    minimal integration work required on their part. Discussions are currently underway via
    RM with a number of major clients who we are aiming to sign-up over the coming months,
    including Wiggle, Asos, Avon, Talk Talk, River Island, Debenhams, Dixons, Pro direct
    soccer, Thorntons and Ideal Home Shopping. Others are looking more likely for a post-
    Christmas launch, including Marks and Spencer, eBay and Shop Direct Group.
    Discussions with Amazon are still ongoing, although we are unclear of their intentions at
    this stage as they are currently experimenting with their own delivery solutions and locker
    box locations.
    The latest results from June show that segregation performance has been clearly
    impacted by the NFSP action encouraging branches to stop segregating, with mixed bag
    down by 8.4 percentage points (ppt) to 46.8%, 1st class down 4.5 ppt to 68.3% and 2nd
    class down by 3.2% to 68.8% compared with the previous month. However, we have had
    more constructive discussions with the NFSP over recent weeks around the possible re-
    instatement of the incentive payment to sub-postmasters, with the NFSP now accepting
    the important principle that this needs to be directly linked to performance going forwards.
    Further work is underway with the aim of introducing a new scheme by October,
    dependent on the outputs of the joint RM/PO Segregation Working Group, which is
    defining the revised structure of segregation requirements and measurement. That group
    has now developed a simplified segregation proposal which is being trialled in July within
    two mail centre catchment areas. It is also looking at potential improvements to the
    sampling regime and mail bag handover process.


4. Government services
     We are continuing to engage DWP on options to extend the POca contract beyond 2015,
     and have now received a clearer signal that they accept that some continuation beyond
     that point will be necessary for both operational and political reasons. We are currently
     undertaking detailed customer research and segmentation analysis which will enable us to
     present well-developed and evidenced proposals to DWP in August. The ExCo discussed
     an early draft of these proposals in June, reaching the conclusion that while there are
     obvious downside risks the volumes and financial projections contained in our strategic
     plan remain credible as a planning assumption.
     In parallel we are also re-engaging with the DWP team leading the Universal Credit
     programme, in particular through the new Programme Director Howard Shiplee. He has
     accepted an invitation to visit the model office to see our identity management and
     assisted digital capabi lities in operation.
     On 1 June we went live with the extended range of services for DVLA offering six new
     transaction types such as HGV taxation, changes of taxation class and issuing duplicate
     tax discs. On 3 July we also launched in 13 London Crown branches a new priority check
     and send service for passports which guarantees the passport will be issued within 7
     days. This is the first new channel that HM Passport Office has introduced since 1992.




CEO Report                            Paula Vennells                                Page 3 of 5
July 2013                                8 July 2013
                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                              POL00099210




                                      Strictly Confidential




     The migration of our telecoms services from BT Wholesale to Fujitsu continues to
     progress according to plan. Testing and call centre training is well advanced and a
     number of live services are now in place in the new environment. New orders will start to
     be placed against the platform from 22 July and the migration of the existing base is
     scheduled to take place by the end of September.
     We are close to being in a position to enter into exclusive negotiations with our preferred
     supplier for mobile services and intend to enter into contractual negotiations in the next
     fortnight. The technical solution looks strong and provides us with the opportunity to
     deliver an integrated telecoms solution to support the development of attractive and cost
     effective strong customer value propositions.
     Work is also progressing on our plans to enter the energy market. ExCo reviewed the full
     range of market entry options in June reaching the conclusion that we should look to
     develop a white label branded energy solution in the short term as this provides the best
     strategic fit. This would allow us to enter the market quickly, at low cost and with limited
     risk. However we will be seeking a flexible agreement with our chosen partner that would
     allow the commercial model to evolve as we grew. We are now in a further phase of
     market engagement with the aim of identifying a preferred partner towards the end of the
     summer and launching the service in early 21014/15.


6. Marketing
     The latest brand metric results show two main performance themes. Following the positive
     progression over recent months, the net promoter score (NPS) has dropped from 7 to -7.
     This is overwhelmingly driven by the Royal Mail price increase, although could also be
     partly affected by the industrial action in the Crowns. Experience from previous years is
     that the NPS quickly returns to the pre-change levels, but nonetheless we are developing
     a marketing plan to address this drop in tandem with the product developments outlined in
     section 3 above. 'Easy to do business with' meanwhile shows strong performance with a
     12 month rolling average at 46% (compared with 41% a year ago), driven in particular by
     the positive impact of the network and crown transformation programmes and the `stress
     free' focus of the mortgage brand campaign.
     Since 20 June and throughout the summer period all of our marketing channels will be
     focussed on the Post Office Travel Essentials range, under the headline 'Get ready for
     your holiday at the Post Office'. The campaign is focused on Travel Money, Travel
     Insurance and Passport Check and Send but also incorporates the Credit Card travel
     proposition. Early indications are that the campaign is delivering strong response rates
     and performance in all of these product areas has been significantly above target at the
     start of these crucial weeks.




CEO Report                             Paula Vennells                                Page 4 of 5
July 2013                                 8 July 2013
                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                          POL00099210




                                    Strictly Confidential




    Formal consultation with employees on the proposed changes to the pension scheme was
    launched on 21 June and is due to close on 25 August. Discussions are ongoing in
    parallel with the CMA who have reviewed the proposals in significant detail, although at
    this stage their formal position is that they do not support the changes. We met with the
    CWU in June, although they have likewise stated that they do not support the proposals
    within either Post Office or the Royal Mai l.
    The Regulator has now been informed by the Trustee of the delay to the valuation with a
    target date of 30 September. Assuming the proposal proceeds following consultation, the
    detailed implementation work such as systems configuration is on track to implement the
    changes from next April.




CEO Report                           Paula Vennells                              Page 5 of 5
July 2013                               8 July 2013
                                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                                           POL00099210



                                                            1




              a•   -



The purpose of this paper is to:

       1.1         brief the Board on planned changes to the structure of the wider Group to
                   facilitate an IPO of Royal Mai l Group Ltd ("RMG");

       1.2         brief the Board on the anticipated changes to the operation of Royal Mail
                   Holdings plc ("RMH"); and

       1.3         delegate authority (in the form set out in Appendix 1) to the Company Secretary
                   and/or the HR & Corporate Services Director to approve and execute any
                   documents necessary to remove the references to the RMG Special Share from
                   the Company's Articles of Association.



       IPO Structure
       2.1   The intention is for the IPO listed group to have a non-trading holding company.
             ShEx have directed this will be a new non-trading entity ("Topco") inserted prior
             to listing between RMH and RMG. This is anticipated to occur during September.

       2.2         Topco wil l be initially incorporated as a third direct subsidiary of RMH, alongside
                   RMG and Post Office Limited. Subsequently RN1G wil l be transferred from RMH
                   to Topco. These changes are illustrated below, together with the consequential
                   structures immediately prior to and at IPO. Note that RMH will be renamed in
                   advance of IPO to remove the reference to "Royal Mail".


                                                                   Prior to transfer of RMG

                               RMH




                                                                             At IPO
                                                                Share          New~~~
                                                               scheme         investo rs
                                                            ...........    a.... ......


                                                                                                     PD
                                                                                                     Ltd




             Note: For simplicity the special shares in RMG, RMH and POL held by HMG are not included in the diagrams above.




  Group Structure                          Susan Crichton                     Page 1 of 5      10 July 2013
                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                       POL00099210




                                            •ut;r




                                                    ini
    RMH Board
    2.3  The RMH Board is comprised currently of two directors -- Donald Brydon (RMG
         Chairman) and Alice Perkins (Post Office Limited Chairman) — with Jon Millidge
         as Company Secretary (also RMG Company Secretary).

    2.4    September is viewed as the latest time for the composition of the RMH Board to
           change to remove common directorships with the listed group.

    2.5    ShEx plans for the future RMH Board to be composed of BIS officials acting
           under direction of HMG, with this approach (i.e. acting under such direction)
           entrenched in revised Articles of Association.

    2.6    ShEx does not plan for the function of the future RMH Board to change from now
           i.e. ShEx plans that it will continue to meet only as and when required to
           discharge its necessary duties.

    2.7    The adoption of revised Articles of Association for RMH, as well as changes to
           the RMH Board, name, Company Secretary and registered office, are anticipated
           to occur at or around the same time (i.e. around September).

    Post Office Limited Special Share
    2.8   The Secretary of State currently holds a special share in RMH, RMG and POL.
          The rights attached to the special shares are set out in the respective Articles of
          Association. The RMG Special Share will be redeemed or cancelled as part of
          the steps to execute the insertion of Topco in advance of iPO.

    2.9    The rights attached to the Post Office Limited Special Share include, for
           example, the requirement for prior written consent of the "Special Shareholder"
           for the "adoption of a Strategic Plan or any material variation or amendment of a
           Strategic Plan previously adopted".

    2.10   However, under the current Articles of Association, the rights attached to the
           Post Office Limited Special Share are "exercisable only for such time as the
           Special Shareholder beneficially owns" all three of the special shares. A similar
           provision exists in the Articles of Association for RMH and RMG

    2.11   Accordingly, an amendment is required to Post Office Limited's Articles of
           Association in order for the current rights attached to the Post Office Limited
           Special Share to continue to be exercisable (the RMH articles will be simi larly
           amended). There wi ll no longer be a requirement for the Special Shareholder to
           beneficial ly own any of the other special shares in order to exercise the rights
           attached to the Post Office Limited Special Share. It is proposed to remove any
           other references to the RMG Special Share and the RMH Special Share at the
           same time.



    2.12   POL and RMG (along with a number of RMG's whol ly-owned subsidiaries) are
           currently constituent members of the VAT group of which RMH is the
           representative member. The sale of more than 50% of the shares in either entity
           would generally mean that the entity concerned would no longer fulfil the control
           requirements for VAT grouping and would therefore need to leave the VAT group
           (although there may be ways of retaining control and, thus, VAT grouping,
           through use of alternative shareholdings). It has been agreed between RMG and
           Post Office Limited that, for commercial and pragmatic reasons, RMG wil l retain

Group Structure                  Susan Crichton                Page 2 of 5    10 July 2013
                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                              POL00099210




                                                •ut;r




                                                        ini
           the existing VAT group's registration should the current VAT group structure
           change.

    2.13   To structure this change for VAT purposes, it is proposed TopCo will be
           incorporated under the ownership of RMH and included in the RMH VAT group.
           At the point when TopCo shares are sold, RMG and its subsidiaries within the
           VAT group will remain under the control of TopCo but will no longer be controlled
           by RMH. As a result, TopCo will then be considered to be the controlling body of
           the VAT group (incorporating RMG and its subsidiaries). Consequently, RMH
           and Post Office Limited will cease to qualify as members of the VAT group on
           the basis that the controll ing body will not own 50% or more of the shares in
           either entity. RMH and Post Office Limited will therefore be required to register
           as a new VAT group.

     RMH Support Services

    2.14   It is understood that the intention is to ask Post Office Limited to manage the
           administration and accounting for RMH under the new structure. The fol lowing
           list has been compiled as services that RMG currently provides to RMH:
           •      company secretarial support

           •      accounting services for consolidated management and statutory accounts (as
                  ultimate parent company and a plc there are considerable statutory reporting
                  obl igations)

           •      settlement of invoices to group companies or third parties

           •      management of relationship with external auditors for statutory accounts and
                  consolidation issues (currently Ernst & Young)

           •      corporation tax returns, correspondence and support for payments

           •      tax accounting

           •      VAT filings

           •      employment tax and related support and fil ings for other tax as required

           •      provision of a senior accounting officer service

           •      treasury function (organising payments, management of investment portfolio,
                  ongoing banking and investment support services)

           •      insurance - provision of insurance within existing policies, participation in
                  current broker contract, management of the relationship with brokers,
                  renewal process, responding to insurance queries, management of major
                  loss claims
    2.15   Whilst RMH is not a complex holding company, if Post Office Limited is asked to
           provide these services there will be a resource cost and systems implications
           which will need to be addressed. The scope of the Finance Roadmap Project to
           separate our accounting systems will increase with associated cost and potential
           delay.



Group Structure                      Susan Crichton                  Page 3 of 5   10 July 2013
                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                             POL00099210




                                                •ut;r




                                                        ini
The Board is asked to:
      3.1     note the planned changes to the structure of the wider Group to faci litate an IPO
              of Royal Mail Group Ltd ("RMG");

       3.2    note the anticipated changes to the operation of Royal Mail Holdings plc
              ("RMH");

       3.3    note the additional duties that are likely to become Post Office Limited
              responsibilities and that there will be additional cost as a result; and

       3.4    approve delegation of authority to Alwen Lyons, the Company Secretary and/or
              Susan Crichton, the HR & Corporate Services Director (in the form set out in
              Appendix 1) to approve and execute any documents necessary to remove the
              references to the RMG Special Share and the RMH Special Share in the
              Company's Articles of Association and to do any act or thing required to be done
              by the Company to give full effect to, or in connection with, the actions outlined in
              this board paper.




                                                                                                •




  Group Structure                   Susan Crichton                  Page 4 of 5    10 July 2013
                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                           POL00099210




                                                 •ut;r




                                                         ini
The intention is to delegate authority to Alwen Lyons, the Company Secretary and/or Susan
Crichton, the HR & Corporate Services Director to approve and execute any documents
necessary to remove the references to the RMG Special Share from the Company's articles. In
order to comply with Article 77 of the Company's articles (see below), such authority must be
first delegated to a committee of one or more directors who have the power to sub delegate to
non-directors.

The Board is therefore asked to:

       Approve in accordance with Article 77 of the Company's Articles of Association, the
       delegation of authority to a committee comprising Chris Day, Chief Financial Officer, with
       the power to sub delegate, to approve and execute any documents which are required for,
       ancillary to, or desirable in connection with the removal of the references to the RMG
       Special Share and the RMH Special Share from the Company's Articles of Association,
       such approval in any case to be conclusively evidenced by the execution of the relevant
       document; and

2.     Direct this committee of the Chief Financial Officer to meet and immediately sub delegate
       its authority, without the power to further sub delegate, to a committee comprising of the
       Company Secretary and/or the HR & Corporate Services Director.

The Board may wish to consider amending Article 77 at a future point.

Article 77 — Delegation of the Board's Powers

"The board may delegate any of its powers to any committee consisting of one or more
directors with power to sub delegate. It may also delegate to any managing director or any
director holding any other executive office such of its powers as it considers desirable to be
exercised by him, Any such delegation may be made subject to any conditions the board may
impose, and either collaterally with or to the exclusion of its own powers and may be revoked or
altered. Subject to any such conditions, the proceedings of a committee with two or more
members shall be governed by the articles regulating the proceedings of the board so far as
they are capable of applying."




     Group Structure                  Susan Crichton                Page 5 of 5   10 July 2013
                                                                                           POL00099210
                                                                                         POL00099210



                      Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




                               POST OFFICE LIMITED
                               (Company no. 2154540)
                                  (the Company')




Alice Perkins              Chairman
Neil McCausland            Senior Independent Director
Tim Franklin               Non-Executive Director
Virginia Holmes            Non-Executive Director
Alasdair Marnoch           Non-Executive Director      (items 13/30-13/37)
Susannah Storey            Non-Executive Director      (items 13/30-13/37)
Paula Vennells             Chief Executive Officer     (all items excluding 13/36-13/37)
Chris Day                  Chief Financial Officer     (all items excluding 13/36-13/37)



Alwen Lyons                Company Secretary
Mark Davies                Communications Director                  (item 13/31-13/32)
Sue Barton                 Strategy Director                        (item 13/31-13/35)
Kevin Gilliland            Network and Sales Director               (item 13/33-13/34)
Martin Moran               Commercial Director                      (item 13/38)
Kevin Seller               Head of Government Services              (item 13/38)



                             liiii1i]a1U[IiSJ

                     (a)     A quorum being present, the Chairman opened the meeting.

                     (b)     The CEO updated the Board on the recent challenging NFSP
                             conference at which she and the Minister had spoken and taken
                             questions. She explained that it had been helpful to attend as the
                             specific debate around the network model had challenged the
                             business to produce different solutions for the `small rural' and
                             'urban deprived' branches. The reception had also made it clear
                             that the business needs to find a more constructive way to engage
                             individual subpostmasters.

POLB 13131                   GOVERNMENT RESPONSE                    TO    THE     FUNDING   AND
                             STRATEGY PLAN

                     (a)     The Board agreed the strategy and funding update and the
                             proposed delegated authorities for the Board's Funding Sub-
ACTION: Sue Barton           Committee. It was agreed that delegated authority levels for
                             mutualisation should be added.
                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                     POL00099210



                      Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




ACTION: CEO          (b)   The Board valued the weekly updates sent by the CEO and asked
                           for them to continue.



                     (a)   Mark Davies, Communications Director, presented a paper to the
                           Board setting out the proposed approach for engaging with
                           stakeholders around Post Office Limited's strategy for 2013-2020.
                           The Chairman thanked Mark not only for the excellent media
                           coverage for the new Current Account and the network
                           transformation programme but also for managing the difficult
ACTION:                    messages around the current industrial action. Mark described it as
Mark Davies                a team effort and said that he would pass on the Board's thanks.

                     (b)   The Board asked for a simple crib sheet of 4 or 5 communication
ACTION:                    points.
Mark Davies                The Chairman asked Mark Davies to ensure that any statements
                           were checked to ensure that they were future proof.


                     (c)   The Board endorsed the approach to stakeholder engagement.



                     (a)   The Board received a verbal update from Kevin Gilliland, Network
                           and Sales Director, on the current relationship with the NFSP.

                     (b)   The Board discussed the advantages of direct engagement with
                           individual subpostmasters and the CEO explained that the
ACTION: Kevin              business would be introducing a subpostmaster engagement
 Gilliland                 satisfaction measure this year. The Network and Sales Director
                           was asked to present the detail to the Board when it was avai lable
                           with the timeline for introduction included in the mutual ways of
                           working session at the Board awayday.

                     (c)   The CEO reported her recent positive experience of trade
                           associations and her view that they could have a positive and
                           challenging effect on the business. It was agreed that the proposal
                           of a trade association would be included in the mutualisation
ACTION: Sue Barton         options which would be presented to the Board at their awayday.

 M       al                 •~+       M           + IM      I       4<

                     (a)   Kevin Gi lliland, Network and Sales Director, updated the Board on
                           the current situation in respect of the Crown Transformation
                           Programme and the current industrial action.
                                                                                            POL00099210
                                                                                          POL00099210



                       Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




                      (b)   The Board acknowledged the sensitive nature of the current
                            situation and agreed that it was at a finely balanced stage. They
                            endorsed the strategy of maintaining a firm and consistent position
                            with the CWU on the key points regarding consolidated pay,
                            franchising and the need to make any pay deal conditional on co-
                            operation in delivering transformation to the Crown Network.

                      (c)   The Board supported the view that face to face communication was
                            the most effective way to get the business' messages across and
                            increasing the 'super-briefers' role in the communication.

                      (d)   The Board also endorsed a controlled and strategic approach to
                            sharing information with the CWU, and not supplying individual
                            office P&L accounts whilst the dispute continues.

                            The Board endorsed proceeding with the practical next steps
                            outl ined in the Crown Network — Transformation Programme and
                            Industrial Relations Paper.

POLB 13/35                  ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS/RESULTS OF EXTERNAL
                            AUDIT

                      (a)   The Board received the Annual Report and Financial Statements
                            for the 2012-13 financial year and ancillary documents. Alasdair
                            Marnoch, Chairman of the Audit, Risk and Compliance Committee,
                            reported very positive feedback from the auditors who were
                            complimentary about the controls in place and management
                            capability.

                      (b)   With due regard to their individual duties and liabilities, the Board:

                               •    Approved the approach to Going Concern and agreed the
                                    Going Concern status for Post Office Limited at the full year;

                               •    Agreed that it was appropriate for the Directors of Post
                                    Office Limited to make the undertakings and statements in
                                    the financial statements;

                               •    Confirmed that, as individual directors, so far as they were
                                    aware, there was no relevant audit information of which the
                                    auditor was unaware and that each director had taken all
                                    reasonable steps to make themselves aware of any relevant
                                    audit information and to establish that the auditor was aware
                                    of that information;

                               •    Approved the financial statements;

                               •    Delegated authority for reviewing final amendments and
ACTION: Mark Davies                 completing the Annual Report and Financial Statements on
                                    behalf of Post Office Limited to a Sub-Committee, the
                                    quorum for which to comprise any three of Alice Perkins,
                                                                                     POL00099210
                                                                                   POL00099210



                   Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential



                                Paula Vennells, Chris Day and Alasdair Marnoch. The
                                Board asked that a final paper copy of the full report be
                                circulated to the Board before completion, the Board agreed
                                to review within 24 hours;

                                Authorised Alwen Lyons to sign the Directors' Report and
                                Chris Day and Paula Vennells (or, in either's absence, Alice
                                Perkins) to sign the balance sheet, each acting on behalf of
                                the Board; and

                           •    Approved the Letter of Representation to the auditor and
                                authorise Paula Vennells or Chris Day to sign and issue it
                                on behalf of the Board.

                        The Board agreed the process and timeline for production of the
                  (c)   Report & Accounts as set out in the papers:

                           •    A copy would be sent to BIS on the 21st May
                           •    A copy to the designers on the 22 May
                           •    Sign off by sub-committee and the Chairman by 24 May
                           •    Revised version circulated to the Board approx. 10" June
                                (paper copy)
                           •    Response by 11 th June
                           •    Report published 3'd July


                        The CEO and CFO left the Meeting

POLB 13136              BONUS   PAYMENTS    FOR   THE    YEAR   2012/13
                        (RECOMMENDATION FROM REMUNERATION COMMITTEE)

                  (a)   Neil McCausland, Chairman of the Remuneration Committee
                        informed the Board of the outturn of the 2012/2013 scorecard
                        measures for the Short Term Incentive Plan (STIP) and the Long
                        Term Incentive Plan (LTIP).

                  (b)   The Board noted the outturn of the STIP against the scorecard
                        targets and approved the recommendation of the Remuneration
                        Committee for the STIP payments for the CEO and CFO-

                  (c)   The Board --------------
                                    noted the outturn of the LTIP against the performance
                        conditions and approved the recommendation for the LTIP payment
                        for the CEO.
ACTION: Company   (d)   The Board asked the Company Secretary to seek consent for these
Secretary               payments from the Shareholder Executive as required by the
                        Company's Articles of Association.




                  (a)   Neil McCausland, Chairman of the Remuneration Committee,
                        presented the Board with the Scorecard measures for 201312014
                        for the Short Term Incentive Plan (STIP). He recommended the
                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                POL00099210



                 Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential



                      adoption of a new STIP design for the Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
                      for 2013/2014, to align it with the design of that of the Chief
                      Executive Officer (CEO), albeit with a lower potential.

                (b)   He also informed the Board of the Long Term Incentive Plan (LTIP)
                      performance conditions for the award dated April 2013. He brought
                      to the Board's attention the fact that the framework of the STIP and
                      LTIP design and measures for the CEO and CFO required Special
                      Shareholder approval which would now be sought.

                (c)   The Board discussed the recommendations and noted that the
                      performance measures had hardened with the threshold collar
                      tightening towards the target and the stretch cap becoming more
                      stretching. They discussed the likely outturn and which was thought
                      to be between target and stretch.

                (d)   They were assured that these bonus scorecard measures would be
                      replicated down through the ExCo and throughout the business.

                (e)   The Board

                         •    Accepted the Remuneration Committee's recommendations
                              for the Scorecard Measures subject to STIP for 2013/2014;

                         •    Approved the change to the STIP design for the CFO;

                         •    Accepted the Remuneration Committee's recommendation
                              for the LTIP performance conditions for the award dated
                              April 2013: and

                         •    Noted that the framework for the STIP and LTIP design and
                              measures for the CEO and CFO require Special
                              Shareholder approval .

                      Sarah Storey and Alasdair Marnoch left the meeting.

                      Paula Vennells and Chris Day rejoined the meeting.

i                        i     !                •              ..   .i          ~

                (a)   Martin Moran, Commercial Director, updated the Board on the
                      current position of the Front Office for Government (FOoG)
                      Business and the revised FOoG strategy.

                (b)   The Board supported the scaling back to focus on real prospects
                      but emphasised the need remain alert to wider opportunities
                      especially if they could be positioned as helping government
                      departments during the current funding round.

                (c)   Kevin Seller, Head of Government Services explained that the
                      Government could make better use of the DVLA framework
                      contract and he suggested updating the stakeholder plan to that
ACTION: Kevin
                      effect. This would then be shared with the Chairman and CEO to
Seller                agree how the Board could support the stakeholder engagement.
                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                  POL00099210



                Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




               (d)   The Board noted the revised income forecasts and progress to date
                     and the changes in the FOoG strategy.

POLB 13/39           MINUTES OF PREVIOUS BOARD MEETINGS

               (a)   The minutes of the Board meeting held on 20 March 2013 were
                     approved for signature by the Chairman.

               (b)   The minutes of the Board meeting held on 9 Apri l 2013 were
                     approved for signature by the Chairman.



               (a)   The Board noted the minutes of the Audit, Risk and Compliance
                     Committee meeting held on 13 February 2013.

               (b)   The Board also noted the minutes of the Nominations Committee
                     meeting held on 5 February 2013.

               (c)   The Board noted the minutes of the Pensions Committee meetings
                     held on 4 March and 8 April 2013.

               (d)   The Board also noted the minutes of the Remuneration Committee
                     meeting held on 13 March 2013.

               (e)   It was noted that the minutes of each of the above Committee
                     meetings, provided for information, had been formally approved by
                     the relevant Committee.

.s, ,                               -           VIiI1Iz       .]4i

               (a)   The Status Report, showing matters outstanding from previous
                     Board meetings, was noted.

POLB 13142           CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S REPORT

               (a)   The Board noted the Chief Executive's report and discussed the
                     following specific items:

               (b)   Parcels Tariff
                     The new Parcel prices were already affecting the sales in branch
                     and the Mai ls team are discussing this with RMG to try to negotiate
                     a price discount for drop and go small business customers. The
                     Chairman also reported that this had been a topic at her meeting
                     with Donald Brydon, RMG Chairman, which had been very positive.

               (c)   Current Account
                      The CEO reported a successful first week with the number of
                     accounts opened ahead of target.

                     The Board asked for a note explaining the success criteria on
ACTION: Nick         which the pi lot wil l be evaluated. They also asked if they could have
 Kennett             the opportunity to open their own accounts.
                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                     POL00099210



                 Post Office Limited — Strictly Confidential




                (d)   Horizon
ACTION: Susan         The Board asked for a note to update on the Horizon position with
                      the Second Sight review
 Crichton

POLB 13143            ITEMS FOR NOTING

                (a)   The Board noted the update on various Financial Services matters,
                      including Bank of Ireland (UK) plc capital & liquidity.

                (b)   The Board noted the Health and Safety report.

                (c)   The Board noted the Significant Litigation report.

                (d)   The Board noted the Report on Sealings and resolved that the
                      affixing of the Common Seal of the Company to the documents
                      set out against items numbered 865 to 1039 inclusive in the
                      seal register was hereby confirmed.

-•   -   ~               fL.II:I4aiI        T

                      Financial Update
                (a)   The CFO reported that period 1 reports showed a positive EBIT
                      variance after adjustments mainly driven by lower staff and agent
                      costs. The one off project costs were 25% above target and he
                      assured the Board that he would monitor these closely over the
                      following period.

                (b)   The next full financial update would be available at the July Board
                      with PIR and benefits realisation work reporting to the ARC on the
                      5th June 2013



                      The Board away day would take place on the 18tH &19th June 2013.

                      The next ful l Board would take place on the 16th July 2013.



                      There being no further business the meeting was declared closed
                                                                                              POL00099210
                                                                                            POL00099210




Wft ii

  •   Twin track approach discussed, needs to be without onerous costs or governance
  •   Concept of a council similar to a building society members' council' supported by
      user-groups was a preferred approach.
  •   The nature of the debate has changed and we need to tell the Minister what we can
      do, what can be announced to show a positive move to more mutual ways of
      working, without compromising the governance.
  •   ACTION The Board asked that the updated Rothschild report be circulated.
                                                                            CD
  •   ACTION Check that the strategic plan refers to commercial sustainability and not
      mutualisation and change of ownership                                     SB
  •   Do not assume that change of Ownership has gone from the Govt. agenda. Sc we
      need to stress the positive things we can commit to especially over the next 2 years
  •   Al l agree that aiming for sustainability is the goal and that focussing on new ways of
      working makes business sense irrespective of ownership model.


  *   Direct communication to staff, subpostmasters and multiples are the top priority,
      using the appropriate channel.
  •   The approach will cost time and money with possible deployment of super briefer into
      the subpostmaster network. ACTION Suggestion that we ask franchise partners
      what they do to engage branches
  •   Concerns that POL and NFSP have very different ideas of how a Trade Association
      relationship would work.
  •   Support to drive forward as quickly as quickly as possible with the ways of working
      but take the Trade Association/ NFSP approach more carefully to give time to
      explore
  •   ACTION Agreed that we would look at introducing a `members' counci l of 20-30
      people, with unions/staff! subpostmasters and customers all represented. Return to
      the Board with a full proposal in line with the agreed timeline          SB
  •   ACTION The Board agreed the outline of the WoW timeline. Final proposal to be
      circulated, excluding Trade Association ( although recognised that this may be
      necessary, so SB to develop a TA proposal but off the page for now)       SB
  •   The Board were uncomfortable with anyone but the shareholder holding them to
      account'. ACTION Check where the term 'hold the business to account' is used, and
      come back with options for taking this forward without introducing additional
      governance_                                                                SB
  •   Agreed that a `share scheme', meaning `sharing in success not giving away shares
      would be a possible approach but not unti l the Business ceased to be loss making.
                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                  POL00099210




         This could be included in the pay principles in the long term strategy aligned with
         WoW.
People
   •     Structure means business focusing more on the customer, supported by a
         transactional service delivery function (with work which could be outsourced), and a
         very small Corp. function ( which should also include HR and IT architecture for
         thought leadership).
   •     ACTION Show how many people as a % in each areas                               SC/CD
   •     Need to isolate Customer functions from the `glue' that stops the business delivering
         at pace. Need a 'heavyweight HR and Commercial Director. Commercial Director
         seen as a successor for the CEO who needs to challenge the organisation.
   •     ACTION Business to consider whether POCA should sit within FS in the new
         structure                                                             PV
   •     Discussion about moving to one Customer Director now. But too much going on in
         Retail and FS to risk a new person straight away covering three big roles. Could
         possibly put FS and marketing together, decided to leave three as a transition.
   •     Service Delivery is also a key job, as it needs to drive out costs and move to an
         outsourced model_ The Business had three possible internal candidates but was
         asked also to search the market for possible external candidates            PV/SC
   •     If an internal candidate was chosen they would need short term external support to
         drive the programme.
   •     ACTION The Board asked to see the proposed structure charts for the final and
         interim stages.                                                         SC
   •     The ExCo would now meet weekly for an hour or two to drive pace in the big
         programmes (NT,CTP, FS and IT) and monthly for a full performance review, with
         smal ler Sub Group called for specific tasks.
   •     The top 30 chosen for talent would receive more development and the top 150 would
         meet quarterly for business performance which they would then cascade and
         development.
   •     ACTION ExCo succession plan to return to RemCom                                SC
   •     ACTION Outstanding questions to return to NomCom                               SC
Outsourcing
   •     Discussed the different options for outsourcing and the different skil l required. It is not
         always necessary to sort out the business processes before OS, as long as the
         business produces clear requirements; clear rules and then manages the
         relationship.                                                                 CD/SB
   •     Cost is only one aspect of the arrangement also about expertise and leveraging the
         outsource skills
   •     The Business has aggressive cost reduction in the plan but does not have an OS
         strategy, although it does have 3rd party arrangements. The IT strategy was
                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                             POL00099210




      discussed and whether the SI was taking enough accountability for the Towers.
      ACTION Sue Barton! Lesley Sewell to meet Tim to revisit the SI Terms of Reference
      and the relationship with the Towers. Neil McCausland was unsure that the Board
      should be revisiting a decision it had already made.                    SB
  •   Discussed Call centre outsourcing to drive costs and service, expect improvements
      from day 1.
  •   Need to decide what is Core to the business and look to outsource the rest. Possibly
      partner with an independent 3rd party to look at the core and help with the
      procurement.
  •   ACTION Chris to send a note to the Board before the next meeting setting out a
      timel ine for the next steps including: defining core; defining requirements;
      procurement; the effects of separation; and management information.           CD
  •   ACTION Return to the November Board with the plan and milestones, showing
      direction of travel and the prize, having consulted TF & AM          CD/SB
  •   Heavy hitting external programme manager needed to deliver, which could possibly
      be the Transformation Director (COO).


Lunchtime discussions
      Bricks & Mortar surviving as people move to digital
  •   Need to change how you work with the customer. Promotions on the web and mobile
      drive customers into store
  •   Click & Collect — onestop partner with My Hermes meeting customer demands
  •   Need a distinctive High St. People can do the boring stuff on line
  •   Focus on communications, don't be parochial add value globally
  •   Use retail localities as the linchpin of communities
  •   How could you combine with other CAB/ Libraries
  •   Strategy makes sense to have branches alongside, inside convenience stores
  •   Things opening up on line, onl ine will be the growth, but face 2 face as the fulfilment
      if it works
      PO as a challenger FS brand
  •   Huge gap in basic bank accounts — banks not trusted
  •   Short term credit — credit unions are not working
  •   PO has tried this 3 times but could not get critical mass
  •   Clarity about products is missing, don't always have to be the cheapest, but be clear
      and fair
  •   Needs to be simple to operate for the branch
                                                                                               POL00099210
                                                                                             POL00099210




   •    Gillian called out two conversations were going on, opportunities for the future along
        with constraints of the present


        Engaging our people
   •    Don't confuse leadership with control
   •    Different people want different things, ask them, some people just want support and
        to know they are doing the right thing.
   •    Onestop run monthly regional meetings with staff and managers 20 people, viewpoint
        survey twice a year, letters on the internet, pull not push
   •    Leadership team in shop 2 days a week
   •    PO comms too long and confusing onestop rewrite
   •    NFSP send branch circulars, magazine, GT meets 1000 spmr a year
   •    Spmr feel voice less heard since independence
   •    Recent improvement in how business communicate
   •    British Youth council — national members day, on line voting on issues but want
        debate and engagement as well. Possible role for younger people as spmr, help
        them with a framework for starting a business, offer a bridge, mentoring, knowledge
        transfer
   •    Be careful about consensus. Democracy and over consensus can cause paralysis.
        Be clear about what is non-negotiable.


The Board agreed that these would be strong candidates for any advisory counci l
Mails
   •    The Business are recruiting for a Head of SME, the SME 'hit squad' meet every
        week, the most important thing to deliver is the expansion of Drop & Go and the Click
        & Collect customers
   •    Expanding to the whole network, now part of the sales focus, targets and weekly
        review in place, discounts for Drop & Go customers, qtr 4 improve the onl ine
        capability to include hybrid to pay on line and drop of in branch.
   •    Click & Collect goes live in 10500 branches next month, 4500 with extended opening
        hours, several big retailers close to signing up.
   •    Board asked if anything could be done to accelerate
   •    ACTION Investigate options to incentivise quicker growth                           PB
   •    ACTION Spend time in branch to understand the barriers in the sales process and
        make it as easy as possible for people                                         PB
   •    ACTION Once we have a story to communicate make sure we do so loudly!              PB
                                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                                       POL00099210




       No substantial issues with RMG privatisation. ACTION Think radically about how we
       would respond to changes in the USO. Are there any opportunities for us PBIMMISB




The Board meeting would include:
   •   An update on the NTP conversion information, with clarity the run rate for
       conversions
   •   Update on conversations with the Minister
   •   Proposed changes to the planned strategy being presented to BiS.
   •   Clear cost implications of those changes
   •   The Board will need to sign off any changes outside the delegated authorities
                                                                                            POL00099210
                                                                                          POL00099210



                                     Strictly Confidential




             Minutes of a meeting of the Remuneration Committee of the Board
            held at 148 Old Street, London EC1 V 9HQ on Wednesday 1 May 2013


Present:               Neil McCausland (Committee Chairman)
                       Virginia Holmes
                       Al ice Perkins

In Attendance          Paula Vennel ls (PV)          CEO (from minute 13/25)
                       Chris Day                     CFO (minutes 13/26-13/28)
                       Susan Crichton (SC)           HR and Corporate Services Director
                                                     (minutes 13/20 — 13/28)
                       Karen Hamer (KH)              Reward Manager
                       Fay Healey (FH)               Chief HR Officer
                       Jonathan Hutchings (JH)       New Bridge Street
                       Alwen Lyons                   Company Secretary
    i




                 (a)   A quorum of two directors being present, the Chairman of the Committee
                       opened the meeting and welcomed those attending.




                 (a)   The minutes of the meeting held on 13 March 2013 were approved for
                       signature by the Chairman of the Committee.

                 (b)   The Chairman asked if a communication had been sent to the
                       participants explaining the new LTiP measures. SC explained that
                       knowledge of possible changes in the 2015 Network Transformation
                       targets and the current Industrial Relations environment had delayed the
                       correspondence but that she was reluctant to delay any longer_ The
                       Chairman asked SC to discuss and decide on the approach with the
                       CEO, letting the Committee know their decisions.

                       SHORT TERM INCENTIVE PLAN (STIP) — OUTTURN AND PAYMENTS
                       FOR 201212013
                 (a)    The Committee received an update from FH on the internal audit review
                        of the outturn of the 2012/2013 scorecard measures completed on 30
                        April 2013. FH explained that the outturn had been capped in line with
                        the rules.

                 (b)   Alice Perkins reported to the Committee that the CEO had achieved 80%
                       of her personal objectives which were attributed to 20% of her bonus,
        •




                                          Page 1 of 5
                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                     POL00099210



                               Strictly Confidential


Alice            and that in light of this the total STiP payment awarded to the CEO for
Perkins          2012/2013 should be £157,936. Alice Perkins undertook to inform the
                 CEO of this result.

           (c)   It was noted that the CFO had received a 4 marking Performance
ACTION:          Review and the Committee were comfortable with the effect this would
Paula            have on his bonus. It was agreed that the STiP payment for the Chief
Vennells         Financial Officer should be £129,053. The CEO would be asked to
                 inform the CFO.

           (d)   The Committee noted the outturn of the Post Office scorecard 2012/2013
                 and the percentages to be appl ied to STiP payments for the Executive
                 Committee, Remco and SLP populations. It was noted that the STiP
                 would be paid in June 2013 in accordance with the plan rules.

REMCOM           LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN (LTIP) OUTTURN AND PAYMENTS
13123            2012/2013
           (a)    The Committee received an update from FH on the outturn of the
                  2010/2013 LTiP performance conditions and considered a proposal for
                  payments under the Long Term Incentive Plan (LTiP) 2012/2013.

           (b)   The Committee approved the LTiP payment for the Chief Executive as
                 detailed in appendix 1 of the LTiP Outturn and Payments for 2012/2013
                 paper and noted the outturn of the LTiP for the Executive Committee,
                 Remco and SLP populations. The LTiP would be paid in June 2013 in
                 accordance with the plan rules.
ACTION:
Karen            The Committee asked KH to produce a table comparing the CEOs total
                 remuneration package in 2011/12 to that of 2012/13, for circulation to the
Hamer
                 Committee.
-_'




           (a) The Committee considered the proposals to enhance the Clawback
               clause in the LTiP rules and to include a Clawback clause in the terms
               and conditions of the STiP for the Chief Executive (CEO), Chief Financial
               Officer (CFO), Executive Committee, Remco and SLP.

           (b)   JH (NBS) informed the Committee that 3 years' clawback would be the
                 longest he would expect to see in the market. FH explained that this
                 would require a change in the scheme rules which people would have to
                 sign up to if they were to be eligible for the LTiP.

           (c)   The Committee approved:
                    i_ the change in the LTiP rules, effective from April 2013, to
                       enhance the Clawback clause as detailed in appendix 1 of the
                       Clawback Clause Paper: and
                   ii. the change in the terms and conditions of the STiP, effective from
                       April 2013, to include the Clawback clause as detai led in
                       appendix 2 of the Clawback Clause Paper for the fol lowing
                       employee grades: CEO, CFO, Executive Committee, Remco and
                       SLP.

                 The CEO joined the meeting.



                                    Page 2 of 5
                                                                                      POL00099210
                                                                                    POL00099210



                               Strictly Confidential

                                                                     O R.




                                              r




                                                            :■
                                                  wrtiiai
           (a)   The Committee considered the proposal to change the design of the
                 Short Term Incentive Plan (STiP) for the role of Chief Financial Officer
                 (CFO) to align it with the STiP of the Chief Executive.

           (b)   JH (NBS) had supported the proposed increase of potential percentage
                 range of 40% on target and 67% for stretch and reported that the
                 changed gearing aligned with the market benchmark. The Chairman
                 noted that this was a significant reduction in maximum potential bonus
                 and asked the CEO if she thought the CFO would accept the changes.
                 The CEO was hopeful that the CFO would accept.

           (c)   The Committee approved the STIP design and increase in on-target
                 percentage for the CFO and agreed that the proposal should be
ACTION:
                 presented to the Shareholder Executive (ShEx) to review on behalf of the
Karen
                 Special Shareholder. KH was asked to produce a draft paper for review
Hamer
                 by the Chairman setting out the proposal for ShEx.

REMCOM           SHORT TERM INCENTIVE PLAN (STIP) MEASURES 201312014
13/26
                 The CFO joined the meeting

          (a)    The Committee considered the proposed Post Office Scorecard for
                 2013/2014 with particular reference to those measures which form the
                 Short Term Incentive Plan (STiP).

          (b)    FH clarified that ExCo was considering changing from the current PDR
                 multiplier to a more flexible approach but that no decision had yet been
                 reached.

          (c)    The CFO explained the trajectory to Crown breakeven in 2015 from the
                 outturn of a loss of (£37m) in 2012/13, and that the target for 2013/15
                 was likely to be a loss of (£23m).

          (d)    The CFO explained that the Network Conversions target was to be set at
                 1550 contracts signed in the year, bringing the cumulative target by the
                 end of 2013/14 to 3000. He recognised that this would be contentious as
                 it was 600 less that the current strategic plan but assured the Committee
                 it was still a very stretching target. The Committee discussed the
                 problem of changing a target during the year if the strategy changed, but
                 agreed that the network measure should have a footnote to explain the
                 assumption that if the strategy changed the targets would need to
                 change too.

          (e)    The Committee agreed the ranges in the Growth, Profit and Easy to Do
                 Business With measures but asked that Plan target be referred to as
                 Threshold.

          (f)    The Crown Profit (loss) would be set at Threshold (£23m), Target (£23m)
                 and stretch (21m).

ACTION:   (g)    The CFO was asked to email the final scorecard to the Committee and
CFO              then present the proposal to the ful l Board.


                                    Page 3 of 5
                                                                                       POL00099210
                                                                                     POL00099210



                               Strictly Confidential



ACTION:   (h)    JH explained to the Board that they should bear in mind the disclosure
Karen            requirements for the Report & Accounts and it was decided to report the
Hamer            KPIs as categories of Growth, Customer, People and Modernisation.

          (i)    The Committee approved the Post Office Scorecard with particular
ACTION:          reference to those measures which form part of the STiP for Executive
CFO              Directors and agreed that the proposal should be presented to the Board
                 and then the Shareholder Executive to review on behalf of the Special
                 Shareholder.

REMCOM           LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN (LTIP) AWARD DATE APRIL 2013
13/27
           (a)   The Committee received a proposal on the performance conditions for
                 the Long -I- erm Incentive Plan (LTiP), award date April 2013, payment
                 date March 2016, and performance conditions to be tested in the
                 financial year 2015/2016.

           (b)   The Committee discussed the structure of the proposal with Access
                 Criteria as the gateway and EBITDAS and EBITDAS/turnover as two
                 separate measures. It was recognised that the EBITDAS measure would
                 focus on driving the Business back to profit and that the artificial
                 measure of EBITDAS/turnover did not add any value.
ACTION
Karen      (c)   The quantum awards presented in the paper at para 2.4 were not correct
                 and a replacement paper would be filed with correct stretch percentages.
Hamer
           (d)   The Committee approved the design of the LTiP, award date Apri l 2013,
                 and resolved that the performance conditions should be: a gateway of
                 Access Criteria; and a measure Earnings Before Interest and Tax,
                 Depreciation, Amortisation and Subsidy (EBITDAS).



          (a)    The latest draft of the Directors' Remuneration Report (DRR) was
                 considered.

           (b)   JH (NBS) explained that usually the DRR was presented in the structure
                 of a letter from the Chair of the Remcom showing the context for the
                 report; an explanation of remuneration strategy for the current and future
                 years and a look back at the year of the accounts.
ACTION:
Karen      (c)   Alice Perkins asked the Business to ensure that the DRR was aligned
Hamer            with the rest of the R&A.

           (d)   The Committee agreed that the key messages should be:
                       There are a constrained set of circumstances, we are in a
                       turnaround business
                       Trying to keep people motivated with no flexibility on pay
                       Are open about pay
                       We benchmarked our remuneration and people are underpaid
                       Every decision taken is subject to agreement with the shareholder
                       We have inherited the schemes we are currently using, they were
                       put in place by a different organisation, without this Board or
                       Remcom


                                    Page 4 of 5
                                                                                                POL00099210
                                                                                              POL00099210



                                              Strictly Confidential



ACTION:                 The CFO explained that the internal team were working on the R&A
Karen                   document this week and they would ensure that they took advice from
Hamer                   NBS as well as the input from the Committee to redraft the DRR.




                                 x




                                     :




                                         r•
          .




              i
     •'




                  (a)   The CFO and Susan Crichton left the meeting.

                        The Committee having received and noted the refined Executive
                        Committee benchmarking data considered the proposal to increase the
                        salaries of Susan Crichton, HR and Corporate Services Director, and
                        Mark Davies, Communications Director.

                  (b)   JH (NBS) reported that Susan Crichton was well within the benchmark
                        for a General Counsel role without her other responsibilities and similarly
                        Mark Davies was at 62% of the market median for a Director of
                        Communications.

                  (c)   The Committee approved:
                           i. an increase in salary for Susan Crichton to £185,000 in respect of
                              additional accountabilities, taking effect from 1 September 2012
                              when responsibility for the Human Resources function was
                              transferred; and
                          ii. an increase in salary for Mark Davies to £125,000 in respect of
                              progression in role following appointment in July 2012, taking
                              effect from 1 April 2013.

REMCOM                  ANY OTHER BUSINESS AND DATE OF NEXT MEETING
13130
                  (a)   The next meeting of the Committee was scheduled for Thursday 4 July
                        2013.

REMCOM                  CLOSE
13131                   There being no further business, the meeting was then closed.




                                                   Page 5 of 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00099210

                                                                                                                                                                           Strictly Confidential




No.   REFERENCE         ACTION                                                                                                                                                                     BY WHOM                                                 STATUS

                        1. Network Transformation and Crown Offices
                           —        --      -- - — -- - - ----               --                                                                                                                                                                        -        -                                      ---------------
1a    January 2013      Idea of high profile event suggested for early adopters being planned.                                                                                                     Mark Davies                                             Ongoing
      POLB 13/03(h)
                        2. Finance
2a    January 2013      To check with ShEx what has to be reported to Brussels. CFO to email the Board Chris Day/                                                                                                                                          The funding for Post Office is
      POLB 13/07(c)     regarding actions being taken.                                                 Susan Crichton                                                                                                                                      based on cumulative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           performance over 3 years up
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to March,2015 —so an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           underspend in the first year is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           not an issue in itself. Post
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Office Finance has checked
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with ShEx who have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           confirmed that there is no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           need to report the current
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           financial position of Post
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Office to Brussels. Post
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Office does have to provide a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           report to BIS, independently
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           verified by Deloitte, later this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           year which compares last
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           year's performance against
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the calculation agreed with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Brussels for SGEI costs. This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           report has been shared with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the Board.
2b    November 2012     CFO would produce a project spend benefits realisation analysis for ARC to give                                                                                            Chris Day                                               Completed. Approved by
      POLB12/122(c)     more detail on project spend against forecast.                                                                                                                                                                                     ARC on 5 June 2013.
                        3. Strategy
3a    January 2013      A Champion on ExCo for the Digital Programme to be nominated-                                                                                                                                                                      Martin Moran is the
                                             ----------------------




                                                                      --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ----------------------------------




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ----------------------
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Martin Moran
      POLB 13/04(e)     Implementation of Digital Programme to proceed with all urgency, working in                                                                                                                                                        nominated Champion.
                        alignment with the strategic plan. Updates on progress to be brought back to the
                        Board.

 Status Report at 4 July 2013                                                                                                                                                  Alwen Lyons                                                                           Page 1 of 4
                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                POL00099210

                                                                         Strictly Confidential


3b       November 2012      "Point person" to be identified for SME's, across pillars                         Martin Moran     Interviews for a new Head of
         Strategy Evening                                                                                                      SME are to commence in
                                                                                                                               July.
3c       March 2013         Business to consider fully whether running Travel insurance `in-house' was a      Nick Kennett     To July Board.
         POLB13/15(c)       core competence for the business. To be reviewed at sign-off for phase 1.
3d       March 2013         Business to hold early exploratory discussions with Bank of Ireland regarding     Nick Kennett     To July Board.
         POLB13/15(d)       possible buy-out of insurance, using KPMG to establish possible value.
3e       March 2013         Paper to be prepared on IT Architecture and Customer Database Development,        Sue Barton!      See Appendix A.
         POLB13/15(e)       with particular focus on future FS requirements.                                  Lesley Sewell/   To July Board.
                                                                                                              Nick Kennett
3g       March 2013         Business to prepare Board paper on investment requirement for the FS              Chris Day        CFO to provide update at
         POLB13/15(i)       strategy, including any effect on self-funding and state aid.                                      July Board.
                            Seven year P&L. to also be produced showing the investment milestones.
3h       May 2013           Continue to send Strategy and Funding weekly updates to the Board.                Paula Vennells   Ongoing
         POLB 13/31
3i       May 2013           Prepare simple crib sheet of 4-5 communication points to be used for engaging     Mark Davies
         POLB 13/32         with stakeholders around Post Office's strategy for 2013-2020. To ensure that
                            any statements used left room for manoeuvre in case circumstances changed in
                            the future.
3j       May 2013           Update Stakeholder Plan to make better use of DVLA framework contract. To         Kevin Seller
         POLB 13/38         be shared with CEO and CFO to agree how the Board can support the
                            Stakeholder engagement.
3k       May 2013           Prepare note for the Board explaining the success criteria on which the Current   Nick Kennett     Noting paper going to July
         POLB 13/42         Account pilot will be evaluated.                                                                   Board.
31       May 2013           Board asked for opportunity to open their own Current Accounts.                   Nick Kennett
         POLB 13/42
                                     and Remuneration
                              .




                                  Peop




                                         le




4a       November 2012      The Board requested an update on the people and performance management            Susan Crichton   The People Plan was
         POLB 12/116 (h)    framework at the February Board meeting.                                                           presented as part of the June
                                                                                                                               Strategy day.
4b       May 2013           Seek consent from ShEx for STIP payments for CEO and CFO, and LTIP                Alwen Lyons      Completed — notification sent
         POLB 13/36         payment for CEO.                                                                                   13 June 2013.
                            5. Personal Injury Referral Fees
5a                          Post Office Insurance will work with BGL to evaluate the impact on the business   Nick Kennett     I have evaluated the position
                            model (including income and incentives) and management proposes to update                          and with the regulatory
                            the board later in 2013 of any changes.                                                            changes having being
                                                                                                                               implemented only in April it is

     Status Report at 4 July 2013                                             Alwen Lyons                                                Page 2 of 4
                                                                                                                                                      POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                   POL00099210

                                                                    Strictly Confidential


                                                                                                                                rather early to have seen the
                                                                                                                                impact - I suggest that this
                                                                                                                                would be better presented
                                                                                                                                back to the Board in the
                                                                                                                                autumn when we will have
                                                                                                                                seen both a better
                                                                                                                                understanding of the market
                                                                                                                                impact and how BGL has
                                                                                                                                responded.
                        6. MutuahsaHon
6a   March 2013         Business to ask Rothschilds to update Mutualisation report to include ;,the new      Chris Day          Verbal update to May Board.
     POLB13/1 6(d)      strategy, and get their view on sustainability and balance sheet requirements in
                        the light, of this, within a tightly managed set of Terms of Reference and budget.
6b   March 2013         Board to have sufficient time to consider proposed Public Purpose statement          Alwen Lyons        To be considered at July
     POLB13/16(f)       during the Summer.                                                                                      Mutualisation Sub
                                                                                                                                Committee.
6c   March 2013         Business to consider its future stakeholder engagement and the most effective        Sue Barton/Alwen   Completed. Presented at
     POLB13/16(g)       meeting structure to be put in place.                                                Lyons              June Board Ways of




                                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                                                         paper.




                                                                                                                                Working
6d   May 2013           Add delegated authority levels for Mutualisation Committee.                          Sue Barton         Completed.
     POLB 13/31
6e   May 2013           Proposal of a trade association to be included in the mutualisation options to be    Sue Barton         Completed. Proposal
     POLB 13/33         presented at the Board awayday.                                                                         presented at June Board
                                                                                                                                meeting.

7a   May 2013           Present the detail of the subpostmaster engagement satisfaction measure when         Kevin Gilliland
     POLB 13/33         available.
                                                                                                                                Completed.


8a   May 2013                                                                                                                     Update to July's Board.
     POLB 13/42

9a   January 2013       Business to reassess the Click and Collect and Failed Deliveries services            Martin Moran       Closed - see CEO Report.
     POLB 13/05(b)      (including escalation and looking again at the MDA as necessary .
9b   November 2012      A plan be presented to enable members of the Board and ExCo to have                  Sue Barton!        Completed. Board met
                                to




     POLB12/120 (c)     greater exposure to the people involved in the Stakeholder Forum.                    Alwen Lyons        Members of Stakeholder

 Status Report at 4 July 2013                                            Alwen Lyons                                                       Page 3 of 4
                                                                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                                                                            POL00099210

                                                                    Strictly Confidential


                                                                                                                             Forum at June Board




                                                                                                                                                    Dinner:
9c   March 2013         Organise Board awayday for 18-19 June.                                             Alwen Lyons       Completed
     POLB13/23(a)
9d   May 2013           The business was asked to develop a more constructive way to engage with           Sue Barton        Completed. Included in
     POLB 13/30         individual subpostmasters.                                                                           Mutualisation Paper and
                                                                                                                             Timeline presented at June
                                                                                                                             Board.
9e   May 2013           Circulate final paper of copy of the full Annual Report and Financial Statements   Mark Davies/All   Circulated 11 June 2013
     POLB 13/35         to the Board, for comments within 24 hours, before being reviewed by the
                        Annual Report sub-committee.

 APPENDIX A
 March 2013 POLB13/15(e)
 There are a number of activities, detailed below, which are currently underway and by October we will have a view of the business and
 technology roadmap to support our strategic aspirations, at which point a paper will be placed in the Board reading room.

 All of the activities support the 15 — 20 Strategy, and include the capabilities to deliver the FS income growth and have been included in our IT
 plans and funding. We are currently defining our Customer Management Strategy and subsequently the technology roadmap. Javelin have
 supported the definition of the strategic digital requirements which has included customer; complemented by a project to define our customer
 management strategy by the end of June led by Nick Fox in Marketing, supported by Berkeley. We will take a pragmatic and incremental
 approach to how we wi ll deliver our customer management capability.

 In addition, for Financial Services we are working with BOI to pilot a more detailed analysis/segmentation exercise to identify cross/up-sell
 opportunities at a very granular level . The outcome is to generate targeted campaigns to fewer customers. This is a pilot and will inform our
 strategic approach.




 Status Report at 4 July 2013                                           Alwen Lyons                                                   Page 4 of 4
                                                                                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                POL00099210



                                                                  Strictly Confidential




                                                                                                                                                                    .
   FILE NAME            CASE        USlNESS UNIT &                    DESCRIPTION                                         STATUS                              XSP
                      } J) R          CONTACT
Horizon claims       'Ol/HF/RVv   Simon Baker        POL has received various claims from               On 08.07.13, Second Sight provided an            Bond Dickinson
                                                     subpostmasters (SPMs) alleging wrongful            interim report on its review. This is the
                                                     termination of contract and/or damages based       subject of a stand-alone report to the Board.
                                                     on alleged defects in the Horizon system and
                                                     POL's internal processes.                          Second Sight's initial findings (based on its
                                                                                                        review of 4 of the 47 cases being considered)
                                                     These allegations were initially made in 5         conclude that while there are no systemic
                                                     claims brought through the SPMs' solicitors,       problems with Horizon, there are two specific
                                                     Shoosmiths.     Shoosmiths is not currently        "bugs", which gave rise to errors in a number
                                                     progressing these claims through the courts        of branches' accounts. Second Sight also
                                                                                                        highlighted shortcomings in POL's internal
                                                     Similar allegations are also being made through    training and support to SPMs in relation to
                                                     SPMs' MPs, through the "Justice for                the Horizon system.
                                                     Subpostmasters Alliance" (JFSA), and in
                                                     defences to court proceedings brought by POL       Second Sight is continuing to investigate the
                                                     to recover debts from SPMs.                        SPMs' concerns. POL is cooperating with
                                                                                                        Second Sight's investigation and conducting
                                                     An independent investigator Second Sight           a review of the criminal and civil proceedings
                                                     Support Services Ltd (Second Sight) has been       it has issued against SPMs where issues with
                                                     reviewing these allegations in consultation with   the Horizon system have been raised to
                                                     James Arbuthnot MP and JFSA.                       establish which cases may be vulnerable to
                                                                                                        challenge.

Claim for Judicial   POL/HF/RW    Angela             A former subpostmaster (SPM) has sought            The parties are waiting for the Court to list    DAC
Review                            Van-Den-Bogerd     "judicial review" of POL's decision to terminate   the case for hearing, which is likely to be in   Beachcrofts
                                                     his SPM contract.                                  November 2013.

                                                     The SPM claimed that POL's termination             POL has tried to engage the SPM in
  Significant Litigation Report                                   Susan Crichton                                                              Page 1 of 4
                                                                 11 July 2013
                                                                                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                          POL00099210



                                                              Strictly Confidential


                                                 process was flawed and infringed his Human        settlement discussions, and continues to
                                                 Rights. He has asked the court to review          explore options for resolving the claim before
                                                 PC L's decision and find that it was unlawful     any Court hearing.
                                                 and/or an abuse of power.

                                                 POL is asking the Court to dismiss the claim
                                                 on the grounds that it is a commercial matter
                                                 which the Court cannot review, and in any
                                                 event POL did not breach the SPM's rights.

Employment        POL/HF/RW      Colin Stretch   Six claims against POL are currently proceeding   Significant claims continue to be monitored      Weightmans
                                                 before the Employment Tribunals.                  (both internally and with external counsel)
                                                                                                   and risk assessed as they progress.
                                                 Claims allege unfair dismissal for conduct, and
                                                 unfair dismissal for disability and race
                                                 discrimination.

                                                 Potential exposure to POL over three claims is
                                                 c.E150,000, with three cases yet to be valued.

                                                 Claims could require policy changes if upheld
                                                 (e.g. with respect to race or disability
                                                 discrimination).




 Significant Litigation Report                               Susan Crichton                                                              Page 2 of 4
                                                            11 July 2013
                                                                                                                                                                        POL0O099210
                                                                                                                                                                 II•]~II'IsURY4lf+]



                                                                     Strictly Confidential




                              L1f   ltPTECkI                                                                       STATUS

Two a»iutant sub postmasters accused of covering shortages by delaying     Both defendants pleaded guilty, and were sentenced to 5 mur tl~. and 6 months
the processing of business deposits to Santander. Case concerned 40        imprisonment (suspended for 12 months) respectively. Civil recovery of the
deposit slips being suppressed with a total value of £34,115.50            outstanding debt is being considered.

                                                                           Defendant pleaded guilty on 05/02/13 and was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.
Sub postmaster accused of theft of £78,660.63.
                                                                           We are currently awaiting a date for the hearing of the Proceeds of Crime Act
                                                                           confiscation proceedings.

Sub postmasters accused of theft of £85,000.                               Crown Court trial fixed for 18/11/13.



                                                                           The case has been committed to the Crown Court. There will be a hearing on
Subpostmaster accused of theft of £77,905.02.                              12/07/13 to determine the details of trial.

                                                                           POL has recovered £62,992.78 to date.

Subpostmaster accused of theft of £57,811.79.                              Defendant pleaded guilty and on 28/11/12 was sentenced to 9 months
                                                                           imprisonment (suspended for 18 months) and 180 hours unpaid community work. A
                                                                           timetable has been set for confiscation proceedings to determine the sum payable to
                                                                           POL, with a final hearing to be fixed.
                                                                           POL has recovered £43,988.03 to date.

Subpostmaster accused of two offences of theft of £9,999.43 and            The case has been committed to the Crown Court. There will be a hearing on
£175,260, and two offences of false accounting.                            25/07/13 to determine the details of trial. A restraint order has been obtained to
                                                                           assist recovery of the financial loss.

Subpostmaster accused of fraud of £115,172.11.                             Defendant pleaded guilty and on 03/05/13 was sentenced to 16 months
                                                                           imprisonment. A timetable has been set for confiscation proceedings to determine
                                                                           the sum payable to POL, with a final hearing set for 20/09/13.

  Significant Litigation Report                                      Susan Crichton                                                             Page 3 of 4
                                                                    11 July 2013
                                                                         POL00099210
                                                                      POL00099210




                                Strictly Confidential




Significant Litigation Report    Susan Crichton         Page 4 of 4
                                11 July 2013
                                                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                                                      POL00099210




                                              Confidential




The purpose of this paper is to:

        1.1      Provide an update on safety performance.
        1.2      Outline risk reduction activities.



        2.1      Injury accidents, up to period 2, are showing a positive trend against last year, and
                 against the target reduction of 5%. Accidents involving absence have increased
                 from two to three compared to the same period last year but minor monthly
                 fluctuations are not unusual . The "per 1000 staff in post" comparison indicator,
                 which takes account of head count fluctuation year on year, is showing a slightly
                 more favourable trend for all accidents'.

IF.175M. WilIafiRii   TiTr355T.11i   ,0MIiL     I, Iff Ts7   l+"   - 2TiT- 1"WI-i 1F.




        2.2      The number of days lost due to accidents is showing a positive trend compared
                 to last year and against a target reduction of 5%. (Table 2) Indicating that there
                 is a positive trend on frequency along with a reduction in severity of those
                 accidents.




Health and Safety                       Susan Crichton                                  Page 1 of 5
                                          July 2013
                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                                POL00099210



                                                  Confidential


Table 2 Days lost resulting from injury accidents (Cumulative)




         F
              P1    P2      P3      P4       P&   P6    P7    P8   P9   P10 P11   P12
                                                   Period




       2.3     The number of road traffic collisions (RTCs) during the first two periods has
               increased significantly compared to the same period last year although the
               trend during period 2 is more in line with expected monthly performance and 'at
               fault' incidents are running at the same level as last year. Road risk reduction
               opportunities continue to be the subject of analysis at the Road Risk Forum with
               a view to identifying improvement activities in addition to those already in place.
               (3.1 below) Injuries as a result of road traffic collisions are infrequent. Road
               traffic collisions account for less than 3% of the overall number of injury
               accidents, however they have the potential for high impact in terms of injury and
               loss.

1 F17[ c~:liFT:■I   i T+~K.I l'E(3i.Ti -1<




Health and Safety                            Susan Crichton                       Page 2 of 5
                                               July 2013
                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                               POL00099210



                                           Confidential

      2.4       The majority of accidents currently fall into three main categories: lifting and
                handling, stepping and striking and outdoor falls. These are high frequency
                events with, in the majority, relatively low severity. The lower frequency types of
                incident can carry the potential for very high impact, for example, assaults and
                road traffic collisions. .

      2.5       Robberies on Post Office Cash and Valuables in Transit (CViT) crews are at the
                same level as last year at 7 cumulative for the first two months. Physical injuries
                during robberies, of which there have been 2, the same as last year, remain
                relatively minor in severity. Two of the seven robberies were enabled by the
                presence and/or threat of use of fire arms however the firearms were not
                discharged. Risk reduction activities are identified at 3.2. (Appendix 1 —
                Significant Incidents refers)

      2.6       Robberies and attempted robberies on the Post Office network, cumulative to
                period 2, are significantly lower than last year —11 compared to 18. The ratio of
                successful robberies has reduced from 78% to 54%. Supporting activities have
                been introduced to continue to mitigate this risk and are identified at 3.2.
                (Appendix 1 — Significant Incidents refers)

                Burglaries and attempted burglaries (which do not involve personal attack) have
                reduced from 13 to 8 compared to the same two month period last year.

      Activities

      3.1       Road Risk

                Current activities to mitigate road risk are:
            •   Road risk forum in place to scope and develop road risk reduction initiatives
                and activities
            •   Analysis of effectiveness of face to face training given to top 50 high risk drivers
                has indicated that accidents amongst this community have reduced significantly
                following the refresher training
            •   Eye sight checks for operational drivers are in place
            •   Technical accident reduction interventions on new vehicles e.g. Reversing aids
            •   Analysis and evaluation of data (e.g. risk profiles) to determine further accident
                reduction interventions
            •   Introduction of coloured high visibility' seat belts on new vehicles
            •   Safety team input and concurrence for vehicle specification and changes
            •   Safe driver of the year award
            •   Weekly case conferences to ensure consistent approach to accident
                investigation, follow up activity and sharing of best practice

      3.2       Robbery/Burglary Risk

                Current activities to mitigate robbery and burglary risk are:
            •   Active liaison activities with the police and increased police support activity
            •   Liaison with Met. Police on the increase in gun enabled robberies
            •   Introduction of new deterrent technologies e.g. Smartwater — a solution that
                contains a unique identifier that is released automatically in the event of a
                robbery, spraying those involved and enabling identification of the individuals
                involved in the robberies
            •   Significant reduction in opportunities for duress type robberies linked to the
                introduction of single person vehicles
            •   Increased security support visits to Post Offices in 'hotspot' areas
Health and Safety                    Susan Crichton                           Page 3 of 5
                                       July 2013
                                                                                                  POL00099210
                                                                                                POL00099210



                                           Confidential

             •   Increased use of crime alert communication techniques to Post Offices
             •   Trialling new point of transfer arrangements to reduce exposure
             •    Increased use of surveillance vehicles

       3.3       Health and Wellbeing

                 Current activities to enhance wellbeing
             •   Programme of visits to all Post Office sites to offer and encourage the use of
                 health check equipment that provides a wide range of indicators on physical
                 wellbeing
             •   Plans in place to re-visit al l Post Office Crown Branches and Supply Chain sites
                 within 18 months
             •   Health and wellbeing 'Team Talk' modules
             •   Health and wellbeing poster themed campaigns
             •   Online wellbeing monitoring tool to support health check initiative
             •   Enhanced Occupational health service provision from January 2013

rL

       4.1       Driving activities have the potential for high impact/loss and remain a significant
                 residual risk. However, the actions identified above are aimed at mitigating that
                 risk and improving performance.



The Post Office Ltd Board is asked to:

       5.1       Note the overall safety performance
       5.2       Note the risk reduction activities.


                                                                                   Susan Crichton
                                                                                        July 2013




Health and Safety                    Susan Crichton                           Page 4 of 5
                                       July 2013
                                                                                                                                             POL00099210
                                                                                                                                         POL00099210



                                                                    Confidential


                                                                                                                                    Appendix 1


Significant Incidents (Period 2)
Crowns and Network
Location               Loss      Circumstances                                         Physical Injuries   Any further details
Friday 24/05/2013.     £17,000 Two masked males, one with a shotgun                    None                6 arrests have been made
Skelmanthorpe                    demanded cash. They demanded the safe was                                 following the robbery and 2
Huddersfield                     opened and made customers (5) lie on the floor,                           have been charged.
HD8 9AA
Supply Chain (Cash, delivery and collection)
Wednesday              None      Guard was just removing pouch from Ibox when          None
22/05/13                         attacker calmly approached the counter as if to
South Lambeth,                   inquire about a service. At the point of transferring
London.                          the pouch to the Postmaster, the observant post
                                 master pushed the offender and snatched the
                                 pouch, securing the parcel hatch. The offender left
                                 the office and was chased by two staff, who were
                                 then threatened with a knife.
Thursday 23/05/13      £26,000 Trip 2 of 3, pouch passed to the counter staff          None
Portland Road                    when two assailants entered the office. One stood
SPSO. London.                    by the door with a hand gun covering the office
SE25                             and outside. The other assailant went up to the
                                 counter where the custodian was stood and
                                 demanded that the crew hand over the money.
                                 The crew explained that his box was empty and
                                 suggested to the counter staff that he pass the
                                 money back over, this he did and the assailant
                                 grabbed the pouch and they both made a
                                 getaway. Shotgun and handgun used as a threat.




Health and Safety Report                                        Susan Crichton                                             5 of 5
                                                                  July 2013
                                                                                                                                                        POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                   POL00099210




                                                              POST OFFICE LIMITED BOARD

                                                         Sealings 15 May -9 July 2013 inclusive




Register of Sealings

The Directors are invited to consider the seal register and approve the affixing of the Common Seal of the Company to the documents set out against items
numbered 1040 to 1058 inclusive in the seal register.

"The Directors resolve that the affixing of the Common Seal of the Company to the documents set out against items numbered 1040 to 1058 inclusive in the
seal register is hereby confirmed."


                                                                                                                                        Alwen Lyons
                                                                                                                                   Company Secretary
                                                                                                                                        16 July 2013




Register of Sealings                                                     09/07/2013                                                                Page 1 of 3
                                                                                                                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                               POL00099210




Date                                                                         Register of Sealings                                                        Company Number
09/07/2013                                                                                                                                                       2154540



 Seal Number        Date of "  j     Date of                                                                     Persons Attesting           Destination of
  / File Ref.       Sealing   1     Authority   Description of Document                                          To Document                 Document
    1040          20/05/2013       15/05/2013   Lease between POL and Archrise Limited of premises at              Alwen Lyons               Jean Reynolds
                                                59/61 Grange_Road Middlesborough TS1 SAT
    1041          20/05/2013       15/05/2013   Licence for alterations between POL and Archrise Limited. Alwen Lyons                        Jean Reynolds
    1042          20/05/2013       20/05/2013   Counterpart underlease relating to Unit 1 Babington Court, Alwen Lyons                       Jean Reynolds
                                                Gower Street, Derby, DE1 1JU between POL, Babington
                                                Court Commercial Limited, Babington Management
                                                Company Limited and Hugh McGill, Leonard McGill, Shane
                                                McGill and Victor Costello.
    1043          24/05/2013       24/05/2013   Agreement for Surrender relating to Unit 1, Southside              Paula Vennells            Jean Reynolds
                                                Shopping Centre, Wandsworth between POL, Metro
                                                Nominees (Wandsworth) (No 1) Ltd and Metro Nominees
                                                 Wandsworth No 2 Ltd
 ------           --- -- —         — — — -- —                     --     -------------------- -- — — — — — ------.-----------        — — —    — -- — — --------
    1044          24/05/2013       24/05/2013   TR1 relating to Unit 1, Southside Shopping Centre,                 Paula Vennells            Jean Reynolds
                                                Wandsworth
    1045          04/06/2013       04/06/2013   Lease between POL and Real Estate Investors plc relating Alwen Lyons                         Jean Reynolds
                                                to 6 - 8 Alcester Road South, Kings Heath, Birmingham B14
                                                7PU
    1046          04/06/2013       04/06/2013   POL and Primeco Limited - TRI relating to 41 - 43 Market           Alwen Lyons               Jean Reynolds
                                                Place, Chippenham SN15 3HR
    1047          04/06/2013       04/06/2013   Deed of Settlement between POL and Primeco Limited                 Alwen Lyons               Jean Reynolds
                                                relating to 41 - 43 Market Place, Chippenham, SN15 3HR
    1048          17/06/2013       14/06/2013   Deed of surrender relating to 35 Broadgate Circle, Central         Alwen Lyons               Jean Reynolds
                                                Square, London EC2 between POL, BLCT (PHC 2) Limited
                                                and Broadgate (PCH 2) Limited
    1049          17/06/2013       14/06/2013   Service Tenancy Agreement (Temporary SPM                           Alwen Lyons               Jean Reynolds
                                                Appointment) of the Post Office being part of 18 John Street,
                                                Llanelli, Carmarthenshire, SA15 1AA between POL and
                                                Mary Stewart
    1050          20/06/2013       20/02/2013   Licence to carry out works relating to 3rd and part 4th            Gill Catcheside           Jean Reynolds
                                                Floors, 120 Bark Street. Bolton between POL and Gordon
                                                Neville Moon
    1051          20/06/2013       20/06/2013   Lease of floor of office 3rd Floor and part 4th Floor, 120 Bark Gill Catcheside              Jean Reynolds
                                                Street, Bolton between POL and Gordon Neville Moon.

Date 09/07/2013                                  Registered Office: 148 OLD STREET, LONDON, ECIV 9H0, ENGLAND                                                  Page 2 of 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00099210
                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00099210




Date                                                                                     Register of Sealings                                                                        Company Number
09/07/2013                                                                                                                                                                                   2154540


 Seal Number          Date of             Date of                                                                                Persons Attesting                      Destination of
  I File Ref.         Sealing            Authority      Description of Document                                                  To Document                            Document
    1052            28/06/2013         27/06/2013       Deed of Settlement for Bristol Cannon Street FPO, 8                      Alwen Lyons                            Jean Reynolds
                                                        Cannon Street, Bristol, BS3 1BL between POL and Primeco
                                                        Limited                                                                            ---------------              ------------------
     1053            28/06/2013         27/06/2013      TRI for Bristol Cannon Street FPO, 8 Cannon Street,                      Alwen Lyons                            Jean Reynolds
                                                        Bristol, BS3 1BL between POL and Primeco Limited
     1054            04/07/2013         04/07/2013      Underlease of 238-242 Essex Road, London between Post Gill Catcheside                                           Jean Reynolds
                                                        Office Limited, Mazat Limited and Syed Mehdi Abbas
                                                        Razavi and Sayyada Razavi.
     1055            04/07/2013         04/07/2013      Tenancy Agreement for Unit 124 North Mall Southside                      Gill Catcheside                        Jean Reynolds
                                                        Shopping Centre, Wandsworth between Post Office Limited
                                                        and Metro Nominees (Wandsworth) (no. 1) limited and
                                                        Metro Nominees (Wandsworth) (No. 2) Limited.
     1056            04/07/2013         04/07/2013      Licence for Alterations relating to Unit 124 Southside                   Gill Catcheside                        Jean Reynolds
                                                        Shopping Centre, Wandsworth between Post Office Limited
                                                        and Metro Nominees (Wandsworth) (No. 1) Limited and
                                                        Metro
------------------- ------------------ -------------- - --------------------------- Wandsworth -- No.
                                                                  Nominees --------------         -----  Limited.
                                                                                                      2 ----------------------- --------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
     1057            05/07/2013         05/07/2013      Lease of Ground Floor 119 Wandsworth High Street London Susan Crichton                                          Jean Reynolds
                                                        SW18 4HY between POL and Husseyin Arif, Aysel Arif and
                                                        Gengiz Arif.
     1058            05/07/2013         05/07/2013      Licence to Carry Out Works relating to Ground Floor at 119 Susan Crichton                                       Jean Reynolds
                                                        Wandsworth High Street London SW 18 4HY between POL
                                                        and Husseyn Arif, Aysel Arif and Gengiz Arif.




Date 09/07/2013                                            Registered Office: 148 OLD STREET, LONDON, ECIV 9HQ, ENGLAND                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                                                                                 POL00099210
                                                                                               POL00099210




   Post Office Limited Board and Audit, Risk and Compliance Committee Dates 2014 and Q1 2015




Possible Board Dinner             20 January 2014     Board dinner, evening only TBC


Board                             21 January 2014     9am- 1 pm                 Boardroom


Mutualisation Committee           21 January 2014     1.30pm - 4pm              Boardroom

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                         12 February 2014    2pm-4pm                   Boardroom


Board Breakfast                   26 February 2014    8.15am - 9.15am           TBC


Board                             26 February 2014    9.30am - 1.30pm           Boardroom

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                         19 March 2014       2pm - 4pm                 TBC


Board                             26 March 2014       9am - 4pm                 Boardroom


Board                             30 April 2014       9am - 4pm                 TBC

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                         15 May 2014         2pm-4pm                   TBC


Board                             21 May 2014         9am-4pm                   TBC


Board Strategy Awayday            17/18 June 2014     TBC                       TBC


Board                             16 July 2014        9am-4pm                   TBC

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                         10 September 2014   2pm-4pm                   TBC


Board                             24 September 2014   9am - 4pm                 TBC


Board                             29 October 2014     9am - 4pm                 TBC

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                         12 November 2014    2pm - 4pm                 TBC


Board                             26 November 2014    9am - 4pm                 TBC


Board                             28 January 2015     9am-4pm                   TBC

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                         11 February 2015    2pm - 4pm                 TBC
                                                                    POL00099210
                                                                  POL00099210




Board                        25 February 2015   9am-4pm     TBC

Audit, Risk and Compliance
Committee                    18 March 2015      2pm - 4pm   TBC


Board                        25 March 2015      9am - 4pm   TBC
