                                                                                    POL00344051
                                                                                POL00344051




Privileged and Confidential — Created for the purpose of obtaining legal advice



DRAFT Observations on the Investigations Function

What have we have found out about POL's Investigation Function in
reviewing the Case Files during the Horizon Investigation?:

In reviewing POL's documentation relating to the 29 MP-referred cases, and
the 20 cases referred by the JFSA, 2nd Sight has gained an insight into the
workings of POL's Investigation Team. The following observations are based
solely on what we have seen in those case files. We have not interviewed any
of the members of the Investigation Team, nor its senior management. We
have not reviewed its mandate, manpower or workload. We have also not
researched the legal basis upon which POL conducts either Investigations or
Prosecutions. With that proviso, we make the following interim observations:

     1. POL investigators and investigations are overwhelmingly focussed on
        obtaining an admission of False Accounting from the interviewed
        SPMR (or employee)

     2. POL Investigators often appear to have paid scant attention to the
         interviewee's assertions of innocence or his/her reference to specific
         transaction anomalies. They seem to have shown little or no
         willingness to establish the underlying root cause of any given
         shortfall.


         This disinterest seems to be driven by the desire to 'get the money
         back' from the SPMR, knowing that a False Accounting conviction will
         provide a relatively inexpensive (to POL) pathway to that goal. In the
         event that an SPMR has not committed any criminal offence, then
         clause 12 of the standard contract provides an equivalent pathway to
         asset recovery using Civil Law.

         In either event (Criminal or Civil Case), since POL doesn't need to
         show where the money has gone, investigators see no business
         benefit in trying to establish the underlying root cause(s) of the loss.
                                                                              POL00344051
                                                                         POL00344051




   Under the contract between SPMR's and POL, the burden of proof
   (that they are not responsible for the loss) falls on the shoulders of
   each SPMR even though none of them (in the cases reviewed) had
   any investigative skills and their requests for assistance and provision
   of underlying data were routinely denied, mostly on cost grounds.
   This meant that the accused had neither the expertise, the external
   support, nor the data to establish the true reason for the loss and
   thereby either prove their own innocence or realise that they really
   were responsible for the loss.

3. In none of the cases examined so far did any investigator record
   anything that indicated that there might be any widespread systemic
   problem worthy of investigation, despite similar allegations being
   made by different, unconnected, SPMRs.

   One might expect that similar assertions by many SPMRs would
   trigger an investigation into the possibility that some of those
   assertions might be correct, but we found no evidence that this had
   ever happened. Examples of much-repeated assertions include
   problems involving postage labels; lost cheques; transactions dropped
   or duplicated as a result of power or communications failures;
   transactions executed under the IDs of branch staff but denied by
   them; GIRO or AP payments that were not charged to customers;
   ATM shortages; and Lottery Scratch Cards.

   This is not to question why every single assertion was not fully
   investigated but to suggest that, where repeated assertions have
   been heard, a sample should be deeply investigated until they have
   either been proved to be true or comprehensively dismissed.

4. We saw a repeated failure to reach consensus or closure with the
   interviewees. Where the SPMR was wrong in his or her assertions,
   one would expect that to be convincingly articulated and proved by
   the investigator. Time and again, however, the investigator and the
   SPMR got close to consensus but failed to arrive at it. This led to
                                                                              POL00344051
                                                                            POL00344051




   repeated situations where more and more time was spent re-visiting
   the same old issues, but at progressively greater distance from the
   underlying transaction(s). Had every SPMR's assertions been
   thoroughly investigated - and documented - at the outset, much
   wasted time would have been saved.

5. The overwhelming impression gained from reviewing the transcripts
   of investigative interviews is that the SPMR was viewed as an enemy
   of the business. The culture within the Investigation Team appears to
   be one of a "presumption of guilt" when conducting an investigation,
   rather than the aim of "seeking the truth". (See comments on the
   consequences of "Tunnel Vision" at the foot of this report.)

   POL's investigators will have come across SPMRs who have been
   responsible for their own shortfalls; who really did steal POL funds; or
   whose staff or relatives stole POL funds (and some of those will have
    jumped on the Horizon-bashing bandwagon' in their efforts to evade
   responsibility), but there will have been some who either really were
   innocent or who passionately believed that they were.

   It is the handling of this group that seems to have been seriously
   flawed. By failing to investigate those SPMRs' assertions (or even to
   pay proper heed to them during interviews), the investigators have
   alienated all of them. It is that group (the SPMRs who evidently still
   believe themselves not only to be innocent but also to have been
   cheated by POL) who really have become enemies of the business.

   Had POL's investigators handled their assertions more sympathetically
   - and professionally - at the outset, and invested a little more time in
   reaching closure with them, there would now be far fewer of them
   calling for their cases to be re-investigated.
                                                                                 POL00344051
                                                                             POL00344051




What changes should POL make to its Investigation Process?

2nd Sight cannot be certain about the changes that will be needed without
completing some further work. That would necessarily include:

      Interviewing the current Investigation Team Management and some of
      its senior staff;

   2. Examining the team's Mandate, Mission Statement, Goals and any
      Operational and Ethical Guidelines that it follows;

   3. Reviewing the CVs of the team's management and staff (including team
      members' professional backgrounds, qualifications and work
      experience);

   4. Reviewing the team's workload and management information (how
      many cases does the team deal with each year; what is it that drives the
      investigation workload; how many reports does it produce; what other
      work product does it generate; etc.);

   5. Reviewing a representative sample of the team's reports and other work
      product (e.g. Training Material and Courses Delivered; Systemic Issues
      Identified; Input to Systems Designers; etc.);

   6. Obtaining feedback from the team's 'customers' and other corporate
      stakeholders.

Once that work has been done it will be possible to formulate
recommendations that could reasonably be expected to transform the
effectiveness of the Investigation Process within a 6-12 month timescale.

Some beneficial results would be rapidly achieved simply by modifying the
Team's Mandate and Mission and then driving the new message home through
short but intensive training of all team members. Those team members who
then proved themselves unable to make the necessary transition would need
to be redeployed.
                                                                                    POL00344051
                                                                                POL00344051




Why having a first-rate Investigation Team is essential:

Because identifying loss drivers and correcting systemic weaknesses is such an
essential part of Effective Loss Management, it is absolutely vital that the
organisation does that job really well. Responsibility for this work usually falls
to the organisation's Investigation Team, or sometimes Internal Audit. It is
hard to overstate the importance of this function in maintaining the health of
the organisation. A properly functioning Investigation Function within POL will:

   1. Be staffed with trained and experienced individuals, of sufficient
      seniority and credibility that they command organisation-wide respect.
      Those individuals must also maintain a reputation as people who can be
      trusted by their fellow employees and by SPMRs (some of whom will be
      informants, whistleblowers, those accused of wrongdoing, etc.)

   2. Have a balanced team comprising individuals with backgrounds in
      commercial fraud investigation; in POL's operational processes and
      standard operating procedures (a deep understanding of the mechanics
      of branch processing is vital); and in police investigations (though it is
      vital that the team is not overwhelmingly staffed with ex-police
      individuals, not least because there can then exist a risk of 'tunnel
      vision' - an overwhelming focus on evidence of guilt - that will need to
      be corrected)

   3. Be well-versed in the law relating to the conduct of commercial and
      criminal investigations*

   4. Understand the enormous power that POL's Investigation Team wields
      (for example in the impact it will have on the lives of the subjects of its
      investigations - whether or not those investigations lead to criminal
      prosecutions)... and, over time, demonstrate that it can be entrusted
      with such power

   5. Understand that POL's Investigation Team in fact has far more power
      than almost any other business's Investigation Team (e.g. by reason of
                                                                                POL00344051
                                                                              POL00344051




   its power and adopted practice of bringing prosecutions without them
   first having to be approved by the Crown Prosecution Service)

6. Show, by its actions, as well as by its communications, that any innocent
   parties (including employees and sub-contractors) who become the
   subject of one of its investigations will always be dealt with in an even-
   handed and unbiased manner, with at least as much effort being
   directed at establishing innocence as in collecting evidence of guilt
   (note: this is just as important in preparing for Civil Asset Recovery and
   Internal Disciplinary Cases as it is in investigations that will produce
   evidence for Criminal Prosecutions)

7. Have the authority to select and prioritise those cases that it will
   investigate (it is generally more productive, in the long term, to
   investigate a few cases well than many cases poorly or superficially)

8. Receive high-quality and up-to-date management information from
   which the team will identify the businesses / branches / processes /
   products that deserve investigative attention

9. At all times strive to 'get to the truth' without being concerned about
   the consequences for POL (knowing that defence of the business, once
   the underlying facts have been established, will be the responsibility of
   others)

1O.Always bear in mind that POL's short-term interests (which might
   appear to be well-served by very quickly dismissing other peoples' or
   other organisations' claims) can sometimes be seriously at odds with its
  long-term interests (e.g. rejecting an SPMR's valid claim might save
   money in the short-term but undermine POL's franchise in the longer
   term)

11. Provide valuable feedback to POL's senior management regarding the
    trends, underlying root causes, systemic flaws, training and HR issues,
    etc. that have been detected during the team's investigations
                                                                                                               POL00344051
                                                                                                          POL00344051




   12. Provide meaningful input to systems and process designers to ensure
       that opportunities for error and fraud are progressively designed out of
       tomorrow's systems, processes and products

   13. Ensure that every one of its recommendations (such as for improved
       training, process change, control re-design, etc.) yield a payback that
       meets or exceeds POL's ROI target (this will ensure that no suffocating
       and low-yield overheads are added)



* NOTE: Examples of Laws and Guidance relating to the conduct of
Investigations include:
        •   The Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 -
            http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/25/contents


        •   The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 ('PACE') -
            http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1984/60/contents


        •   'How to conduct an investigation' (UK Standards Board) - http://cmis.milton-
            keynes.gov.uk/CmisWebPublic/Binary.ashx?Document=36295


        •   http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/d to g/disclosure manual/disclosure manual chapte
            r 1
            1.14. The prosecution team's duties under the CPIA 1996 are not simply about compiling
            schedules of unused material as part of preparation for court. At the heart of every
            investigation is the obligation, in the CPIA 1996 and Code of Practice, to pursue all reasonable
            lines of enquiry whether these point towards or away from the suspect.


        •   http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/d to g/disclosure manual/disclosure manual chapte
            r 4
        •   4.2. There is a duty under the Code of Practice for an investigator to pursue all
            reasonable lines of enquiry, whether these point towards or away from a suspect.
            What is reasonable will depend upon the circumstances of a particular case.
                                                                                                POL00344051
                                                                                          POL00344051




•   http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/dept-min/pub/pmj-pej/p4.htmI


    4. TUNNEL VISION


    1. INTRODUCTION


    Tunnel vision has been defined as "the single minded and overly narrow focus on an
    investigation or prosecutorial theory so as to unreasonably colour the evaluation of
    information received and one's conduct in response to the information." [1141
    Tunnel vision and its perverse by-product "noble cause corruption," [115] are the
    antithesis of the proper roles of the police and Crown Attorney. Yet tunnel vision has
    been identified as a leading cause of wrongful convictions in Canada and elsewhere.


    The role of the Crown Attorney has received considerable judicial comment, with
    frequent emphasis upon the inherent fairness that is integral to the role. The most
    oft-quoted comment is from Boucher v. The Queen, where Rand J. said:[116]

    It cannot be over-emphasized that the purpose of a criminal prosecution is not to
    obtain a conviction, it is to lay before a jury what the Crown considers to be credible
    evidence relevant to what is alleged to be a crime. Counsel have a duty to see that
    all available legal proof of the facts is represented: it should be done firmly and
    pressed to its legitimate strength but it must also be done fairly. The role of the
    prosecutor excludes any notion of winning or losing; his function is a matter of public
    duty than which in civil life there can be none charged with greater personal
    responsibility. It is to be efficiently performed with an ingrained sense of the dignity,
    the seriousness and the justness of judicial proceedings.




                                       8
