POL00333405

POL00333405
One to One Meeting Record
1.__| Personal Details
Name: Robert Daily
Line Manager: Andrew Daley
Date of meeting: 9 November 2009, Glasgow MC
One to One period covered: Last 3 months
Next 1-2-1 date/location
#4 Update - Priorities met (action points from previous 121) Evidences which
Behaviours
The following requirements/action points have been met; (bullet points)
1. Taken over Raymond’s ex cases, and have registered these via the SRA system, progressing towards PF prosecution.
2.
£h Line Managers comments & Comments on Line Manager (‘360’ feedback) Quarterly
Performance
Marking-to date

Line Manager’s Comments: Following my meeting with Robert, I found that he is a motivated member of the security team. He has taken
over some difficult cases from Raymond. One case is fairly intricate and has taken to bring to fruition. None of Raymond’s cases were
reported to the PF, so Robert is under pressure to register them with the PF, (on-line) and progress them to the point of prosecution. He is
doing very well processing the stagnant cases and the fruits of his labour will show in the new year, although PF cases take ages to
prosecute, once it’s handed over to the PF. Robert also has good ideas and is very motivated. Robert took the opportunity to liaise with the
PF and establish whether the PO Fraud Strand can assist them with a different type of report, etc. He is awaiting a date to meet with the PF.
It is also clear that he has a good working relationship with his local CM, Brian Trotter. Robert has at least double the amount of cases, due
to volume of cases raised in Scotland and the size of Scotland. Robert is the only investigator in Scotland. This has placed him under some
pressure but he is coping well. Robert has such a good relationship with the CM’s and other PO staff, these cases find their way to him,
once detected. I will get the rest of the team to also take on more workload in the Scottish region, so that Robert is not overloaded. Robert
does not wish to study a MsC course at present, rather allowing the younger staff members to take up studies. However, he is eager to
attend internal courses and or short courses. His positive ,ready to go-problem solved’ attitude is refreshing. Although Robert has indicated
that he has been through a learning curve, it appears that he has come out on the other side of the curve as a shining example to his fellow
investigators.

[X - Half Year]

4. | Progress against Personal Objectives (To identify issues which may hinder successful completion and corrective action required,
highlighting changes from last 1:1 in achievement, progress against milestones and issues)

121 Template version 14 September 2009 1
POL00333405
POL00333405

Objective

Progress since last meeting

Next milestone

Status
/Deliverable
action
date(s)GAR

Involved in customer engagement across
geographical areas by attendance of and
presentation to their monthly team meetings for;
¢ Network @ Contracts Advisor meetings
« Crown estate @ Contracts Advisor
meetings
¢ Field Support Teams @ Regional Team
Leaders meetings

See Behaviours attached.

Presentations to 2 FA teams.

Assisting with all Fraud Risk activities during 2009
and furthering the
« Crown Office Initiative

See behaviours

Ongoing

Reduce physical attacks, (i.e. robbery and
burglary) against the network to keep the
losses within £1,75million.

Reduce physical attacks, (robbery) against the
Supply Chain’s Cash In Transit operation, in
order to ensure that these losses are within the
£850K appetite.

See Behaviours

March 010

Achieve all targeted compliance of investigative
work by adherence to the standardisation of cases
and end to end processes.

21 cases on hand

See cases on hand update and
feedback/notes of 121, as
attached to this form.

Ongoing

Fully demonstrate that the business
processes/objectives are still met, whilst
ensuring that the most cost effective method
of travel and/or overnight accommodation
during 2009/10, by more effective use of all
tools available to them (pool cars/hire
cars/independent hotel booking services/web
conferencing/telephone conferencing.) To
reduce T&S costs for 2009/10 to within
budgetary targets.

See behaviours

Ongoing

121 Template version 14 September 2009
POL00333405
POL00333405

Recovery of 40% of monies from investigations Exceeding target, see Excel data Ongoing
conducted to have a positive return rate against attached.
investigation element of team

5. _ || Personal Development (progress against PDP / Performance Standards and new learning experiences planned or identified)

Action Progress Next milestone

1. Develop the required ongoing 1) Not on any courses at present
investigative skills

2.

6. _|| Recognition (personal/team/other colleagues) & Team issues (top performer, who needs most development, how are you
motivating and coaching your team)

Crown your colleague, Robert was nominated by Diane Matthews

121 Template version 14 September 2009 3
POL00333405
POL00333405

7. _ || Review of Behaviours/Action, identify a behaviour to discuss and provide examples (choose two from the following, I
create value for customers, I own performance, I take action, I work with others to win, I engage and involve, I support, develop
and challenge)

NAME Robert Daily Behaviour Evidence/Examples 2009/2010

Behaviours Evidence/Examples

121 Template version 14 September 2009 4
1 Lanark PO. Customer Services where receiving high volume of call re POCA enquiries after the closure of
office. After a customer was passed to the Police regarding being over charged for a recorded delivery, |
considered that time could be better utilised if they were made aware of the situation. Therefore | contacted
Line Management and advised on relevant questions to be asked prior to forwarding on to Police and other
departments

2 Lanark PO. Liaised with POCA Account Manager regarding customers and amounts stolen, giving regular
updates by phone to ensure business was kept up to date on progress.

3 Earlston PO. Took on case from colleague. Advised Procurator Fiscal on analysis of Horizon information.
Unfortunately she deemed insufficient evidence for theft. Discussed a charge of ‘Uttering’ as Postmaster
had repaid £3,000. This was considered and accepted. Awaiting outcome of plea from defence.

121 Template version 14 September 2009

POL00333405
POL00333405
1 Glenvarloch Crescent POCA case. | considered the communication breakdown regarding Lanark and created
an email and sent it to POCA Account Team, Press Office, Contracts Manager, Customer Services and Post
Office Security Personnel, detailing the case, possible disruption to services and customer complaints re
POCA’ s. It also explained who should be communicated regarding external enquiries. This ensured
information was passed to the correct sections.

2 Lanark PO. Liaised with Lanark CID on POCA case. Assisted With search at PO, advising Police on relevance
of evidence collected. Advised on Post Office procedures during breaks in Suspect Interview. Advised on
content of letter Police were sending out to customers regarding theft from their accounts.

121 Template version 14 September 2009

POL00333405
POL00333405
POL00333405
POL00333405

3 Earlston PO. Tasked by Procurator Fiscal to obtain further evidence and information within tight timescales.
Obtained and analysed Horizon information within timescale.

1 Having been involved in a Police Liaison case at Lanark | realised the lines of communication were
fragmented. | contacted our Senior Security Programme Manager and POCA Service Delivery Manager to
discuss how to manage communications prior to a further POCA case. | formatted an email and this was
delivered to all relevant sections informing them of their role and who relevant internal and external enquiries
should be dealt with or forwarded to.

2 Cases transferred. For the same cases | have had untangled existing documentation then assess what was
required to submit a comprehensive case to the PF.

121 Template version 14 September 2009 7
3 Cases transferred. | considered after progression to PF | had advised them although colleague was main
witness | would be the point of contact. This prevented case failures which would result in waste of prosecution
costs and jeopardising any potential recoveries.

4 Offender/PF report. | considered time was being wasted creating an offender report and a PF report for
Scottish cases. | created a report that incorporated both. The report was written in the PF format with the
preamble at the top and included the relevant information for POL to make a decision. All POL information was
highlighted in red and in a different font. Once it was decided for prosecution the preamble and information
highlighted in red was deleted, leaving the report read for submission to the PF. Now when a case is
authorised for prosecution it can be submitted to the PF within an hour, instead of time being spent writing a
further report.

121 Template version 14 September 2009

POL00333405
POL00333405
1 Attended SRA Training Event to keep myself up to date with changes to the website.

2 SRA Website. | have ensured the North Team are kept up to date with the website and the progress of the
new SRA Website through team meetings.

3 MacPhail Drive PO. Attended meeting with Botterills. Discussed Horizon information that Subpostmasters
(Multiple) could obtain. Considered the limited alarm access that some offices received from private
companies and suggested if limited access could be built in to Credence for Subpostmasters to obtain Horizon
information for their offices.

4 The Inch PO. Lothian & Borders Police have operation where suspect is using The Inch PO to purchase
Mobile Top Ups. Provided statement in processes and product and the E Top Up system POL uses.

121 Template version 14 September 2009

POL00333405
POL00333405
1 Received thanks from Line Manager for dealing with colleagues cases and getting everything back on track in
Scotland since Sustaining Momentum

2 Contacted Alex McKenzie, Field Support, Line Manager Mandy Neeson praising him for the standard of Audit
Report for Tobermory PO. Suggested it be put forward as template for future reports.

3 Contacted Jan Ferguson, Field Support, Line Manager Wendy Mahoney to thank Jan for the information
received for Ballygrant. The information she produced has allowed us to make a decision on whether to
attend. Attendance would cost the business approx £300 with overnight stays on Island due to Ferry times.

121 Template version 14 September 2009

POL00333405
POL00333405
POL00333405
POL00333405

4 Westwood PO. Transferred to Police due to Offender not cooperating. Gave statement outlining POCA
product and processes to advance case.

11 challenged the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service (COPFS) when SRA Certificates expired. New
certificates would not download on POL computers. Informed cases were backing up to be reported and
urgent action was required. New certificates issued problem found to be POL end. IT challenged to find
solution.

2 | challenged Julian Tubbs on decision to submit Glasgow CIT case to prosecution. | had contacted PF for
advice and was informed as money was repaid and he was a first offender the likelihood was it would be
marked for no proceedings. Julian decided it was policy to proceed to prosecution.

121 Template version 14 September 2009 11
3 I challenged the reporting process in Scotland. Two reports had to be submitted on for POL Security and
one for PF taking up valuable time. | compiled a merged report for both and submitted it to Line Management
and the North Team for comment. Feedback was positive and the report accepted as standard.

issues if relevant, annual leave and accumulated hours)

POL00333405
POL00333405

| Personal Concerns or Issues (workloads & priorities, problems, risks and successes, performance issues, own morale, domestic

Own Morale - Robert's sister in law recently passed away and his wife is grieving. He is providing lots of support.
Risks — Old and tired tape recorders.

Successes —

Annual Leave - As per Excel spreadsheet Days outstanding-11 days

Accumulated Hours - 9hrs-toil

VVVVVV

good.

* Request for information -

Other - Last 2 yrs have been a rollercoaster wrt the constant change in team leaders, although the previous team leaders were very

9 Summarise action points and items for discussion at next 121

Date Action Timescale _| Owner Update

Complete

New Priorities/Action Points: to be met by
the next 121 meeting,

Addendum:
Feedback Cases on Hand & Action Points.

121 Template version 14 September 2009
Robert Daily Cases on Hand

Stane

Update: Warrant issued for arrest, awaiting execution of the warrant.

Corlic Street

Update: Still awaiting business deposits from Giro Bank. Case is
been prioritised.

Port Glasgow Update: Case to be closed. Full recovery made. Case NF’d. PF of
the opinion that suspect will not reoffend and has a gambling
defence.

High Street Update: Case to be closed. Full recovery made. PF has lost case
papers. Where are copies, is it worth resurrecting, considering
the value?

Kessington Update: Case deserted by PF on grounds that essential witness still

in Pakistan. Court would have refused further adjournment. Look at
tracing essential witness asap.

Wansbeck Estate

e liaison case. Informed that the witness suffers from
Awaiting court adjournment date.

St Catherine’s

p' © call the PF and establish when the matter will be

pursued.
Westwood Update: AP to email policemen for follow up.
Skye Crescent Update: Trial due 14 December 2009.
Mcphail Drive Update: Police liaison case. AP to obtain an update.
Jesmond Update: Trial set for 14 December 2009.

Ottoferry SPSO

Update: Case to be closed. Accused was found guilty and received
community service.

Earston SPSO

Update: To proceed with an uttering charge. PF to meet with me.
AP to set up meeting with PF.

Kinlochewe Update: AP to call PF for an update.

Piable Update: Trial set 15 December 2009.

Tobermory Update: Submitted to PF. AP to contact PF and establish progress.
Glenwarloch Update: Admission made. PF to test this case in the courts. AP
Crescent liaise with PF.

Bellville Street

Update: PF to look at charging Danny Naga. Loss to be recovered by
Civil Litigation Agent Debt Team. AP follow up with PF on progress of
case.

Cragengs Road

Update: Have received a solicitor’s letter indicating that she wants to
repay the debt. AP to establish what has been received by the Civil
Litigation Agent Debt Team, prior to submitting to PF.

Glasgow CIT

Update: Submitted to PF. AP to follow up with PF with respect to
progress.

Dalmeigh SPSO.

Update: To interview the subject next week.

121 Template version 14 September 2009

POL00333405
POL00333405
