POL00372551
POL00372551

Message

From: Alice Perkins
Sent: 21/10/2013 10:
To: Paula Vennells
Subject: Re: Signing out!
Paula,

Thank you for this. All clear and helpful. I hope you get a real break this week.

One thing. I'd like to understand why you don't want me to talk to Sue about her leaving? As you say, we
can discuss this next Monday evening - a lot to get through - but if she's made up her mind, what harm
can it do?

All the best

Alice

sooo Original Message -----
From: Paula Vennells [mailto
Sent: Monday, October 21, 2013 12:47 Ait
To: Alice Perkins,
cc: Chris M Day <
Subject: Signing out!

Martin Edwards

Hi Alice, don't worry about the lateness of this note - I am clearing the I tray before signing out. I
hope your weekend has been good despite the autumn rains.

Chris is well briefed, as is Martin.
A couple of updates:

+ Sir Anthony Hooper/Sparrow: very positive phone call on Friday pm. No issue at all re Hillsborough; he
is going to send a file note. He also understood the SS angle and is keen to support. Belinda is now well
glued in to what is happening.

My concern re Sparrow currently is our obligations of disclosure re., an unsafe witness. (The
representative from Fujitsu made statements about no bugs, which later could be seen to have been
undermined by the SS report.) We do not think it material but it could be high profile. Martin E is
briefed if you want more detail. This is just in case.

+ Fed/strategy: I have read the draft MoU for the 15 year agreement and fed back some comments on style
and content. Sue and Kevin will be in touch to take you through. It is on the right track, it needs more
of a PO balance and the accompanying paper must have a horizon scan. I have yet to read the operating
document but expect this in some ways to be less difficult. Mark is working on the comms planning and I
know will be happy to talk to you as well, if you would like to. I decided not to issue a Board update -
jit risked being too upbeat too soon. But the team will get something out post-Thursday's meeting with the
i where the final details should be agreed having gone through lawyers. (George on holiday till
then.)

+ half-year: Chris and Mark will pick up all comments, inc., Alasdair's.

* Sue B has decided to leave. I would prefer if you didn't raise with her but wanted you to know in case.
I shall use the opportunity as a catalyst for wider changes and we can explore when we meet next Monday.
(Obviously Chris, Fay and Martin E are aware.)

“He has had
The CwU are

due in this week as per my note.
I think that's all the important areas. Chris is in the loop. If you do need me - same system as before -
don't assume I'll be reading emails but I will pick up texts and can be directed to email that way. I
know you won't bother me unless serious, but if in doubt, don't hesitate.

Best wishes and thanks to Chris and Martin in advance.

Paula

Sent from my iPad

eae www Wwe eH He Ha a He eso sea ae eee ea desea seas aera trae
POL00372551
POL00372551

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the
named recipient, you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this
communication. If you have received this in error, please contact the sender by reply email and then

delete this email from your system. Any views or opinions expressed within this email are solely those of
the sender, unless otherwise specifically stated.

POST OFFICE LIMITED is registered in England and wales no 2154540. Registered Office: 148 OLD STREET,
LONDON EC1V 9HQ.

a

This message has been scanned for malware by Websense. www.websense.com
