POL00059424
POL00059424

Post Office Ltd
CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Statement Mare ard TNE

of:

Age if under : (if over 18 insert Occupation: 1
18: ‘over 18’) Arehitent

1. Introduction

Jenkins. T am employed by Fujitsu Servic Ltd who

I am Gareth Idr

have been contracted by Post Office Ltd to provide the Horizon systems

operating in Post Offices around the cour y. However I understand that
my role is to assist the court rather than represent. the views of my
employers or Post Office Ltd.

I graduated from Cambridge University with a degree in Mathemati in

1973 and was awarded an MA by Cambridge University in 1997. 1

employed by ICL in tember 1973 and have worked for that company

since (though its was changed to Fujitsu Services about 10 years

ago). During my Lime with ICL / Fujitsu T have held a number of roles

in Gustomer support, development, design and architecture. Curing the

early 1990s T + involy with representing IC in developing Syste

Management Standards and in 1992 I was the head of the UK delegation on

Systems Management at the International Standards Organisation

conference in Ottawa, ada. In the late 1990s 1 become a

Distinguished Engin within ICL. Distinguished Engineers, § abour

100 or so of the nical staff within the company (out about
1 fi i) stat

[ am a member of the B sh Computer Society M , a Chartered

Signature Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Of 12 Pages
Continuation
Statement of

Engineer

ng) a

1996 1 have been working on the Horizon project in association

$
with Post Office Ltd. My initial role was in the integration of the

Riposte messaging system which is responsible for storing all data in

the Post Office branches and replicating it to the Data Centres. I was

also responsible for the design of the interface between Horizon and

Streamline which processes all Credit and Debit Card payments for Post

Office Ltd. More recently I’ve been involved in projects associated

with interfacing data from Horizon to Post Office's back end accounting

sy

I have been asked to provide a statement in the case of Angela Sefton

and Anne Nield. T understand ¢

integrity of the system has been

ioned and this report provides some general information regarding

Integrity of Horiz

on.

tement there is a statement that loss

T note that in the Defence

started in 2005 and a statement that Horizon was installed at that time.

n was rolled out between 1999

As TI mention below (section 2.1), Horize

and 2002, so I am surprised at the refere

e to 2005. However there was

a significant change to Horizon that was implemented late in 2005,

namely the removal of the weekly Cash Account report and the move to the

ed at

monthly Branch Trading Report. The ges were thoroughly te

the time (as is the case with any change to Horizon) and there has been

no indication of there being any issues regarding this change. In

particular the changes had no impact on the overall integrity of the
ateme

stem 4 outlined in th

further background

Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424

POL00059424
CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement
Page 3 Of 12 Pages
Continuation Gareth Idris JENKINS
Statement of
Li The nt Structure
ection 2 of the document describes the Horizon system at a high level,
giving time-line for its development, the Business scope and
Archi cture diagrams for both the original Horizon System and the
current Horizon Online system,
Section 3 then summarises my views on the overali integrity of the
Horizon system.
2. The Horizon System
Timeline
Fujitsu were originally awarded a contract in 1996 to provide a Horizon
System to Post Office Lt The following provides me key dates and
functional changes:
¢ Horizon Pilot 1996
* Horizon Rollout 1999 2002
* Network Banking 2003
. 2004
* Cash Account removed 2005
* Data Centre Migration 2009
e HNG-X Rollout 2010
Horizon Online (or HNG-X} was a major re-implementation of Horizon. it
was a complete re-implementation of the business functionality at the
and utilised a central Database to hold of all
tions re r than the Me t iginal Horizon
All Post Office the Hi be

Signature
witnessed by

GRO

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 4 Of 12 Pages

Tdris JENK

Continuation
Statement of

Online between January and September 2010 actions were

the new system as part

ope
The Business scope of Horizon is:

e Point Of Sale Application
* Transaction Recording
© All such transactions are Audited

¢ Posting Summary Transactions to POL SAP (Post Off Ltd's back

end accounting system)

jence (Post Gffice Ltd’s back

* Posting Detailed Transactions to

end Management Information system)

* Posting Remuneration Data to AP (Royal Mail Group’s back end

Payroll system)

* De parties

ivering Client Data to Post Office Lta lents (ie
that Post Office Ltd acts as an agent for such as Local

Authorities and Utility companies ete)

Diagrams

Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 5 Of 12. Pages
Continuation Gareth Tdris JENKINS
Statement of

u” Audit
"Extract

Data
Extract

Journal

Figure 1 - Horizon Data Flows

The Horizon sys

em was designed to store all data locally on the
hard disk

in what is referred to as the messagestore. Once
the data has been successfully stored there it is then replicated
(copied) to the hard disks of any other counters in the branch (and in
the case of a single counter branch to the additional external storade

on the

ingte counter}. Pata is alse pa

on from the eway counter

to the Ho on data centre using similar me

nani

where it is

in the cs

Signature. Signature

G RO witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 6 Of 12 Pages

Continuation NKINS

Statement of

The replication proc ed such that should the data fail to be

a failure on the local IT network

copied immediately (for examp]

due
within the branch or another counter being switched off or the branch
being disconnected from the data centre), then further attempts are made

to replicate the data at regular intervals until it is finally copied

ssfully. Once the data reaches the Data Centre a further copy is

taken by the Audit Agent which writes it te an Audit File which is added

into the audit trail wi e it is available for retrieval for up to 7

years. Data in the audit trail is “sealed” with a secure checksum that
is held separately to ensure that it has not been tampered with or

corrupted,

from the CS M

Other systems can also access the d sagestore via

Harvester Agents. However ich systems are outside the scope of the

integrity of the Audit tra

Every record that is written te the transaction log has a unique
incrementing sequence number. This means it is possible to detect if

any transitions recerds have been lost.

While a customer session is in proar details of the transactions for

that customer session are normally held in the computer's memory until

the customer session (often known as the “stack”) is settled. At that

point all details of the tra ions (including any methods of payment
used) are written to the local hard disk and replicated (as described

above). It should be noted that double entry bookkeeping is used when

recording Financial transactions, ic for every le of goods or

services, © cover the method of payment

such a

it is writ

t has been use

her all the data is hard disk or none

way that

Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 7 Of 12. Pages

Continuation Gareth Idris JENKI
Statement of

of it written, This concept of “atomic writes” is also taken into
account when data is replicated to other systems (ie other counters,
external storage or the data centre).

The data for a stack will have been successfully secured to the local

hard disk before the screen is updated indicating that a new customer

sion can be started. Note that although an attempt will have been

to replicate the data to an external system at this time, there is

guarante at this point that such replication will have been

sful. For example if there is a Network Failure followed by a

Terminal failure there is a slight risk that transactions in the

ng period could be lost.

All data that written includes a “checksum” value (known as a CRC)

which is checked whenever the data is read to ensure that it has not

n corrupted. Any such corruptions detected on reading will result in

being recorded in the event logs which are held on the local

hard disk for a few days for immediate diagnosis and also immediately

sent through to the data centre wt i for

e they are he

dilur to wri to a hard disk {after appropriate retri will

in the counter failing and needing to be restarted and so will be

immediately visible to the 1

snever data is retrieved for audit enquiries a number checks are

carried out:

it files have not been tampered with (ie the Seals on the

audit files are correct)

The individual transactions have sure that

Lhey have not been corrupted.

A chex

is made that no re

Signature Signature

GRO 1 witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 8 Of 12 Pages
Continuation
Statement of

s JENKINS

generated by a counter has an incremental sequence number and a

ck is made that there are no gaps in the sequencing.

Oracle
Write

Audit
Write

AL

| |
| Audit Store

BAL Message

Pigure 2 — Horizon Online Data Flows

Horizon Online is designed to store all data in an online database known
as the Branch Database (BRDB). In particular no data concerning

Business Transactions is retained at the counter other than in the

memory of the Counter Business Application.

In order to support recovery, the identifier of the last successfully completed Basket is recorded on the
Hard disk at the counter. However this is not classed as Business Data

Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 9 of 12 Pages
Continuation Gareth ldris JENKINS
Statement of

Trans

ions are carried out locally on the Horizon Online counters and

a Basket is built up during a Customer Session. Each transa ion will

result in a Basket Entry consisting of one or more Accounting Lines. At
the end of a Customer Session when the Basket has been completed and all

Settlement items (or Tender lines) have been processed and added into

the Basket as further Accounting Lines, s that the total value of the |
Basket is zero, the entire Basket is sent to the Data Centre as a BAL
Message where the Branch Access Layer (BAL) processes the message and

all the Accounting Lines are recorded and committed to the BRDB as part

of a single Oracle Commit. This means that ther all the transactions

within a Bas

ket are successfully written or none of them are. Once the

Accounting Lines have been successfully committed a response is returned

to the counter indicating this suc and this then allows any receipts

to be printed. Tr

Basket is deemed to be fully completed once all

relevant receipts have been successfully prin 1. Note that if there

are no receipts to be printed, then the screen is updated to show the

top level menu indicating successful

uipletion of the previous Basket.

The Oracle Commit also includes an Audit of the data originally

transmitted from the counter to tl

BRDB. This data is digitally signed

at the counter using a key generated as t of the Log On process. Tt

is this audit record that is used to provide the extract of transactions

used fe

Litigation support.

Any auditable ssage from the counter is stored, together with its

Digital Signature and other key attributes in an “Audit table” (known as

the Journal) in BRDB. Each n

midnight, the contents

of th table for the previous day are co; from the BRDB to a number

of gerial files.

| A number of

Signature Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 10 Of 12 Pages
Continuation
Statement of

data fron

each

number of for ease of

entrated into a

At thi

point a check is made that indeed tt

e@ are no missing

duplicate jsns for any counter and should any be found an alert

raised.

ld only happen as a result of a bug in the

somebody tampering with the data in BRDB and this

included specifically to c any such

These are then copied to the Audit system where they are sealed

with

nls. hey are held there for a period of 7 years during

which they may be retrieved and

iltered to produce the

audit data for a particular Branch.

The audit record may a4

include application events that have been

aceumulated at the counter since the last auditable m

sage was sent to

the Data All major activities that affect the Brar also have

an audit nt from the counter to the Data snire included

in the audit

Audit record includes the following identification:

* Branch identifier (i.e. FAD Code)

© Counter

e Sequer

Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 11 Of 12 Pages
Continuation eth idris JENKINS

Statement of

Within any counter (i for a given Branch Id / Counter Id

combination), the jsn will always i by exactly one for each

d. ‘This enables a check to be made that there are

successive audit rec

rds missing fxr © audit trail when they are retrieved.

no re

The transactions in a basket’ are constructed using the principle of
d

Line

uble-entry bookkeeping. This means that in addition to the Accounting

that relate

to the actual business transactions, separate
Accounting Lines are also generated for the tender items (such as Cash,
Cheques or Credit / Debit Cards), resulting in the total value of all

sro. When the contents of a

Accounting Line

sket adding up to
Basket are written to BRDR a check is made that the net value of all the
o and should it not be, then an alert is

accounting lines is indeed ze

raised and the basket is discarded and an error response returned to the

counter,

Not sult of a bug in the

happen as a

code and this duded specifically to check for any

such bugs.

Baskets are also built up during Back Office Sessions and st

ets.

Office baskets
3. Horizon Integrity

ed in a simiiar way to Customer Ba

This is described the separate integrity documents

ARCGENREPOO04 .HorizonDataIntegrity.doc which I now produce as exhibit

GIJ/l and HorizonoOn? i duce

ity_POL.doc which I now pr

invols in a number of challenges to

stam and produced Witness Statem

the or

Signature
witnessed by

POL00059424
POL00059424

CONFIDENTIAL
Witness Statement

Page 12 Of 12. Pages
Continuation Gareth Idris JENKINS
Statement of

To am net

for a numbe where the Integrity has been challende

where Integrity of Horizon Online has be

aware of any en

cases in which I have been involved were

The main chalieng

presented as “Hypothetica and my previous Witness Statements

went through each of t hypotheses and showed that there was no

specific evidence for any of them in the data presented.

In summary I would conclude by saying that I fully believe that Horizon

will accurately record all data that is submitted to it and correctly

account for it. However jit cannot compensate for any data that is
incorrectly input into it as a result of human error, lack of training

or fraud (and nor can any other system).

Signature
witnessed by

