POL00145120
POL00145120

From: BARTY, Susan GRO

Sent: Wed 03/07/2013 2:19:13 PM (UTC)

To: Rodric Williams; GRO 4

Subject: RE: Horizon - Second Sight Interim Report - STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL
Rodric

Just to check - | am not able to click through in the Spot Review Bible. Should | be able to?

Kind regards
Susan

Susan Barty
Partner

www. law-now.com

From: BARTY, Susan

Sent: 03 July 2013 14:30

To: 'Rodric Williams’

Cc: Hugh Flemington; Turner, William

Subject: RE: Horizon - Second Sight Interim Report - STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL

Rodric
Thanks for this. | will let you know if we have any questions.

Just so you know, | will be working from our Bristol office tomorrow, and working from home on Friday (only 25 minutes from the
office if necessary!). Will Turner (copied), one of our associates, will be helping me with this.

Kind regards
Susan

Susan Barty
Partner
CMS Cameron McKenna LLP

www.law-now.com

From: Rodric Williams [mailtod

Sent: 03 July 2013 12:53
To: BARTY, Susan

Cc: Hugh Flemington
Subject: Horizon - Second Sight Interim Report - STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL

Susan,
POL00145120
POL00145120

Thank you for your time on the telephone yesterday.

We expect to receive Second Sight’s Interim Report late Thursday / early Friday. | will forward it to you as soon as it is
to hand so that you can review it for factual accuracy and (as requested by our Chairman) any possible defamation
issues. We will want as quick a turnaround as possible.

To help you, | attach:

1. The Terms of Reference pursuant to which Second Sight have been operating;

2. The “Concerns with Horizon” document which set out a mechanism by which Subpostmasters could raise
issues with Horizon for consideration by Second Sights. This also sets out a little bit more about how Second
Sight should conduct its review and report its findings;

3. Abrief for the meeting which our Chairman, CEO, and Company Secretary had with James Arbuthnot MP this
morning;

4. Aninternal POL Briefing Note on the Interim Report, which expands on many of the issues raised in the
meeting brief; and

5. The “Spot Review Bible” (see below).

Second Sight has approached its review by identifying specific issues and forwarding them to us for comment. We
have called these “Spot Reviews”.

The four specific cases the subject of the Interim Report are covered in Spot Reviews 1, 5, 21 and 22. The “Spot
Review Bible” embeds the requests in from Second Sight and our responses (which were prepared with assistance

from Fujitsu, which supplies the Horizon platform).

Please let me know if you would like me to talk you through any of these documents or any issue in more detail, or if
you need any further information.

Kind regards, Rodric

Rodric Williams | Litigation Lawyer

) 148 Old Street, LONDON, EC1V 9HQ

Post Office stories

®
& @postofficenews

POL00145120
POL00145120

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named recipient, you
must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication. If you have received this in error,
please contact the sender by reply email and then delete this email from your system. Any views or opinions expressed within
this email are solely those of the sender, unless otherwise specifically stated.

POST OFFICE LIMITED is registered in England and Wales no 2154540. Registered Office: 148 OLD STREET, LONDON
EC1V 9HQ.

Proud to support Special Olympics as our Charity Partner who provide year-round sports training and competition for children and adults with learning
disabilities: transforming lives through sport.

CMS Cameron McKenna LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registration number OC310335. It is a body corporate
which uses the word “partner” to refer to a member, or an employee or consultant with equivalent standing and qualifications. It is authorised and regulated
by the Solicitors Regulation Authority of England and Wales with SRA number 423370. A list of members and their professional qualifications is open to
inspection at the registered office, Mitre House, 160 Aldersgate Street, London EC1A 4DD. Members are either solicitors or registered foreign lawyers. VAT
registration number: 974 899 925. Further information about the firm can be found at www.cms-cmok.com

CMS Cameron McKenna LLP is a member of CMS, the organisation of European law firms. Further information can be found at www.cmslegal.com

The contents of this e-mail (including any attachments) are confidential and may be legally privileged. If you are not the intended recipient of this e-mail, any
disclosure, copying, distribution or use of its contents is strictly prohibited, and you should please notify the sender immediately and then delete it (including
any attachments) from your system. Notice: the firm does not accept service by e-mail of court proceedings, other processes or formal notices of any kind
without specific prior written agreement.

