                                                                                                              POL00116218
                                                                                                          POL00116218



                                          ----------------------------------
From:                   Paula Vennellsi                      -GRO
Sent:                   Mon 18/11/2013 10:34:39 PM (UTC)
To:                     Martin Edwards                        GRO
Subject:                Re: draft note for the Board
Attachment:             image.png
Attachment:             image.png
Attachment:             image.png
Attachment:             image.png
Attachment:             image.png
Attachment:             image.png
Attachment:             image.png

Thx. Risk, performance, and any noting papers. Cheers.

Sent from my iPad

On 18 Nov 2013, at 22:19, "Martin Edwards'"                         GRO                wrote:




        Just reading through tomorrows ExCo papers. Are there any you haven't read yourself yet which you'd
        Tike me to focus on? (Obviously I'll read them al l!)


        From: Paula Vennells
        Sent: Monday, November 18, 2013 10:11 PM
        To: Martin Edwards; Theresa Iles
        Subject: Fwd: draft note for the Board

        Thx Martin. That was impressive! Can we track down a reply or anything in the Board papers to
        show this was logged and why we may have ended up where we are?

        Could you also ask Simon R at Bond Dickenson to comment, as they probably gave Susan
        advice?

        Cheers, Paula

        Sent from my iPad

        Begin forwarded message:


              From: Paula Veimells             GRO
              Date: 18 November 2013 22:00:36 GMT
              To: Paula
              Cc: Theresa Ilesl          GRO
              Subject: FW: draft note   the
                                            for




                                                     Board
                                                                                                 POL00116218
                                                                                               POL00116218



This emails refers to a conversation you had with Susan about managing the costs of
mediation.
Martin

From: Paula Vennells
Sent: 27 August 2013 22:47
To: Alwen Lyons; Susan Crichton
Subject: Fwd: draft note for the Board

Alwen, thank you for this. I'll get back to you on one section I'm reviewing but wanted to
get Susan in the loop on Horizon asap. The other two parts below are fine - just a colon and
inverted commas missing from the MG piece (to lead into the SLT note). I have amended
below.

Re Horizon: I think there is too much detail re the release but nothing on reassuring the
Board re mediation. They will want to know how we plan to manage any associated risks.

Susan, a couple of questions to help position this: I have just read the mediation pack
tonight: p10 states clearly that compensation can be a possible outcome. When we
discussed this, the hope of mediation was to avoid or minimise compensation but as far as
I can see, the pack doesn't really suggest any other outcome. (Difficult To do I know.) And
so, this will be the page that Spmrs will pay attention to. You explained that there were
steps in place to advise Spmrs entering the process that this was a chance to be heard and
not to expect compensation. How are we planning to manage those expectations? And
where compensation may be offered, you mentioned small figures in the £3-5k band: can
we give a range of costs? (ROM is fine)

The Board note might be better briefer and more factual: ie., mediation launched as per
our commitment (independent adjudication); some reassurance around what we expect
from the mediation process - ie., not compensation; it has gone through the ARC/ and or
discussed with Alasdair/Alice; Board (or ARC?) will be updated in more detail in Sept.,
Board pack?

This is urgent: the Board might have expected to be informed before or at least at the
same time as the release was issued. I'm sure they will understand because of strikes but
it's a bit close. For first thing tomorrow please.

Thanks both,

Paula
Sent from my iPad
Begin forwarded message:

      From: Alwen Lyons                 GRO _._._._._._._._._._._._._._..
      Date: 27 August 2013 20:36:46 BST
      To: Paula Vennells                GRO___
      Subject: draft note for the Board

      Paula her is the message for the Board, can you let me have any amends.
      Would you look in particular at the HR piece as these are my words and you
      may want to change them. The rest is picked up from communications but I
      have positioned as your note.
                                                                                    POL00116218
                                                                                  POL00116218



Dear All
I promised you a note covering four different areas, apologies for the length
of the email but there is a lot to cover

Horizon - Announcement of independent mediation scheme for
subpostmasters (Project Sparrow)

We have today announced the introduction of an independent mediation
scheme to address the concerns raised by some subpostmasters regarding
cases which they feel require further resolution.

This follows the publication of the interim report into the Horizon system
produced by Second Sight in July. As you know the report stated that so far no
evidence of system wide (systemic) problems with the Horizon software had
been found. However, it noted that improvements could be made in the
training and support processes provided to subpostmasters. In response to
the report we have made a number of commitments, one of which is to
create this independent mediation scheme for subpostmasters and the Post
Office to investigate and try to resolve a subpostmaster's concerns.

The Post Office, JFSA (Justice for Subpostmasters Alliance), and Second Sight,
the independent investigators, have formed a working group to
collaboratively develop and monitor this scheme which is available to current
and former subpostmasters from 27 August 2013.

Commenting on the launch of the Scheme, Angela van den Bogerd Post Office
Head of Partnerships said: "The Post Office is committed to addressing any
outstanding concerns among subpostmasters swiftly and transparently.

"As part of this commitment we set up an independent review which recently
published an interim report which found that so far there was no evidence of
any systemic issues with Horizon but did identify some further improvements
we could make to our training and support arrangements, which we are
taking forward.

"In addition, the independent mediation scheme we are announcing today
will provide an effective way to assess and address any outstanding cases
where subpostmasters feel they have been unfairly treated.

"Subpostmasters are the lifeblood of our business and we take their concerns
extremely seriously. We hope the package of measures we are announcing
will demonstrate our commitment to working closely with them to further
improve our network."

Commenting on the announcement, James Arbuthnot MP, who is
spearheading interest in the matter at Parliament, said: "I am very pleased
indeed with the working group's proposed process. To my mind, it represents
the very best chance all parties - individual subpostmasters and mistresses,
and the Post Office have of ensuring the best outcome for everyone. It is fair,
thorough, and independent."

Subpostmasters wishing to submit an application can visit www.ifsa.org.uk
for further information.
                                                                                     POL00116218
                                                                                   POL00116218




I have am also in the process, with the help of Alasdair and Alice, setting up a
lessons learned review to understand what we could have done better in the
independent review carried out by Second Sight, but also to understand how
the Business responded to the Subpostmasters' challenges and whether our
process for dealing with balance queries, suspensions, prosecutions etc.
were fair. This review will report to me and Alwen will help facilitate the work
for Richard Hatfield who has agreed to undertake the work finishing by mid
October.




Appointment of the new Chief Marketing and Commercial Officer

As you know we have been searching for a Chief Marketing and Commercial
Officer. Following approval by the Nominations & Remuneration
Committees, I am pleased to inform you that Martin George has been
appointed to the role. In the spirit of no surprises, Martin has held a number
of senior marketing roles and was at BA during the time of the allegations of
fixing the price of the fuel surcharge. Appropriate due diligence was carried
out to my satisfaction and to the satisfaction of the RemCom prior to
appointment and full references have been taken (two by me personally).
Martin is a strong marketing professional, who will be a great addition to the
Post Office and bring additional strength to the ExCo.

Attached is a copy of the communication that has gone out to the Senior
Leadership Team. ShEx have also been informed of the appointment:

"I am very pleased to be able to announce that Martin George will be joining
the PO Executive Committee, reporting to me, as Chief Marketing and
Commercial Officer. He will be taking up his new role on 23 September.
Martin will be responsible for leading the Marketing, Mails, Telecoms,
Government and Digital teams as well as taking the lead on the SME agenda.

Martin is a proven business leader with significant experience in brand
marketing, commercial and general management; he is an accomplished
marketing professional having worked in companies such as Boots, Cadbury,
British Airways and BUPA. He has held both senior executive and main Board
roles.

In terms of his career there are many highlights, to draw out just a few: at
Cadbury Martin worked in Brand Management and won the National
Marketing Award from the Institute of Marketing for a new product launch,
whilst at BA he transformed the commercial model from "intermediary push"
to "consumer pull" through a programme of product & service innovation as
well as the introduction of ba.com. Martin is passionate about the consumer,
as well as numerous service enhancements; he introduced BA miles to
improve customer loyalty. He also led the commercial recovery of BA
following the tragic events of 9/11. Whilst at BUPA he led the global initiative
on Brand repositioning and transformed the ecommerce capability of the
business,

I would like to extend my thanks to Paul Brown who has led the Commercial
                                                                                  POL00116218
                                                                                POL00116218




team on an interim basis and who will work closely with Martin during his
induction period.

I am sure that you will join with me in giving a warm welcome to Martin
when he joins us in September."



Industrial Action Update

290 crown branches opened today (managers were deployed) with 79 closed.

There has been very limited media coverage of today's strike action with the
Daily Express being the only national newspaper making reference to it.
There has been no national TV broadcast coverage, though a small number of
regional radio stations have covered the strikes.

Yesterday, of the 19 branches in Scotland for whom we received notification
of strike action (due to different local holiday arrangements in Scotland), 9
opened and 10 closed. There was limited coverage in the Scottish press and
no significant coverage in the national press.

Over the course of the weekend approximately 60% of staff have taken strike
action which is in line with recent strikes.




Thanks
Alwen
Alwen Lyons I Company Secretary


         i,48   d Struet, L J`NDON E: I. °,! 6HQ



            r                            ~
  POL00116218
POL001 16218
