                                                                                         POL00294897
                                                                                       POL00294897



                 LEGALLY PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL
Response to JFSA
Request for Delegated Authority As Regards Costs of Legal Action
14 October 2011


Request

We request POL IC approval for delegated authority to [ Kevin Gilliland ] to approve
the initiation of legal action and subsequent legal costs in defence of challenges
made by Shoosmiths (Access Legal). These challenges are on behalf of former
subpostmasters who have been dismissed for financial irregularities and who have
challenged the integrity of the Horizon system in their defence. POL is at an early
stage of action, however, costs of defence for the current "Letters Before Action"
are estimated at [ £ xx ] and the current upper estimate of costs, should more cases
proceed, is [ £ xx ].


Background

Throughout the last 10 years, the Horizon accounting system has been subject to a
number of unfounded criticisms in the national press. It has also faced questions in
the Houses of Parliament and allegations in court by former subpostmasters and
their legal defence teams. Post Office has consistently won its prosecutions, and
presiding judges have made statements which had been expected to deter further
baseless allegations, however, the challenges continue to be made.

The situations have arisen in a minority of cases where POL has dismissed a
subpostmaster for financial irregularities and the subpostmaster has claimed that it
was the accounting records that were wrong due to IT issues, rather than that
money had been stolen.


Current Situation

Shoosmiths (Access Legal) are acting for several former subpostmasters. These
individuals come together in the JFSA (Justice For Subpostmasters Alliance). POL
has now received commonly worded "Letters Before Action" from Shoosmiths on
behalf of 4 former subpostmasters. These are precursors to claims for damages
against POL. They request significant materials to be disclosed.

POL had around 20 cases which it wished to take to court, where the defence
blamed Horizon. POL is confident that Horizon is not at fault, however, some of the
predicted legal costs outweighed the debts being pursued. POL could not
economically justify individual cases but to abandon such cases risked giving
unwarranted credence to the jfsa's allegations.

The counter claims have now brought these to a head. POL now has to defend
onerous requests from Shoosmiths and consider its response to all the cases
above.


Steering Group

POL has now established a steering group chaired by Rod Ismay and involving
representatives from Legal, IT, Network and Security, with reference to Press Office
and other teams as considered necessary.
                                                                                     POL00294897
                                                                                   POL00294897



                LEGALLY PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL
Proposals regarding legal action will be submitted by that group, based on legal
advice and with relevant input from stakeholders as regards the reasonableness
and relevance of requests for information received.

The terms of reference of the group are as follows:

To propose to the defined business decision makers, and subsequently manage, a
co-ordinated litigation plan to address existing challenges and deter future
challenges in the most pragmatic and efficient manner. This group to review the
status of the overall response and to be empowered to make decisions on tactical
matters.


Updates to POL IC

Noting papers will be submitted to POL IC as considered necessary by either the
Steering Group or POL IC.
