POL00109806
POL00109806

Message

From: Angela Van-Den-Bogerd f
on behalf of | Angela Van-Den-Bogerd <~
Sent: 18/12/2014 08:54:59

To: Alwen Lyons {

Subject: Fw: One Show

Thanks Alwen,
I have and here's my response.

Angela
e

oore- Original Message -----

From: Angela Van-Den-Bogerd

Sent: Thursday, December 18, 2014 12:05 AM
To: Belinda Crowe; Paula Vennells

Subject: RE: One Show

Paula,

Steve Phillips at Nelson is in the Scheme. we have extensively investigated his claims - first as BAU and
then as a Scheme application. He claims that interference on his telephone line was causing him losses in
branch as well as intermittent power cuts. We have invested a large amount of time sharing our
investigation findings with him. I have personally visited him to share our findings and have
demonstrated to him that the cause of his losses is highly likely to be errors at the counter (we have
evidence of a large number of errors being attributed to Steve himself) although we can not rule out
theft as his security procedures were lacking. we advised him early on through BAU when his losses had
not reached £18k to introduce individual stock units. He refused and the losses continued. when I became
involved I insisted he introduce individual stock units which my team set up for him. Since this point
the losses have stopped (other than the usual tolerance level jie £20ish per week)

The reason we haven't been in touch with Steve about the loss is that I agreed with him we would block
his debt until his application had concluded in the Scheme. Steve is aware of this. He is also aware that
our investigation has found no system or equipment fault and therefore he realises he is responsible for
the loss. second sight has yet to produce their view on this case - this is I believe a few weeks off.

Angela

From: Belinda Crowe

Sent: 17 December 2014 22:42
To: Angela Van-Den-Bogerd
Subject: Fw: One Show

oo-e- Original Message -----

From: Paula Vennells

Sent: Wednesday, December 17, 2014 09:45 PM
To: Mark R Davies;
Cc: Alice Perkins <
Subject: One Show

ert; Patrick Bourke
t

Hi all, I managed to catch the one show on iPlayer

Not denying the fact it is unhelpful and inaccurate, (especially the focus on Horizon - but see below re
thoughts on that), Mark has achieved a balance of reporting beyond anything I could have hoped for. The
statements stamped across the screen with the PO sign as a back drop were really powerful. They
emphasised everything we have done, and came across as ... fact! Very good.

The rest was hype and human interest. Not easy for me to be objective but I was more bored than outraged.
The MP quoted (who?) was full of bluster, and inaccurate. Jo Hamilton lacked passion and admitted false
accounting on TV. JA was nowhere to be seen. And the bulletin was too long.

what I thought was helpful was that it presented Horizon as the problem, which is exactly what Ss say
they haven't found. And so easier for us to refute. There was nothing about intimidation, poor coaching
and the message about not knowing how to use the system, in my eyes made the SPMRs look inadequate.

Lastly, (belt and braces I know - forgive me), can we find out how the SPMR in Nelson (Wales) thinks

we're about to go after him for £18k and why he thinks we haven't been in touch. That sounds like a live
issue, not one in the scheme? (I'm sure we have been in touch!)

POL-0107794
POL00109806
POL00109806

My sincere thanks to all of you. I had an email tonight from Richard C saying how much you had helped,
that we could have done nothing more and he was sorry the debate had not gone better.

Paula

sent from my iPhone

POL-0107794
