POL00294684
POL00294684

From: Antonio Jamasb[/O=MMS/OU=EXCHANGE ADMINISTRATIVE GROUP.
(FYDIBOHF23SPDLT)/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=ANTONIO.JAMASB83AD2870-
4631-4E8F-89E0-9814FDOC8BFA]

Organizer: Antonio Jamasb:

Attendees: Dave Hulbert; Mark Weaver; Mark Burley; Rod Ismay; Dave M King; Will
Russell; lan Trundell; Emma Langfield; Lynn Hobbs; Anita L Turner

Location: Conference Call BT Meetme 0800 0121 445 - PIN 27085296

Subject: Receipts & Payments resolution proposal meeting

Importance: Normal

Start Time: Mon 15/11/2010 2:30:00 PM (UTC)

End Time: Mon 15/11/2010 3:00:00 PM (UTC)

Required Attendees: — Antonio Jamasb; Dave Hulbert; Mark Burley; Rod Ismay; Dave M King; Will
Russell

Optional Attendees: — Mark Weaver; lan Trundell; Emma Langfield; Lynn Hobbs; Anita L Turner

Attachment: ReceiptsPayments notesv7.doc

When: 15 November 2010 14:30-15:00 (GMT) Greenwich Mean Time : Dublin,
Edinburgh, Lisbon, London.
Where: Conference Call BT Meetme 0800 0121 445 - PIN 27085296

The aim of the meeting is to discuss the working group proposal:- to resolve
discrepancies generated by branches following a specific process during the
completion of the trading statement.

Service Delivery recently became aware of an issue whereby if a certain process was
followed during completion of the trading statement any discrepancy the branch was
carrying, either positive or negative, would “drop” from the Horizon system, but still
show within the Credence system.

Few branches were aware of the issue, but it creates questions around whether the
Horizon system can cause losses or gains. However it also highlights positives in our
management of the system, because once the issue arose we were able to highlight it,
quickly investigated the problem and then ring fence the issue while ascertaining a fix
to stop it reoccurring, but it doesn't resolve the issue at branches that already have the
issue.

We currently have the fix out to the estate with 99.68% of the network covered by
release 2.12. There are currently 98 counters left to have the release applied. The
number of branches currently impacted by the issue is circa 80 branches with the
maximum discrepancy at a branch of circa £1.5k. The majority of the branches have a
discrepancy of a few hundred pounds.

There are several solutions to resolve the issue at the affected branches, they are as
follows:-
POL00294684

POL00294684

SOLUTION ONE - Alter the Horizon Branch figure at the counter to show the
discrepancy. Fujitsu would have to manually write an entry value to the local branch
account.

IMPACT - When the branch comes to complete next Trading Period they would have a
discrepancy, which they would have to bring to account.

RISK- This has significant data integrity concerns and could lead to questions of
“tampering” with the branch system and could generate questions around how the
discrepancy was caused. This solution could have moral implications of Post Office
changing branch data without informing the branch.

SOLUTION TWO - P&BA will journal values from the discrepancy account into the
Customer Account and recover/refund via normal processes. This will need to be
supported by an approved POL communication. Unlike the branch “POLSAP’” remains
in balance albeit with an account (discrepancies) that should be cleared.

IMPACT - Post Office will be required to explain the reason for a debt recovery/ refund
even though there is no discrepancy at the branch.

RISK - Could potentially highlight to branches that Horizon can lose data.

SOLUTION THREE - It is decided not to correct the data in the branches (ie Post Office
would prefer to write off the “lost” transaction)

IMPACT - Post office must absorb circa £20K loss

RISK - Huge moral implications to the integrity of the business as there are agents that
were potentially due a cash gain on their system. Should the branch have a
discrepancy when Fujitsu are overwriting the amount to match the P&BA system, this
would be lost.

The working group involved in investigating this issue would recommend you agree to
solution two, whereby P&BA will contact the branch through the central settlement
function to reclaim the discrepancy and correcting the difference within Credence. If
this option is followed, P&BA will work with External Communications to agree the
words and communication to share with the branches to ensure we do not put the
system in a negative light.

We are looking for you as senior stakeholders to agree this approach as a way forward.

| have included a more detailed report with the aim to discuss this issue further on the
conference call arranged.
