POL00088956

POL00088956
Page | of 2
Angela Van-Den-Bogerd
From: John Breeden
Sent: 05 December 2010 21:50
To: Angela Van-Den-Bogerd
Ce: Sue Huggins; Tracy Marshall; Lin Norbury; Andy Bayfield; Mike Granville
Subject: FW: Follow up to BIS meeting on JFSA

Attachments: JFSA response issues for BIS.doc; Suspension cases - process.doc; Post Office Ltd
Investigations.doc

Angela,
Further to my voicemail message on Friday please find below the email | have received from Lynn Hobbs.

The second documented attached above, entitled Suspension cases - process was the one prepared for

the meeting with BIS that Lynn was to attend in November — it is not clear from Lynn’s email below if this

document was discussed with BIS, the indication being Mike Granville was going to send these across to
BIS (sorry | am not clear on the date of the meeting and the order of events here but from the third email |
will send you it appears the process was not discussed at the meeting.).

| have two further emails from Lynn will | will forward on one relating to Horizon Integrity which Sue and
Mike have already received and the third providing a brief ahead of the meeting with BIS.

Regards

John

John Breeden

National Contract Manager North

Post Office Ltd —- Network Support
2nd Floor, The Markets Crown Office, 6/16 New York Street, Leeds LS2 7DZ

Email john.breeder
Confidential Information: This e-mail message is for the sole use of the intended recipient (s) and may
contain confidential and privileged information. Any unauthorised review, use, disclosure or distribution is
prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, please contact me by reply e-mail and destroy all copies
of the original message.

From: Lynn Hobbs

Sent: 03 December 2010 18:16

To: John Breeden

Subject: FW: Follow up to BIS meeting on JFSA

John

This is the last email exchange | had with Mike Granville about the BIS meeting. The attached
documents were what Mike was proposing sending to BIS and | commented as below. | haven't seen
anything further but | did have a conversation with Mike about the whole ‘remote access to Horizon’ issue.
This was being looked into by Andy McLean and Mark Burley. The view being expressed was that whilst
this may be possible it's not something we have asked Fujitsu to provide. | don’t know what the final
outcome was.

1 am also forwarding two further emails

One from Rod Ismay which is the final report he produced as a request from Dave Smith, MD, to review
the whole issue of Horizon integrity

06/12/2010
POL00088956
POL00088956

Page 2 of 2

The second from Mike Granville with a document that was sent to BIS in August as a briefing in advance of Ed
Davey’s meeting with JFSA

Happy to discuss next week if it would help

Lynn

My reply to Mike and Rod
Mike, Rod

I'm happy with the report and just have one observation

| found out this week that Fujitsu can actually put an entry into a branch account remotely. It came up when we
were exploring solutions around a problem generated by the system following migration to HNGX. This issue was
quickly identified and a fix put in place but it impacted around 60 branches and meant a loss/gain incurred in a
particular week in effect disappeared form the system. One solution, quickly discounted because of the
implications around integrity, was for Fujitsu to remotely enter a value into a branch account to reintroduce the
missing loss/gain. So POL can’t do this but Fujitsu can.

Lynn

From: Mike Granville |
Sent: 17 November 2010 17:31 t
To: Rod Ismay; Lynn Hobbs |
Subject: Follow up to BIS meeting on JFSA i

Rod / Lynn

Further to the meeting we had with Mike Whitehead about the JFSA — | am aiming to send this broad response
note. Please can | ask if you could cast an eye over this and let me know if you have any comments — or whether
I've missed anything. I'd like to be able to send tomorrow (Thurs) — so, if feasible, could | ask you to let me have
any comments tomorrow.

Thanks
Mike

Mike Granville
Head of Regulation Strategy

Post Office Ltd

[=] 1st Floor, Banner Street Wing, 148 Old Street, LONDON EC1V 9H1Q
Ber
as
#2) mike.granville@

06/12/2010

