POL00245978
POL00245978

From: Thomas P Moran
Sent: 4 AM (UTC)
To: Parsons,
Jane MacLeor

Mark

Patrick
Ce: 7 “; Lukas, Elisa‘ 3
Subject: RE: Letter to Freeths - legally privileged [BD-4A.FID26896945]
Attachment: _DOC_34430591(1)_ Response to Letter of Reply_ 27 November 2016 TPM.docx

Dear All

| have now reviewed this and made some suggestions in the attached. Apologies for not having been able to make the
call on Friday.

My overall conclusion is that could very well have serious implications on the proceedings and we absolutely have to
make sure we are briefing and securing the support of the right people internally before issuing.

As I’m the lucky man with the responsibility for this as the SG chair, | must ask that we get this properly reviewed by
Mark Davies and also Angela who | don’t think are on this list. In particular we need a full assessment and media plan
based on the worst case consequences in place before sending.

am in tomorrow so available to discuss this. I’m not sure of the exact deadlines for submission (which at present, to
me are secondary to the briefing and planning we need to have in place first).

Thanks a lot
Tom

From: Rob Houghton

Sent: 27 November 2016 22:22

To: Parsons, Andrew; Jane MacLeod; Rodric Williams; Mark Underwood1; Patrick Bourke; Thomas P Moran
Cc: Prime, Amy; Lukas, Elisa

Subject: RE: Letter to Freeths - legally privileged [BD-4A.FID26896945]

| personally think we overdo the response on access and I’ve suggested some changes. As usual —| am relatively new
to all this but | would reduce down the sentiment and explain it once. Im on leave tomorrow; daughters 21° birthday
(I know | know —| was very young ;-)) — lm ona train back to London at 5pm so would be inappropriate to join a call
but can catch up on emails (or text me if required).

R

From: Parsons, Andrew |
Sent: 27 November 2016 09:
To: Jane MacLeod; Rodric Williams; Mark Underwood1; Patrick Bourke; Rob Houghton; Thomas P Moran
Cc: Prime, Amy; Lukas, Elisa

Subject: Letter to Freeths - legally privileged [BD-4A.FID26896945]

All

Please find attached a draft Letter to Freeths in response to their last substantive letter (copy also attached). This
incorporates comments from Tony and Rod.
POL00245978
POL00245978

The majority of this letter addresses legal and procedural points. The key substantive area is section 9 on Remote
Access (in particular, Rob, I'd be really grateful if you could review this section).

Following feedback from Deloitte, we cannot definitively say that PO (as distinct from FJ) never had the ability to
change Horizon data because Deloitte and the current staff at FU just don't have enough knowledge of Old Horizon to
confirm this. This was a point made in an early draft but it has now been removed.

We have (| hope) now found a formulation of words that avoids having to overtly throw FJ to the wolves and avoids
any risk of waiving privilege in any documents, but still gives us a fair story to tell. We have also toned down the
admissions of making incorrect statements, though they are still there. | hope this might make it easier to get this
letter cleared through GE and Fu.

We have a call scheduled for 5pm tomorrow with Tony which we can use to run through any comments. Comments
by email before then are also welcomed.

The final version of the letter will be thoroughly proof read before sending so please ignore any typos.

Kind regards
Andy

Andrew Parsons
Partner

Bond Dickinson LLP

Direct:! °
ust’ GRO
Office:!

Follow Bond Dickinson

Tin

www.bonddickinson.com

Please consider the environment! Do you need to print this email?

aly is authorised to
ible and delete any

and any attachments is confidential and may be

achments. If you are not rob, houghton
ion, distribution, publication

s this e-mail and any a

copies. Unauthorised use, dissem uunkavefl

Any files attached to this e-mail will have been checked by us with virus detection software befor

which may be caused by software viruses and you should carry out your own virus ch

nsmission, Bond Dickinson LLP accepts no liability for any loss or damage

before opening any attachment

Content of this email which does not relate to the official business of Bond Dickinson LLP, is neither given nor endorsed by it

This email is sent by Bond Dickinson LLP which is a
London Riverside, London, SEI 2AU, where a list of me
consultant who is of equivalent standing. Our VAT registration number is GB123393627.

nited liability partnership registered in England and Wales under number 0C317661. Our registered office is 4 More
nes is open to inspection. We use the term partner to refer to a member of the LLP. or an employee or

POL00245978
POL00245978

Bond Dickinson LLP is authorised and regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority

