POL00081700_208
POL00081700_208

Stephen Dilley

From:

Sent: 15 September 2006 10:37

To: Stephen Dilley

Subject: Re: Second witness statement of Helen Rose: P.O -v- Castleton
Follow Up Flag: Follow up

Flag Status: Red

Stephen,

I have read the statement and with regards to the Former Subpostmasters Account Statement I am not sure if I
can comment on this as I have no part in any documentation sent to the office or generated about the office once
the audit is completed (apart from the audit report). I would presume it originates from the Former
Subpostmasters Department in Chesterfield. This is the first time I have seen one.

As from the 25th of this month I am changing jobs again. My new title will be Security Analyst, I don't know
whether that will need adjusting or not, I don't mind either way.

Also a snapshot contains all transactions, sales, stock and method of payments at an office. Every time a
transaction takes place the snapshot would alter. It is only a balancing aid for postmasters/auditors and not
classed as an accounting document. The snapshot will presume that every entry is correct and give you a derived
figure of cash that should be in the office. Thus presuming that the receipts, payments, suspense account,
cheques and stock are entered correctly. On arriving at the office an auditor would ask the postmaster to run a
snapshot off, sometimes two, one for file without any marks on and a working copy for ticking off things when
checked. There would be no reason or benefit to even look at previous snapshots.

The security inspection was started but from what I can remember not completed. The reason for this being that
normal audits would require many compliance tests completing, including the security compliance. However when
a postmaster is suspended for what ever reason then compliance tests are not completed. This would have been
started as a matter of routine until we were notified that Mr Castleton was to be suspended.

Hope this helps

regards

Helen Rose

Investigation Manager

Post Office Ltd
Finance

GRO _| Mobite:!.

STD Phone: 0, Mobex i

} External Email: helen.rose

"Stephen Dilley"...
<Stephen.Dilley;_

To:  <helen.roseé.
ce: “Tom Beezer" <Tom.Beezer'

<rmorgani.....

<mandy.talbot”
14/09/2006 16:12 <andy.r.pearson!_
Subject: Second witness statement of Helen Rose: P.O -v- Castleton
Dear Helen,

I refer to our recent email exchange and attach a second witness statement for your approval, together with just
those exhibits that you may not have seen previously.
POL00081700_208
POL00081700_208

‘lease can you read the statement very carefully and make sure that you are 100% happy with it, especially
paragraph 12. Please could you also answer my question in bold italics in para 12.

Oncel ar back from you, I'll draw up a final version and send it to you for signature.

Kind regards.

Stephen Dilley
Solicitor

for and on behalf of Bond Pearce LLP
DDI: 7
Main office phone: +.
Fax:
www. bondpearce.coni

The information in this e-mail and any attachments are confidential and may be legally privileged and protected
by law. The intended recipient only is authorised to access this e-mail and any attachments. If you are not the
intended recipient, please notify the sender as soon as possible and delete any copies. Unauthorised use,
dissemination, distribution, publication or copying of this communication is prohibited.

Any files attached to this e-mail will have been checked by us with virus detection software before transmission.
You should carry out your own virus checks before opening any attachment. Bond Pearce LLP accepts no liability
for any loss or damage which may be caused by software viruses.

Bond Pearce LLP is a Limited Liability Partnership registered in England and Wales number 0C311430.
Registered Office: 3 Temple Quay, Temple Back East, Bristol, BS1 6DZ.

A list of Members is available from our registered office. Any reference to a Partner in relation to Bond Pearce LLP
means a Member of Bond Pearce LLP.

Bond Pearce LLP is regulated by the Law Society.

>>>> STATEMENT_1212111.DOC attachment was removed from this email <<<<

>>>> eCopy scanned document.pdf attachment was removed from this email
>>>> <<<<

JESUS SSE EER OR SE EKA TEI OIC OSS OSI SEI ISIS ISIS IDKASEA I IORI AKA
This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named

recipient, you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication.

If you have received this in error, please contact the sender and then delete this email from your system.
JER OREO ESOC ECORI IE TOROS IEICE CIEE A IA AK
