POL00069490
POL00069490

Telephone attendance

Client: Royal Mail Group PLC Sub Postmaster Litigation

Matter: Mr Lee Castleton

Matter no: 348035.134

Attending:
Name: Stephen Dilley Location: N/A Date: 10 October 2006
Start time: Units:

I had a telephone conversation with Richard Morgan. Updating him as follows in relation to
the Castleton case:

1.

I have not heard from the court in relation to a hearing date. They have called me to
set one and I have left them two messages, but they have not come back to me. I
will continue to chase.

I have written to Mr Castleton’s solicitors to seek responses to my outstanding letter
and in particular the amendments to the statement of case. They have replied by
seeking more financial documents from our disclosure list but have not really
answered me substantively and said they will do so very shortly. Interestingly they
say their client’s legal expenses insurance are paying my photocopying charges.
They have not served me with notice of funding and I am looking into the legal
ramifications of this and will pick it up with them.

Richard said that he is starting to look over the disclosure with a view to preparing
trial bundle index. I said that I will prepare some more documents for him that we
disclosed since we prepared our disclosure list. They are not large in amount.

Richard thinks we should play some brinkmanship and press for a December trial. If
they disclose an experts report that harms us then as they are doing so late, we can
always ask the court to vacate the trial. However at the moment, they have not
disclosed an experts report and he thinks we can go to trial without one. However,
he wants us to get client approval for this strategy.

Thereafter I had a telephone conversation with Rosina (professional support lawyer) and
asked her to research CPR 44.15 on funding arrangements. What I want to know is, have
Rowe Cohen now rectified the position by telling me their clients legal expenses insurance
albeit late in the day. Also leaving a voicemail message with Tom Beezer to discuss
counsel’s mooted strategy.

Time engaged including attendance note: 18 minutes

3A_1222150_1
