POL00028337
POL00028337

%

A298 - System Stability DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

AI 298 - System stability

1. Dispute
Severity Assessment: Pathway: Low POCL: High
Rectification Plan: Not agreed

2. Description of Deficiency =

Evidence from the live trial shows that the counter system is unstable and lacking the
‘industrial strength’ necessary for a production environment. This is evidenced by:

© unexplained system freezes,
© system freezes resulting fom peripheral failure
¢ menu icons rendered unusable by having a ‘barred’ symbol applied against them.

The first two bullets above are exhibited to the user by either the system hanging or
Presenting a blank blue screen. Following a call to the Horizon System Help-desk the user is
normally advised to re-boot the system. The Acceptance Incident was raised following a
number of service incidents raised at the Horizon System Helpdesk.

Given that the severity of this incident can rightly be considered a factor of the rate of
occurrence and that there had been some disagreement in the past between POCL and ICL
Pathway regarding this rate of occurrence, ICL Pathway and POCL Business Service
Management carried out a joint analysis on 13% August of calls made to the Horizon System
Helpdesk where a system freeze resulted in an instruction from the HSH to reboot the system.
This analysis covered the period from 29 July 1999 until 4 August 1999, however, week on
week comparison indicates a similar rate of calls.

The size of the network is 324 offices.
Business Service Management’s initial analysis identified 287 (DN Pathway dispute this

figure and say it is 98 incidents - on-going work between POCL and Pathway to agree
the size of the problem ) incidents and clustered the reboots as follows:

a) 66 incidents were clustered as printer/printing failures.
b) 74 incidents were clustered as system freezes.

¢) 55 incidents were clustered as no entry sign on icons.
d) 92 incidents were clustered as miscellaneous.

More detailed joint analysis on Friday 13 August is attached.

3. Business Impact

Every incident that results in a system freeze followed by rebooting the system will impact on
customer waiting times as the counter will be out of action for approximately 40 minutes.
There will also be a serious financial impact on POCL.

DN: Ruth to update with new analysis.

An estimate of outlet cost based on an analysis of HSH logs for week number is as follows:

i) The HSH log indicates that 287 calls were received that resulted in a reboot being
required due to icon based, printing related and other potential system stability issues.

ii) POCL estimates that on average the duration of the incident at the outlet is 40 minutes to
log the call with HSH, re-boot the system and recover transactions (1 and 2 position
offices) undertaken in manual fall-back mode.

iii) The incident frequency is projected as 287 reboots /323 outlets giving an incidence rate of
89%,

Version 0.5 Page 1. 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

A1298 - System Stability DRAFT

Commercial in Confidence

4.

5.

iv) Assuming a steady state with 18,500 outlets the number of incidents per week would be
16,465, and 856,180 per annum.

v) Applying the duration of service outage at 0.6667 hours and a cost of service at the
counter of £22.80 per hour, the cost per annum is projected as £13,014,586.

Other impacts that have not been quantified here are:

i) Extreme frustration and loss of confidence by sub-postmasters in the system. ”

ii) Adverse impact on customers perception of the service .

iii) Increase in HSH and NBSC Helpdesk calls and cost to authorise the need to re-boot

iv) Client SLA/confidence

v) Risk of errors and impact on POCL Transaction Processing due to increased errors in fall-
back

vi) Severe disruption to POCL’s critical operating process.

As these problems have yet to be resolved there is evidence that users are rebooting the
system themselves without calling the Horizon System Helpdesk. This increases the risk that
transaction would be lost impacting customers and clients and that unknown problems would
identified by ICL Pathway.

Severity Rating
Pathway’s Severity Rating: LOW
POCL’s Severity Rating: HIGH

POCL assert that this Acceptance Incident is High because it clearly comes under the
contractual definition of High "Failure to meet an Acceptance Criterion which would have a
substantive impact on the service received by the customer". Pathway have advised that their
understanding of the rate of occurrence constitutes a Low severity rating. However, the
statistics on which this conclusion was based has now been proven to be incorrect. In fact,
the rate of occurrence has now been shown to be 48 time greater than that on which ICL
Pathway based their assessment. In comparing the performance of Horizon with that of
POCL’s legacy systems (ECCO and ALPS), it should be noted that the reboot rate per
terminal for Horizon is 35% compared with ECCO at 0.30% and ALPS at 0.75%,

In summary therefore we must conclude that, given the current high level of occurrence, the
associated impact on business activity and perception, the absence of any rigorous analysis of
the cause or an acceptable rectification plan (see below), this incident is clearly of High
severity.

Rectification Plan

Pathway has not yet provided POCL with the analysis of the causes of the system freezes and
lock-ups. There is a known problem with the inter-operation between the printer and the
application during balancing which can lead to the system freezing and this is being
addressed. Pathway have presented statistics which suggest that the incidents of occurrence
is reducing and are therefore proposing a passive approach based on ongoing analysis
followed by a formal review after three months. This proposed approach is unacceptable to
POCL for the following reasons:

¢ The rectification plan could result in the system being rolled out with all the current
problems remaining unresolved.

¢ The current degradation of customer service and user perception is untenable in an
operational environment larger than the current live trial.

¢ Pathway’s severity is based on questionable evidence of the rate of occurrence which
POCL believes is understated, has not been validated and is contradicts other evidence.

Version 0.5 Page 2. 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

es

“te

AI 298 - System Stability DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

© The impact on the user, as estimated by Pathway, is based on the time taken to complete a
reboot, however, the business impact is a measure of the full absence of service
availability - the reboot activity is only a part of the problem life cycle and does not
include the time taken to contact the helpdesk, explain the problem, discuss the activity
Icading up to the freeze, consider the solution by the help-desk and only then, the reboot.

Unfortunately the majority of the activity by Pathway to date has been attempting t to p deny that
a substantial problem exists rather that solving the problem.

(DN - given that we rate this as High then the resulting action is predetermined -
Pathway need to correct within the contractually allocated period. We don’t to talk of
this in Medium severity language.)

Version 0.5 Page 3. 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

AL298 - System Stability DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

Annex.
Details of Joint Analysis of Fixes carried out 13" August

Printer/printing failures, these include:
¢ Final cash account prinUrollover hangs 24
© unable to obtain receipt problem 4
© other printing issues 38

System freezes

Frozen screen
Blank screen
No entry icon*
No icons
Printing

Blue screen
Virtual memory
Lost card
Locked
Hardware

Dr Watson error
Stock Discrepancy
Logon

No entry sign on icons*. This is where there was a no entry sign on icons and which the
advice given was to reboot.

HNEUw =
ix) RYwNoounny

Pathway Categories of System Stability Problems

Frozen desktop after login

desktop buttons no-entried so cannot exit screen
final cash account print/rollover hangs
screen frozen/navigation problems

frozen screen

virtual memory message

slow machine syndrome

“querying for logged users” problem
Suspense account report problems.
login/pressing F1 twice problem

Dr Watson error during report print

APS receipt problem

User history report hanging

tun time error 91 on final cash account print
AP number problem

stock unit balance report hanging,
transaction log problems

AP card swipe problem

cheque listing problem

declare cash freezing

stuck on discrepancies screen while balancing
“no declarations” problem during balancing
declarations problem

Giro print second page problem

“unable to obtain receipt” problem

Other print related issues

Ce

Version 0.5 Page 4, 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

AL376 - TIP Data Integrity DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

1.

AI 376 - Lack of data integrity on the data stream(s) across the TIP interface

Dispute

Severity Assessment: Pathway: LOW POCL: HIGH

Rectification Plan: Not agreed :

Description of Deficiency ve

1, A number of incidents have occurred during Live Trial where transactional data captured
at the outlet has not been passed to TIP in the daily transaction sub files as defined within
the agreed Application Interface Specification (AIS). Pathway have previously indicated
that these incidents were due to the failure of processing rules within the TPS Harvester
failing as a result of missing transaction attributes of either “Transaction Mode” or start
and end time(s). In order to rectify the fault Pathway have provided the following
workaround:

=> Achange to the TPS Harvester which checks that all transactions received IN at
the Harvester are transmitted OUT to TIP.

=> Where this check fails, a “repair” mechanism to automatically in-fill the
transaction mode as “Serve Customer” or to in-fill the start and end times based
on the next transaction within that customer session.

=> To record any such repairs or residual failures on an event log.

=> To manually interrogate the event log and raise a report to be e-mailed to POCL

2. Pathway claim that they have discovered all root causes for the failure to transmit

transactions to TIP and that, along with the workaround which was introduced sometime
during week beginning 09.08.99, bug fixes to correct the root causes have now been sent
to the counter. On this basis Pathway assert that the severity of the incident is LOW.

3. However, Pathway’s paper TIP Acceptance Incident Clearance - Update from Lorraine

Holt (13/8/99) - provided to POCL on 13.08.99 indicate that this problem can be caused
by a number of root causes, including faults that do not have the same profile as that
described above and not all of which have been fully analysed or fixed.

4. Furthermore, there has been an incident where wholesale numbers of transactions were

not sent to TIP due to an (albeit unusual) internal processing error within Pathway’s
central systems. Pathway were unable to detect this failure themselves and their
workaround and bug fixes outlined above would not alter this position. Pathway have not
provided a mechanism for supplying the (still) missing transactions to TIP (TIP are
currently unable therefore to enter the missing transactions into the downstream
process(es)). Pathway have indicated that they would be willing to discuss with POCL
how they might do this (on an ongoing basis) and admit that there may well be future
‘occurrences which they cannot predict.

5. There have also been incidents where transactional data captured within the outlet have

not been passed to TIP in the weekly (outlet) cash account sub files. Pathway maintain
that all these incidents are due to POCL not complying with agreed procedures within a
contract referenced document (i.e. that POCL will not change a“CORE” product to
being “NON-CORE”). However, POCL have not received analysis of all TIP incidents
raised and it is not proven that this is the sole cause. Furthermore Pathway’s paper T/P
Acceptance Incident Clearance - Update from Lorraine Holt (13/8/99) - provided to
POCL on 13.08.99 indicate that this problem can be caused by POCL changing an outlet
status from “Branch Office” to “Sub Office”. Following discussions at the acceptance
workshop on 11.08.99 Pathway appear to have placed some degree of protection in to the
change process, again by specifically forbidding changes of this type within a revised
version of the change catalogue. Whist this may inhibit future occurrences of this specific

Version 0.5 Page 1. 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

=

AL 376 - TIP Data Integrity DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

cause it does not appear to definitively prevent the end result of the outlet accounting
Stream being incorrect,

3. Business Impact

« The ICL Pathway service is an integral part of POCL’s client accounting system - indeed
the service is an accounting service. As such it accounts for turnover of : £1401 billion per
annum involving some 3 billion transactions. Given the scale of this system ven
relatively small defects are capable of generating errors within the accounts of very
significant amounts. POCL’s existing manual and legacy automation systems, which
Pathway’s service will replace, are designed to minimise and correct such errors by
incorporating controls and appropriate validation procedures.

. A major component of the current systems is the matching of the underlying transaction

stream to summary totals on the cash account. In the new Pathway service there are
currently logged incidents where both the underlying transaction stream is incomplete
and where transactions are being “missed” when the service accumulates the summary
cash account line. These faults were identified as a result of special controls put in place
by POCL to monitor the live trial and not by any system based control operated by ICL
Pathway (though such controls are part of Pathway’s contractual obligations). It is not
known when, ifat all, Pathway’s controls would have detected these fundamental errors
and by inference whether such controls are effective.

}. Pathway has not provided POCL with a complete description of all the faults creating the

missing data and therefore POCL has not received any description of how and when all
these faults will be fixed. Pathway has admitted that they do not yet fully understand the
toot cause of all the problems. A ‘workaround’ has been offered which attempts to trap
and correct errors after they have occurred but this cannot provide assurance of a
complete solution to the faults in the service, nor has POCL had visibility of the testing
plan to ensure that the fix does not introduce further problems.

. It isa fundamental of any accounting system that it provides a complete and accurate

record of all transactions. The ICL Pathway system does not support this fundamental.
For example in week 17 there were 89 differences in 20 outlets which extrapolates to
5500 differences over the entire network. For week 18 there were 2451 differences
experienced in 67 outlets which extrapolates to 150k differences over the entire network.

. These “gaps” in data will ultimately be reflected in balance sheet accounts. The nature of

these gaps is such that POCL will not be able to readily explain them. To this end our
external auditors operating within generally accepted accounting practice will insist that
any debit balances are written to Profit and Loss account whilst credit amounts are
tetained on the balance sheet. Given the nature of the errors concerned the potential is
for these write-offs to be significantly threatening the business performance against
shareholder targets and potentially as a going concern. The evidence derived from one
cash account line alone (approximately 80 affected on a single week) projects the loss to
be written off if the integrity issue continues at steady state to be in the order of £4.1m per
annum.

. These balances are also the basis of settlement with clients. Failure to settle accurately

with clients could place POCL in breach of contract. Such breach of contract can, in
acute or persistent circumstances, lead to termination. Many clients have a right of audit.
For government clients this is usually the National Audit Office. The results of such
audits can feature in NAO opinions on the accounts of Government Agencies. Such
comments are a matter of public record. Integrity failures could thus become a matter
of public record damaging the reputation of POCL. Integrity is one of the major
attributes of the brand such damage would, therefore, be substantial.

Version 0.5

Page 2. 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

AL376 - TIP Data Integrity DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

4.

7. Finally this level of difference is operationally unsustainable. The level of resource
necessary to investigate and resolve these differences is significant at the 5500 level and
at the higher level the resource requirements are impractical i.e. there would be a
complete breakdown of POCL’s back end accounting as the effort required would be
unsustainable - crror levels are currently running at twice the normal pre-horizon
baseline. In addition, the absolute increase at the 5500 level would increase error
processing costs by £2.93m per annum which exceed the maximum capacity fovel of the
‘TP Business Unit.

Severity Rating
Pathway’s Severity Rating: LOW
POCL/’s Severity Rating: HIGH

1. The transactional and summary level data streams into TIP are currently matched (TIP
use the daily transaction sub files to create an outlet account which is compared to the
electronic version of the outlet account provided through the weekly sub-file). This
control provides the mechanism for assuring both data streams before passing the data on
to the downstream processes which drive POCL accounting and client billing. This
matching is a temporary internal assurance measure which cannot be sustained during
roll out and is therefore intended to be removed. It is only this matching process which
has shown the errors in the data streams provided by Pathway - no controls or checks
currently exist within Pathway that maintain a similar level of integrity of these data
streams. The Pathway rectification provides an input/output check on a single process step
in a new, lengthy and complex processing chain which has a track record of being error
prone at many levels.

2. POCL assert that checks and controls appropriate to the degree of POCL risk are not
present and refer to the following entries in the contract as evidence that they should exist
within the Pathway domain:

Schedule A15

1,199.1 The APS shall ensure and demonstrate that all committed transactions have
successfully passed from the outlets to POCL and/or clients.

1.200.1The contractor shall ensure that all captured data are complete and ‘accurately
reflected in the appropriate interfaces.

1,200.2The contractor shall synchronise data flows and storage and shall

(a)monitor data transfers and account for data brought forward, received , passed on and
carried forward;

(b)monitor data transfers and account for data, across service interfaces and service
components

1.200.6The contractor shall apply appropriate integrity controls at all interfaces and
provide information demonstrating integrity.

1.200.8 The contractor shall meet all reconciliation requirements in contingency
situations as well as normal working. (1.200.9) Service levels for all reconciliation
requirements are as follows: (a) full reconciliation 100% of items demonstrably accounted
for ;(b)provision of the ability to reconcile by agreed processes at detailed level, including
without limitation at transaction level for transaction data; (c) any differences, doubtful
items or errors to be resolved by the contractor; (d) reconciliation reports and
identification of doubtful items and errors to be delivered to the authority by 9a.m of the
following day.

3. Pathway appear to be suggesting that, because they feel they have fixed most of the

occurrences of lost data so far, that this justifies a rating of Low.

Version 0.5 Page 3. 15/08/99

POL00028337
POL00028337

AL376 - TIP Data Integrity DRAFT Commercial in Confidence

r ) 4. POCL assert that Pathway have not provided a service that demonstrably guarantees the
integrity of the data as required. Because of the Business Impact described in section 3
above, the Severity of this Acceptance Incident must be High.

5. Rectification Plan

1. The current proposed (and partially implemented) rectification plan has not been proven

to prevent the continuation of the existing instances of failures. At a meeting with
> Pathway on 13.08.99, where Pathway’s paper TIP Acceptance Incident Clearance -

Update from Lorraine Holt (13/8/99) was presented, POCL staff remained unconvinced
that all root cause analysis had been completed and that fixes had been applied. It was in
fact reported by Pathway that another instance had occurred on 10.08.99 that did not fit
the profile of any currently known root cause. A failure report had been sent to POCL on
11.08.99 although there was no such agreement in place to do so. Some reported
instances still remained open and Pathway have outstanding actions to provide updates.

2. Therefore POCL require a full report of all root cause analysis, fixes and release dates that
demonstrably cover all reported faults of this type.

3. POCL require a period of time with no incidents being reported or identified by TIP this
must, as a minimum, cover two full consecutive cash account weeks and include a cash
account period end.

4. There is currently no agreed method of conveying any missing transactions to TIP for
inclusion in the data stream. The transactions missed so far, including the large numbers
resulting from the internal processing error, are still missing from the data stream.

5. The daily sub files to TIP (and those to HAPS for AP transactions) are not subjected to
integrity checks and controls. POCL require that data processed through Horizon is
subjected to integrity checks such that data passing across the interface can be shown to
be complete and accurately reflected. The integrity checks and controls should be
‘sufficient to provide a level of protection appropriate to the degree of business risk. POCL
believe that this requirement is adequately represented within the contract to deem
Pathway non compliant and that the current level of protection, when compared to the
business risk renders this non compliance incident as HIGH.

Version 0.5 Page 4. 15/08/99

