                                                                                                                                                                                 POL00111625
                                                                                                                                                                               POL00111625

        Confidential and legally privileged
e   y




        l~ ~~~~ ~~ ~(r   L ~ .y~,   k (lY.              14..          F . }i~
                                                 '~ ~          +si,
                                             h
                                                                                . /1.1    y ~I ~ V li;~.   I"
                                                                                                                ~. ~C✓' d ^ ~ t   ~~ Y I!   ~   6 tl ~~ ~ ~   l ~. ~   '~ 'I~ ~~ ~~




                                                                ofInterm Report




                                                                      STATUS
                                                                                                   r0

                                                                                         6g    'Sf+`c•~           y s:t3'             It




                                                 THIS PAGETO BE DELETED BEFORE SUBMISSION



          FINAL BRIEFING NOTE TO BE IN PDF'FORMAT TO ENSURE ALL META-DATA ABOUT PREVIOUS
                                          DRAFTS IS REMOVED




        4A 27053113
                                                                                                 POL00111625
                                                                                             POL001 11625



Confidential and legally privileged




Post Office Limited — For Internal Use Only— NOT TO BE CIRCULATED

To:      Paula Vennells, Chief Executive Officer
Re:      Second Sight review into Horizon - Interim Report
Date: 2 July 2013

Background

    1. Since June 2012 Second Sight Support Services Limited (SS) has been reviewing
       allegations that the Horizon system is the source of unresolved accounting shortages in
       Post Office branches.

     2. SS has been undertaking its review in consultation with the Rt Hon James Arbuthnot
        MP (JA), and "Justice for Subpostmasters Alliance", an organisation "established to
        raise awareness of the issues within the Post office      system".,



                                                              Horizon
    3. SS's review is to:

              a. review, consider and advise on whether there are any systemic issues and/or
                 concerns with Horizon;
              b. consider both the old Horizon and new HNG-X (aka Horizon Online);
              c. consider training and support processes;
              d. be reasoned and evidence based.

         Annex 1 provides more detail on SS's review.

    4. Post Office Limited, with assistance from Fujitsu, has engaged with SS, including by
       providing branch files and transaction data, and detailed responses on specific issues
       raised.

         Annex 1 also provides more detail on Post Office Limited's engagement in SS's review.

    5. 49 cases have been referred: to SS. SS has now completed its review into 4 specific
       complaints, which it will address in an interim report.

    6. SS will release its interim report to:

              a. Post Office Limited on Friday 5 July 2013; and
              b. JA on Monday 8 July 2013.

    7. Susan Crichton, Lesley Sewell, Alwen Lyons, Angela van den Bogerd and Simon Baker
       met SS on Monday 1 July 2013 at 3pm and obtained a clearer picture of SS's interim
       findings and timing for delivery.

    S. [[We believe JA may feel that any interim findings which disclose any issue with Horizon
       should result in past criminal prosecutions by Post Office Limited being reopened and
       overturned.]]


4A270531131                                                                                         2
                                                                                                               POL00111625
                                                                                                             POL00111625

 Confidential and legally privileged




       9. Paula Vennells and Alwen Lyons will be meeting JA on Wednesday 3 July 2013.

       10. Alwen Lyons began communicating Post Office Limited's position to JA via a face to face
           meeting with his personal assistant Jane Walker on Monday 1 July 2013.

       11. Post Office always has a right to respond to any findings. External communications
           consultancy Portland has been engaged to assist Post Office Limited.

The Interim Report

       12. SS's Interim Report will focus on:

                  a. 4 individual cases; and
                  b. 2 anomalies in Horizon's operation identified by Post Office Limited / Fujitsu.

The 4 Cases

       13. SS's Interim Report will focus on the followingifour•cases:
                                                                ""'




Name                      Branch                 Referral'-                 Issue{u,            Civil or Criminal
                                                                           a~
                                                 MP JFSA              ,           ~`;~,;        Action
                                                                ;"s
Armstrong                 Lepton                 JFSA                       Whether Horizon     ****
                                                                  i       ; provodes adequate
                                                                            and timely
                                                                            information
                                         ~r.
                                                                            during power or
                                          as                                communications
                                                                            failures

Rudkin                   ; lbstock             `' Andrew                    Access to live      ****
                                                  `Bridgen MP               Horizon data

O'Dell                    Great Staughton'       Jonathan                  Transparency of      ****
                                                 Djanogly MP               stock adjustments


Hall                      Hightown               Mike Wood MP               Recording scratch   ****
                                                                            card stock levels

      See Annex 2 for more details of these cases.

      14. SS has considered some of the evidence provided by Post Office Limited, but due to
          resource constraints might not have considered it all (e.g. the specific branch
          transaction logs).



4A...27053113_1                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                    POL001 11625
                                                                                                  POL001 11625


Confidential and legally privileged




     15. SS has also asked subpostmasters to comment on this evidence and its proposed
         findings for the four cases in the Interim Report.

     16. We believe SS has NOT found any evidence of systemic problems with the Horizon
         computer system:

                a. in any of the 4 cases in the Interim Report;
                b. in any of the 6 other cases which SS has referred to Post Office Limited for
                   review; or
                c. otherwise during its review.

The 2 Anomalies

     17. We also understand SS's Interim Report will discuss two anomalies in Horizon's
         operation.

     18. These were found by Post Office Limited and voluntarily communicated to SS, i.e.
         neither was identified by SS as part of its review.

     19 The "62 Branch Anomaly":

                a. affected 62 branches (13              12 Multiples; 37 Subpostmasters)
                                             Crowns,




                                                                'r




                b. concerns a Receipts and, Payments mismatch in HNG-X.when discrepancies were
                   moved into the local suspense account (i.e. the account which aggregates all
                   discrepancies into a'single.gain or loss       branch trading period).
                                                                     fora.




                c. first appeared March 2010
                                  in




                d. majority of incidents occurred between August and October 2010
                e. branch losses ranged from £77f96 down to 34p.
                f. identified by Horizon's built-in         and balances which are designed to flag
                                                       checks




                   up these types of discrepancies.
                g. could have been identified if the subpostmaster had carefully scrutinised his/her
                   Final Balance Report.
                h. 17 subpostmasters were adversely affected, i.e. had a loss attribute to their
                   branch.
                i. subpostmasters notified in March 2011 and (where appropriate) reimbursed.
                j. subpostmasters          made a gain through the anomaly were not asked to
                                       who




                   refund this.
                k. anomaly pre-dates Separation, and therefore would have been dealt with by
                   Royal Mail Group Legal.
                I. reason for delay in notifying subpostmasters:
                         i. priority and distinction from other service issues that were happening at
                            the time of the HNG rollout;
                        ii. complexity of understanding the root cause; and
                       iii. getting agreement and clarity on how best to communicate this to
                            branches.                                                     .




4A_27053113_1
                                                                                                         POL001 11625
                                                                                                    POL00111625

Confidential and legally privileged




     20. The "14 Branch Anomaly":

                 a. financially impacted 14 branches (4 Crowns; 5 Multiples; 5 Subpostmasters)
                 b. concerns an error where historic accounting entries in the 2010/11 financial
                    year were replicated in accounts for 2011/12 and 2012/13.
                 c. first notified to Post Office Limited January 2012




                                                        in
                 d. raised by. 2 subpostmasters affected by the anomaly.
                 e. S subpostmasters were adversely affected, i.e. had a loss attribute to their
                    branch.
                 f. Post Office Limited suspended attempts to recover known losses from affected
                    subpostmasters.
                 g. subpostmasters notified on [[2 July 2013]].
                 h. the worst loss to a branch would have been (9,799 88 ,.This was one of the first
                    cases notified, so no recovery action was progressed Other losses ranged from
                    £113.14 down to a penny.
                 i. reason for delay in notifying subpostmasters : ,
                          i. irregular occurrence - it took over 12 months to realise'that this was an
                             error in Horizon rather than an error by subpostmaster or,Post Office
                             Limited;
                         ii. very few branches materially affected.

     21. Modifications have been made to rectify the 62 BranchAnomaly, and will be made to
         rectify 14 Branch Anomaly.

     22. One of the branches affected by the 14 Branch Anomaly within scope of the SS
                                                                       is




         review (Bowness Road branch). That branch received ?a gain of £3,186.70 (i.e. there was
         no loss to the branch)..

     23. The anomaly first manifested itself in the Bowness Road branch after the complaining
         subpostmaster's contract for services was terminated for branch mismanagement and
         password sharing.

     24. One other branch affected by the 14 Branch Anomaly (Merthyr Dyfan) was review by
              Office Limited. That branch received a gain of £160.92 (i.e. there was no loss to
          Post




         the branch).

     25. We currently understand the branch to be operated by Costcutter, and that its
         employee is being prosecuted over in-branch losses of c. £49,000 (£39,000 of which has
         been repaid to Post Office Limited). [[RW TO UPDATE ON 02.07.13]]

     26. In line with our duties to the Courts, we are .taking steps to contact the prosecuting
         body so that they are aware of the anomaly and can disclose the information in any
         criminal proceedings as they consider appropriate.

     27. None of the subpostmasters affected by either anomaly have been prosecuted over it.

Other Anomalies - `Falkirk"


4A_27053113_1
                                                                                                     POL001 11625
                                                                                               POL00111625



Confidential and legally privileged




     28. We are also aware of a further anomaly in Horizon which was been considered in both
         criminal and civil Court proceedings — the "Falkirk Anomaly".

     29. The Falkirk Anomaly occurred when cash or stock was transferred between stock units
         It was resolved in March 2006 is therefore a different anomaly to either the 14 Branch
         or 62 Branch Anomaly.

     30. The Falkirk Anomaly was the subject of expert evidence in the "Misra" criminal
         prosecution, where:

                   the defence expert asserted that its existence demonstrated Horizon had faults
                   which could cause losses, and therefore that possibility could not be excluded in
                   Misra's case.

                b. the prosecution expert (Gareth Jenkins from Fujitsu) asserted that it could not
                   have been responsible for the losses because its clearly visible events had not
                   manifested themselves in the branch records, and that it had been fixed more
                   than a year earlier.

     31. Misra pleaded          to false accounting,;and was convicted by jury of theft: To reach
                           guilty




         this verdict, the jury had to be satisfied that the charges     proved beyond all
                                                                    were




         reasonable doubt. She was sentenced to 15               imprisonment. There has been no
                                                         months




         appeal against the conviction

     32. The Falkirk Anomaly was also considered by the High Court in December 2006/January
         2007 when a subpostmater (Lee Castleton) raised it as part of his defence to a debt
         recovery action for c £23,000..

     33. The Court found "no evidence" ®f the Falkirk Anomaly in Mr Castleton's branch, and
         accepted the evidence of the Fujitsu witness (Anne Chambers), who was found to be a
         "clear, knowledgeable and reliable witness".

Criminal Prosecutions'

     34. We have undertaken prosecutions which relate to the old Horizon system and the new
         HNGX Horizon Online system.

     35. Since Separation we have never had, a successful prosecution which has relied solely on
         Horizon evidence to convict. We have always had other evidence which contributed to
         the prosecution, e.g. the behaviour of SPM, failure to mention Horizon problems until
         trial, other staff using Horizon without incident.

     36. Both before and after Separation, every time a defendant has raised criticism of the
                                                                                 a




         Horizon computer system it has been successfully defended by Post Office and Fujitsu.

Forward Strategy


4A_27053113_1
                                                                                                     POL001 11625
                                                                                                   POL00111625

 Confidential and legally privileged




      37. Plan A: Meet JA and try to persuade him to postpone his meeting with Second Sight on
          Monday 8      2013. This is unlikely to be successful.


                       July
      38. If not successful, Plan B: We are preparing full communications strategy and will




                                                         a
          consider rebuttal and tactics in line with an approach aimed to minimise reputational
          impact to Post Office Limited.

      39. Do we attend the meeting with Second Sight and JA on Monday S July 2013?

                a. as an observer? (attending may open us up to a cross examination); OR
                b. not attend and pursue the communications strategy (Plan B above)?

      40. Consider replacing or introducing a new Independent reviewer (such as one of the
          Consulting / Accountancy firms)?

 Key Messages [[MARK DAVIES TO REVIEW AND AMEND AS- NECESSARY]J

      41. Horizon's size and user base —
             a. 6 million transactions processed daily
             b. over the past ten years, many millions of branch, reconciliations have been
                carried out;                      f
             c. Horizon used out by 25,000 subpostmasters and their staff in Post Office
                branches with transactions and balances accurately` recorded.

      42. Horizon designed to maintain the integrity of transaction data. SS has hot as yet
          identified anything which challenges this core principle.

      43. With respect to the 62 Branch and 14 Branch Anomalies:

                a. ' We found the anomalies and, so as to be completely open, told SS (i.e. SS didn't
                     find them).
                b. the anomalies were detected, resolved, and we communicated the problem to
                     sub postmasters
                c. confirm the anomlaies did. not affect the integrity of the transaction data
                     [[FUJITSU / GARETH JENKINS TO CONFIRM]]
                d. no Post Office prosecutions relate to these bugs
                e. say we have addressed the problem (but acknowledge it has taken time)




4A_27053113_1                                                                                           7
                                                                                                              POL001 11625
                                                                                                            POL00111625



Confidential and legally privileged




ANNEX 1 An overview of the Second Sight Inquiry process and how Post Office has
interacted with it

Overview of the Inquiry process

As part of the Inquiry process, Second Sight has. submitted 10 scenarios relating to Horizon to
Post Office for its comments (the Spot Reviews). In light of its review to date and Post Office's
responses to these Spot Reviews, Second Sight, is now preparing an Interim Report.

In accordance with the Inquiry process set out under the "Raising Concerns with Horizon"
agreement:

    -         Second Sight will prepare its report bearing in mind the                 need to ensure that




                                                                             primary
              the report is reasoned and evidence based.

    -         The report and any recommendations will be the expert and reasoned opinion of
              Second Sight in light of the evidence seen during the Inquiry.




                                                                                           ..




                                                                                                     .
              Second Sight will consult with JFSA, Post Office and/or any other party                it considers




                                                                                                as
              necessary before producing any report:

              Post Office may provide Second Sight with its own comments on any or all concerns,
              and on Horizon generally.

    -         Second Sight    consider and take into account any comments received from JFSA,
                                  will




                  Office and/or any other consulted party.
              Post




Post Office's activity

Post Office has provided continuous support to Second Sight and has responded to all 10 Spot
Reviews.

In supporting Second Sight, Post Office has:

    -          Worked with Second Sight to ensure that it is addressing all issues raised.

              Thoroughly reviewed each Spot Review through the leadership of senior
              management.

    -          Consulted senior personnel inside Post Office on the issues raised in each Spot
               Review.

    -                Liaised closely with Fujitsu so that its expertise on Horizon supports every response.

    -           Collated and interrogated Horizon transaction records where Second Sight has
                referenced particular identifiable transactions.


4A270531131                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                     POL00111625
                                                                                                   POL00111625


Confidential and legally privileged




                Addressed any follow-up questions raised by Second Sight or Subpostmasters.

                Promptly submitted all responses to Second Sight in accordance with agreed
                timeframes.

Overview of Post Office's responses

Post Office remains confident that Horizon is a. robust system that accurately records the
activities of Subpostmasters, and maintains the integrity of transaction data.

All 10 Spot Reviews have been fully addressed by Post Office and none of them have identified
any error in Horizon.

In fact, the Spot Reviews have demonstrated that Post Office's organisational processes and
the Horizon system are designed to:

                Consistently track user and transaction activity in a transparent manner.

                Provide complete audit trails that allow Subpost;r Bashers to fully review their
                transaction histories.                `..         i '`-;i ~
                                                             A;4';
     -          Strictly control access to Horizon data

                Mitigate the risk of user generated errors resulting ipfinancial losses.

                Prevent fraud against,Subpostmasters and Post Office.

                Withstand problems outs'icle. Post Office's:and Subpostmasters' control such as
                power outages.

                Constantly, monitor Horizon,use and user experience for possible improvement.

It is expected that Second Sight's interim Report will address Spot Reviews 1, 5, 21 and 22 in
detail. . Below is a summary.of.Post`Office's position on each of those Spot Reviews.




4A_27053113_1
                                                                                                                POL001 11625
                                                                                                           POL00111625



Confidential and legally privileged




This Spot Review principally asks whether Horizon robustly manages the risks created when it
is unable to connect to Post Office's central servers due to a power or communications failure
which is beyond Subpostmasters' or Post Office's control.
                       a




Post Office's response to this Spot Review shows that the         Horizon terminal has a




                                                                in




                                                                     -branch
robust back-up and recovery system that prevents there being any discrepancies or errors in
the event of a communications or power failure.

In the particular case raised in the Spot Review, the root cause of the difficulties suffered by
the Subpostmaster was his failure to follow the on-screen and printed instructions given by
Horizon.

A comprehensive, line-by-line review of all the Horizon transactions for the period covered by
this Spot Review was undertaken by Horizon experts at Fujitsu. In light of this analysis, Post
Office Limited is confident that the SPMR knew that the back-up and recovery process had
actively managed the communications failure at the branch in question because:

                When the transactions in question first failed to be processed, Horizon asked the
                SPMR whether he wished to cancel or retry the transactions. The SPMR opted to
                retry the transactions.

     -          When the, transactions failed again, the SPMR opted to cancel the transactions.

     -          Horizon then automatically disconnected and printed a "disconnect" receipt that
                showed the transactions, that had been automatically reversed.

     -          A standard customer receipt      not produced - this                   tell the SPMR that the
                                             was




                                                                               would




                full transaction had not proceeded.

     -          Following the disconnect, the SPMR was required to log back on to Horizon and duly
                did so.

                Following the log on, and as part of the standard recovery process, Horizon printed a
                "recovery" receipt which again showed the transactions that had been reversed and
                those that had been recovered.

The transaction logs evidencing the above conclusions have been provided to Second Sight.


CASE 2 - Spot Review 5 — Access to live Horizon data

This Spot Review principally focusses on an assertion by Mr Michael Rudkin that during a visit
to Fujitsu's site at Bracknell on Tuesday 19th August 2008, he observed an individual based in


4A_27053113_1                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                  POL001 11625
                                                                                              POL00111625

Confidential and legally privileged




the basement of the building who demonstrated the ability to access 'live' branch data and
directly adjust transactions on the Horizon system.

Given the amount of time that has passed, neither POL nor Fujitsu have any record of Mr
Rudkin attending the Bracknell site.

Post Office and Fujitsu have attempted to establish the Bracknell visitor logs for the day in
question to verify Mr Rudkin's attendance and his contact on the day, however these records
are not retained for as far back as 2008.

Fujitsu have additionally made the effort to go through all email, documents and archived
information to hand but do not have any information for Tuesday,l9th,August 2008.that would
suggest they had visitors to the site.

Further review into Post Office work logs indicates that there were'just three POL test
managers present on site in Bracknell on the 19 August 2008 None of them have any calendar
records relating to a visit by Mr Rudkin.

It has however been determined that in August 2008 the basement of Eujistu's building
contained a Horizon test environment that would look very similar to a:   Horizon



                                                                          live




                                                                                 :




                                                                                     :
environment. This. environment was not physically or technologically connected to the live
Horizon environment. It was therefore impossible for anyone this room to have adjusted
                                                                 in




any live transaction records, though Mr Rudkin     have witnessed some form of adjustment
                                                  may




to the test environment.

This separation of test and live environments is designed to guarantee the integrity of'Horizon
data.


CASE 3 - Spot Review 21— transparency of stock adjustments

This Spot Review principally asks whether Horizon automatically makes stock adjustments and,
if so, whether this could cause a subpostmaster to suffer a loss.

In summary, Horizon            not generate automatic stock adjustments. This function does not
                        does




exist within Horizon.

 Each member of staff at Post Office branches should have and use their own unique ID. Each
 subpostmaster, as a result, has a unique user ID. This requirement is detailed in the Standard
 Subpostmaster's Contract for Services. Section 1, clauses 5, 14 and 15 of this Contract for
.Services and the Horizon Online Help operational manual provide that passwords and login
 detai ls for Horizon are personal and are not to be shared between branch staff. This is
 important to enable traceability of transactions for audit and review purposes.

On review of the Horizon transaction logs, every stock adjustment transaction inputted on 4
November 2009 at the Great Staughton branch (being the date and branch under



4k27053113_1                                                                                       11
                                                                                              POL001 11625
                                                                                            POL001 11625


Confidential and legally privileged




consideration in this Spot Review) was a manual transaction logged against the subpostmaster
user ID (JOD001).

Even if there were erroneous stock adjustments, these adjustments could not cause a
subpostmaster to suffer a loss due to the "double entry" balancing process inherent in Horizon.

Each manual instruction inputted by a subpostmaster creates a double entry (i.e. if the
subpostmaster adjusts the stock level down, the cash level on Horizon will be increased by the
same value the stock). This has a balancing effect on the overall cash and stock position
                as




even if an error is made by the subpostmaster. For example, if the branch position begins in
balance, an inaccurate increase to the stock level of stamps will create a shortage of stamps
but it will also cause a reciprocal decrease in the cash position thereby creating a balancing
surplus of cash. This shortage of stamps and surplus of cash balance out meaning the
subpostmaster will not have an overall shortfall.

This double entry system is designed to mitigate the risk of user errors by automatically
balancing out those errors to the Subpostmaster's benefit.


CASE 4 - Soot Review 22 - Recording scratch card
                                                      istoek'llevels




This Spot Review principally asks whether Horizon accurately records REMMED-in scratch
cards.

In summary, Post Office cannot find any evidence that there is,aproblem with the Horizon
system with regard REMMED-in scratch cards
                              to




National Lottery scratch cards      provided and controlled by Camelot, the National Lottery
                                   are




provider. In order to sell scratch cards, a         aster must (1) activate a pack of scratch
                                          Subpostri




cards on the in branch Lottery terminal `and (2) REM-in the scratch card stock on Horizon.
"REMMING-in" scratch card is the process whereby new packs of scratch cards are recorded
                          a




on Horizon as branch stock.
                     in




During the period being examined in this Spot Review, if subpostmasters correctly REM-in
scratch cards to the Horizon system the final figures recorded in the Horizon system at the end
of each day will match the final figures in the Camelot system at the end of each day for the
activation of scratch cards.

On 17 February 2010 at the Hightown branch (being the date and branch under consideration
in this Spot Review) there were two remittance sessions relating to scratch cards regard to
                                                                                  in




which two receipts would have'been automatically produced by Horizon.

The Spot Review suggests that the Subpostmaster's printed records on this day do not match
Post Office's records. However, the alleged discrepancy in the figures resulted from the
subpostmaster presenting for the purposes of this Spot Review only one of the two receipts
produced on this day.



4A_27053113_1                                                                          -          12
                                                                                                 POL001 11625
                                                                                               PO LOO111625

 Confidential and legally privileged




The transaction history in Horizon reflects the figures advanced by Post Office. [[This
transaction history has been provided to Second Sight. CHECK]]

In any event, the manual REMMING-in of scratch cards by Subpostmasters has now been
replaced with an automated process the risk of a discrepancy occurring (such as the one




                                       so




                                                                                          in
the Hightown branch on 17 February 2010) has been largely mitigated.




4A_27053113_1                                                                                     13
