                                                                                    POL00021422
                                                                               POL00021422




                   Post Office Ltd - Strictly Confidential




                          RISK AND COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE

                       26th March 2008   - Meeting Ref 05

Chairman:
Peter Corbett

Attendees:
Paula Vennells
John Scott
Lynn Hobbs
Keith Woollard
Shaun Delaney
Luke March
David Pardoe (Secretariat)

Apologies
Alan Cook
Kevin Fairbotham
Martin Ferlinc




SCHEDULE A - SUMMARY OF ACTION POINTS - MEEETING 05 - 26th MARCH 2008
ITEM I ACTION                                         LEAD      I STATUS
                                   Irrelevant
                                                                           Page 1
                                                                                      POL00021422
                                                                                POL00021422




                    Post Office Ltd - Strictly Confidential


0501




Acti
on
0502
                         Irrelevant
Acti   Ensure that Lynn Hobbs is copied into future D Pardoe        Done
on     R&C arrangements and meeting papers.
0503
Acti   Keith Woollard to ensure that future changes      K          Done. Reporting
on     to  impact   /  likelihood,   are  specifically   Woollard   format changed
0504   highlighted on the "Top Risks" one shot slide.
Acti   Keith  Woollard   to  chase   stakeholders  for   K          Done. Next
on     progression around partially deployed controls    Woollard   assessment to be
0505   -   cash supply (forecast & supply) and salary               undertaken in Q2
       & agent (remuneration & payment).
Acti   Future losses report to show cleaned data and     K          Done. Losses
on     factor the £23.8K WH Smith loss at Kings Lynn.    Woollard   reporting data
0506                                                                now aligned with
                                                                    Clarity P&L
Acti   Scope the possibility of splitting the types K               Work in hand in
on     of former   Subpostmaster losses  to provide Woollard        Finance to
0507   greater  clarity  between  fraud losses  and                 create more


                                                                             Page 2
                                                                                 POL00021422
                                                                           POL00021422




                   Post Office Ltd - Strictly Confidential


       other,                                                  detailed loss
                                                               report to
                                                               support Clarity
                                                               P&L
Acti   Keith Woollard to prepare a major update for K          Done.
on     the  next  Committee  meeting on  activities Woollard   Presentation to
0508   deployed / planned to improve the compliance            be provided to
       piece.                                                  the Committee




                                                                        Page 3
                                                                POL00021422
                                                          POL00021422




         Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


Agenda

1.   MINUTES FROM LAST MEETING

Meeting Ref 04 - minutes approved.

MATTERS DISCUSSED   AT   THE   MEETING   AND   NEW   ACTIONS
REQUESTED




Finally, Lynn Hobbs was introduced to the Committee as
the GM Network Support and a future meeting attendee;



                                                       Page 4
                                                                  POL00021422
                                                              POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


as such a request     was made to ensure that Lynn          was
copied  into   all    future  meeting arrangements          and
supporting papers.

Action 0503
Ensure that Lynn Hobbs is copied        into      future    R&C
arrangements and meeting papers.

2.2 Top Risks   —    General   Indicators   of   The   Control
  Environment

Keith Woollard presented the Post Office Limited risk
profile report updated to reflect activities to date.
Keith reiterated that this was a preview of "Top Risks"
which were traditionally taken to the ET Monday morning
meeting. In essence, slide 4 of the pack provided a one
shot overview of the estimated impact / likelihood,
whilst  the   supporting  appendices  supplied  greater
detail and mitigating actions.

Peter Corbett commented that the one shot slide should
be improved by highlighting specifically where period
to  period  had   seen  a  shift  in  either  impact  /
likelihood of any particular risk.      This would then
support ET discussions on the severity of changed
assessments and any supporting activities required.

Action 0504
Keith Woollard to ensure that future changes to impact
/ likelihood are specifically highlighted on the "Top
Risks" one shot slide.

Paula Vennells   remarked that risk changes            should,
additionally, be stated within any summarised          version
of the pack intended to support ET discussions.

Turning to emerging risks, then discussions were held
around PostComm recommendations around scoping works
regarding  the  separation   of  Group;  Peter  Corbett
supported the inclusion of this as an emerging risk (in


                                                           Page 5
                                                           POL00021422
                                                     POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd - Strictly Confidential


respect of the distraction these scoping works are apt
to bring) and the Committee consensus was that these
matters were being adequately dealt with by Group
Compliance.

Luke March prompted debate around the amount of denoted
risks which appeared to lack true customer focus. Peter
Corbett stated that in fact risks 9 and 10 (capability
to deliver sales and direct channels effectiveness
respectively) were in fact close to the customers'
heart and that any seeming lack of focus was indicative
of the manner in which risks had been articulated.

Discussions were then held around risk management
maturity. Sean Delaney took the Committee through the
"Desired State" slide 6 (2.2) and commented that it was
to be expected that the upper quartile desired state
should show greater shading then those lower in the
chain. Sean went on to remark that in his opinion only
Group Procurement were in better risk managed maturity
state and that a series of activities were planned
(executive   coaching,    risk   awareness   and   risk
coordinator training) which would strengthen the PO Ltd
position even further.    Peter Corbett commented that
the increase in strength needed to come from our
ability  to   manage  risk   and  not  necessarily  its
identification.

A brief overview of the deployment of critical business
controls was then presented by Sean Delaney. Sean
commented that since the pack production a number of
controls had progressed. However, Peter Corbett asked
that reminders be issued to stakeholders around the two
partially deployed controls - cash supply (forecast &
supply) and salary & agent (remuneration & payment).

Action 0505
Keith Woollard to chase stakeholders for progression
around partially deployed controls -     cash supply




                                                  Page 6
                                                          POL00021422
                                                     POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


(forecast & supply) and salary & agent (remuneration &
payment).

2.3 Losses Report

Keith Woollard outlined to the Committee work underway
as regards losses reduction. Peter Corbett commented
that that significant opportunities existed as regards
former   Subpostmaster losses.  Turning  to  WH  Smith
losses, then Peter remarked that the Kings Lynn loss
was distorting the overall figure and asked that due
regard be taken of this in future Committee losses
reports.

Action 0506
Future losses report to show cleaned data and factor
the £23.8K WH Smith loss at Kings Lynn.

John Scott remarked that not all former Subpostmaster
losses would be attributable to fraud (followed by
contract termination) and that a percentage      would
actually   be  losses   which   came  to  light  after
resignation / closure. The Committee concurred and
requested that some work be undertaken to provide
greater clarity between former Subpostmaster losses by
fraud and losses through other reasons/

Action 0507
Scope the possibility of splitting the types of former
Subpostmaster losses to provide greater clarity between
fraud losses and other.

2.4 Network Audit Activities

An overview of Network Audit activity was presented by
Keith Woollard. Keith also outlined recent changes in
Audit personnel reporting lines, which would see Lynn
Hobbs take charge of this area of functionality.




                                                  Page 7
                                                            POL00021422
                                                      POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd - Strictly Confidential


The 2008/09 Audit Plan was then detailed. In summary,
three   broad  options  were   outlined  for   the  2726
discretionary days which existed once event driven
activity was catered for; option one would see all
Crown Offices audited across a two year period, option
two   saw  activity  driven   by  existing   risk  model
parameters and option three activity by level of losses
within the appropriate segments.

Both Keith Woollard and Sean Delaney explained that
opportunities were being examined to further improve
our existing risk models and that this was very much
work in progress.

Peter Corbett made a number of points over the need to
focus on the Crown Office piece and commented that our
past assumption that we could somehow leave the Crown
estate out of the audit equation had appeared flawed.
Additionally, Peter reiterated the need to carefully
monitor assets (including cash holdings obviously)
across the Network and that this activity alone could
be a major contributor to ensuring loss minimisation.

John Scott briefly outlined that he planned to see his
team lead an initiative on further reducing Crown
losses (2008/09 by at least 25%) and that he was
pleased to see that consideration was being given to
renewed focus in this area.    Keith Woollard concurred
and expanded on option one by saying that this could
well see a first quarter "blitz" on the Crown estate.

Keith Woollard and Lynn Hobbs remarked that the option
one model appeared, at this stage, to be the firm
favourite, albeit with discussion to be held around
account and centrally supported type branches.

Turning to Network Audit activities around compliance,
then the main areas of non compliance with Network were
detailed. Keith Woollard pointed out to the Committee
that the basket of measures across each of the segments


                                                   Page 8
                                                            POL00021422
                                                      POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


continued to reveal standards as low as 80%, with
ongoing issues around Mystery Shopper reported findings
and   particularly   in   respect    of   identification
requirements for >f5K bureau transactions.

Peter Corbett stated that the results across the board
concerned him and that those within the commercial
segments caused him some real consternation. Peter
asked if it was possible to prepare a major update
piece on activities planned to drive forward 2008/2009
activities aimed at improving the current situation.

Action 0508
Keith Woollard to prepare a major update for the next
Committee meeting on activities deployed / planned to
improve the compliance piece.




2.5 C rime Risk

John Scott presented the Crime Risk elements of the
revised pack.   An overview of Supply Chain and Network
burglary & robbery incidences were presented and John
explained that Supply Chain losses were just in excess
of 2006/07 performance. This was indicative of losing
more money per attack and work was ongoing to establish
if this "spike" was indicative of pre-funding over the
IA period or whether ATM location was a factor. Turning
to Network, then year on year performance continued to
improve with 2007/08 figures some 22.7% below the same
time the previous year.

John went on to comment over investment programmes
introduced by competitors (i.e. Smartwater introduced
by G4S)   and their apparent successes in reducing
attacks. However, as PO Ltd continued to invest in a


                                                   Page 9
                                                             POL00021422
                                                       POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


variety of initiatives, then it was unlikely that      we
would be unduly hit by way of displacement.

A fraud update was detailed which showed YTD fraud
figures of £4.6M captured within 292 raised cases. John
advised the Committee that a Fraud Strand restructure
had seen greater focus placed on the identification and
drive of proactive fraud initiatives, as opposed to
simply delivering traditional investigative casework.
Peter Corbett commented that he fully supported the
approach, but that a number of cases of late had
reiterated  that basic    control  mechanisms   appeared
missing. The consensus of the Committee was that there
was a need for a strong and targeted communication
message to be aimed at those branches where concerns
existed. Luke March asked if there was an agreed tenet
and tone for such messages and David Pardoe explained
that the communication issues were work in progress.

Some discussion was held over utilising surplus BDM
resource in the activities to reduce fraud; Lynn Hobbs
explained that this was firmly in scope and that the
surplus BDMs were already being utilised in some of the
surplus ONCH issues.

John Scott then outlined the asset recovery position
YTD; in summary, £1.6M had been recovered against
closed   cases    and   the   two   trainee    Financial
Investigators  were performing solidly. Accordingly,
once fully trained the two were expected to increase
recoveries to support 40% 2008/09 recovery targetary.

The 2008/09 Crown loss initiative would see Security
Team personnel target Crown estate losses with a view
to reducing by at least 25%. John Scott explained that
the plan to achieve this relied on better use of WTL
sessions, synergies with the losses & gains policy and
far firmer focus on poorer performing branches.




                                                   Page 10
                                                            POL00021422
                                                       POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd - Strictly Confidential


Discussions were held around the open item position of
cheques. John Scott advised the Committee that whilst
no open items over 4 months were present at the time of
reporting, concerns still existed over potential fraud
hidden within delayed / not despatched cheques. John,
outlined a series of activities aimed at reducing this
threat and these ranged from better MI usage, through
to targeted communications to offending branches. It
was reiterated that 1.2M of fraud had been uncovered in
eight cases of fraud alone.

Travel Money Card chargebacks continued to be an issue
and whilst the viability of this product (certainly
within the call centre environment) had been questioned
between Alan Cook and Gary Hockey - Morley, efforts
continued to cap fraud accordingly.    In this respect
then it was anticipated that recent changes to debit
card acceptance parameters would have a timely (and
positive) impact on the fraud risk.

Rejected postage labels continued to be an annoyance
rather than a major crime risk.   Figures of unexpected
rejections had risen in period 11 and again it was
expected that targeted communications would be the
adopted approach in dealing with a number of branches.

Finally, John presented to the Committee the outline of
a recent HLBP that had been prepared in relation to
Saving Stamp. In summary, this supported efforts to
improve the efficacy of the existing reconciliation
issues   and   proposed a   number  of   measures  from
transaction correction issue through to the withdrawal
of the product and replacement with a closed looped
saving's card.
For reference, sample checks on 1400 branches continued
to reveal (within the 1400) suspected fraud of around
£80K per month.

2.6 Internal Audit & Risk Management




                                                  Page 11
                                                            POL00021422
                                                       POL00021422




        Post Office Ltd — Strictly Confidential


It was agreed that due to meeting room issues (apparent
double booking) this item would be taken off-line.

2.7 Business Environment Scanning

As above.

3.0              AOB

Next meeting is scheduled for 25th June 2008 1400 to
1600 -The Conservatory, 5 th Floor, 80 Old Street.




                                                  Page 12
