POL00029728
POL00029728

Message

From: Westbrook, Mark \(UK - Manchester\)!

on behalf of | Westbrook, Mark \(UK - Manchester\) G RO

Sent: 20/05/2014 12

To: Rodric Williat James, Gareth \(UK - Manchester\)
cc: Chris Aujard |

Subject: RE: Follow Up to Boar

Hi Rodric,

This is the technical information information we have obtained from EMC during the course of our review (you might
just want to skip down to my analysis below this):

Centera provides content authenticity and WORM, which means that once written, customer data is immutable and
cannot be modified. If the original file is modified, a new object is created and the original file is not overwritten. To
our customers, “compliance” means many different things. It could mean that no data can be deleted by the
application. It can mean that the storage platform needs to be locked down. Since the definition of compliance means
many different things to our customers, Centera supports 4 modes or editions of compliance: Basic, Governance Edition
(GE), and Compliance Edition Plus (CE+). Each mode provides different capabilities so that customers can tailor features
to meet their specific compliance needs.

1. Basic: in its Basic edition, Centera delivers the full power of content addressed storage (CAS) and WORM
capability. Self-configuring, self-managing, and self-healing, it captures and preserves original content,
protecting the structure of electronic records. However, data retention is NOT enforced and advanced features
such as shredding and advanced retention management are NOT available. Data can be deleted at any time,
provided the application has the required access rights.

2. Governance Edition (GE): Governance Edition is specifically designed for organizations not governed by the US
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to responsibly manage electronic records. Deploy Governance Edition
for policy-based retention and disposition of electronic records.

3. Compliance Edition Plus (CE+): Compliance Edition Plus is designed to meet the most stringent requirements for
electronic storage media as established by regulations from the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
and other national and international regulatory groups. It draws on the core strengths of the Centera platform
while adding extensive compliance capabilities. Compliance Edition Plus brings Write Once, Read Many (WORM)
protection to critical digital information.

4, Advanced Retention Management (ARM): Advanced Retention Management is an add-on license to GE or CE+
compliance modes. Three additional features are enabled via ARM: event-based retention (EBR), litigation hold
(LH), and min/max governor per pool. We will describe these features on the next slide.

Here is a chart that identifies differences between Centera compliance models

POL-0026210
POL00029728
POL00029728

Features 3 (Bi a
Retention Mgmt del. ¥ Y :
Enforce Retention i « i ~
Delete ian a
A slentoincen 4
7 Purge

Set Defautt Retention i
Shredding bc ~
Remote Mgmt ® an ae
Advanced Retention Lo $ 8s

On CE* Default Retention is always infinite

® On CE* Remote Management can only be
enabled over a dedicated management

network and never on the application / access

network

So the key difference for our purposes is that accounts with the correct access rights would be able to delete (but not

modify existing} Audit Store records on the Centera box.

This risk should be largely mitigated by the unique sequence numbers (JSN’s) recorded against each basket transferred
to the Audit Store, and the digital seals applied to protect them.

There remains a small risk (that can only really be discounted by detailed testing} that someone with the requisite access
rights to the ‘digital keys’ used in the sealing process and admin access on the Audit Store could theoretically:

* Delete an audit store record (after extracting it to review the specific JSNs it contained);

* Recreate the transactional data that was originally within that Audit Store file to suit whatever purpose they
might have (using the JSNs in the original file they have subsequently deleted).

* Seal it using the correct key to generate a valid seal value.

©  Reinsert it into the database (you would need to alter the database of seal values as well to make this change

undetectable}.

There is an additional complexity that the transactions themselves (within a sealed Audit Store file) are also digitally
sealed via digital signature.

The question therefore becomes does anyone have the requisite acess rights to the Centera boxes and rights to key
management to be able to exploit this? This question is currently with Bill Membery at Fujitsu for clarification (ie. the
key control is having the requisite segregation of duties between key management and the Centera boxes).

Let me know if that doesn’t give you what you need.

Thanks,

Mark

POL-0026210
POL00029728
POL00029728

UK Futures

How can UK business d

o JK 3 drive
http:/Avww.deloitte.co.uk/ukfutures

IMPORTANT NOTICE

This communication is from Deloitte LLP, a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number OC30367S. Its registered office is 2, New Street
‘Square, London EC4A 382, United Kingdom. Deloitte LLP is the United Kingdom member firm of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited (“DTTL”), a UK private company limited by
guarantee, whose member firms are legally separate and independent entities. Please see www deloitte.co.uk/about for a detailed description of the legal structure of DTTL and
its member firms.

This communication contains information which s.confidential and may also be privileged. its for the exclusive use of the intended recipient{s}. If you are not the intended
recipient(s), please (1) notify, GRO y forwarding this email and delete all copies from your system and (2) note that disclosure, distribution, copying or
Use of this communication is strictly prohibited. Email Communications cannot be guaranteed to be secure or free from error or viruses. All emails sent to or from a Deloitte UK
email account are securely archived and stored by an external supplier within the European Union.

To the extent permitted by law, Deloitte LLP does not accept any liability for use of or reliance on the contents of this email by any person save by the intended recipient(s) to
the extent agreed in a Deloitte LLP engagement contract.

Opinions, conclusions and other information in this email which have not been delivered by way of the business of Deloitte LLP are neither given nor endorsed by it.

From: Rodi
Sent: 26 May 201
tbraok, Mark (
es Chris Auk

~ Manchester); lar {UK - Manchester}

Subject: F

y Up to Board Unde

to Legal Privik

in the cou

ng your Board
as understood”, namely that the auc
more secure “ ¥

, you identified an example where “a [Horizon] cor
ore Cen

re

Was NOt
tings, not the

ra boxis configured only to “Basic”

E+” setting as we nderstood.

done some further work to better understand the ri

d you have si < that

of the data held in the audit store, includin

entifying the exister

ther, compl

this spe

‘© be identified or inve

ne ti

Kind regards, Rod

Ligation Lawyer

148 Old Street, LONDON, ECIV 9HQ

BOOO®

©

postofficenews

POL-0026210
POL00029728
POL00029728

This email and any attachments are confidential and intended for the addressee only. If you are not the named recipient,
you must not use, disclose, reproduce, copy or distribute the contents of this communication. If you have received this in
error, please contact the sender by reply email and then delete this email from your system. Any views or opinions
expressed within this email are solely those of the sender, unless otherwise specifically stated.

POST OFFICE LIMITED is registered in England and Wales no 2154540. Registered Office: 148 OLD STREET,
LONDON EC1V 9HQ.

POL-0026210
