POL00139690

POL00139690
From: John M Scott[/O=MMS/OU=EXCHANGE ADMINISTRATIVE GROUP
(FYDIBOHF23SPDLT)/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=JOHN.M.SCOTT976DB244-9F5B-4D59-A593-
F563C9B5535D]
Sent: Wed 14/08/2013 7:39:37 AM (UTC)

To: Susan Crichton{.

Ce: John M Scott[f
Subject: FW: Weds Call
Susan.

The brief given by yourself for this meeting was to provide in effect an under the radar escalation point from across the
business of issues that may impact the integrity of the Horizon system. You were frustrated in regards to the production
and circulation of the Helen Rose report and therefore did not want any electronic communication which may be subject
to Fol or Disclosure.

The conference calls have been set up and they are chaired by a senior manager from the Security Team and then I'm
briefed thereafter (| wasn't aware | had to specifically Chair, but that is easily remedied). At the outset the purpose of the
call was given that this was an informal escalation point and no electronic notes would be taken or circulated and
communication would created. Written notes have been taken for each call and activity has been driven behind the
scenes. For example a potential Horizon glitch was raised that had been reported previously to Simon Baker. This was
then managed subsequently directly with Rodric Williams and Steve Beddoe by myself in a manner to bring it under legal
privilege as far as possible.

On the conference call with the Lawyers last Friday, Martin Smith from CWK made reference that there is feedback that
it is duplication for the participants but invaluable for him. This is the case that many of the internal stakeholders are also
attending other conference calls collectively 2 to 3 times a week where the same subject areas are discussed, and
therefore questioning it's purpose. For Martin Smith and co, this is their only access point. However the nature of
operating under the radar and with memory fading of the rationale, from Martin's perspective it will look disorganised
without formal terms of reference, electronic notes, action list etc.

| raised this at the Branch Support Programme meeting with Angela and Gayle when they produced a crowded and multi
tiered operating and governance model for the Second Sight response (the risk of duplication). We discussed and agreed
that this conference call, whilst they were aware of (as Gayle is part of it) but not included in their model, will now come
under the governance of the Branch Support Programme. This is the conversation | also had with yourself last
Wednesday.

Clearly | will now attend the conference calls as Chair and following on from the previous discussions and the steer
below, unless otherwise directed, this will become a formal meeting with terms of reference, electronic notes, actions and
appropriate governance within such approach. This will be built into the operating and governance model and the
previous notes and actions over the last three will now be electronically recorded and circulated. This does run the risk
that more communication will be generated electronically with issues, reports and actions responded to etc that may
include inappropriate comments, opinion, assumptions that may be subject to Fol and Disclosure (as in the Helen Rose
report).

Regards.

John.

From: Susan Crichton
Sent: 13 August 2013 20:34
To: John M Scott

Subject: Weds Call

John - as part of our remedial action | had asked you to set up and chair this call, | have had very worrying feedback re
this call from CK and it sounds like this is not being chaired, the participants are unclear as to its purpose and no minutes
are being kept - or there is confusion.

Can we discuss?

Susan
