POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

To Dave Smith, Managing Director From Rod Ismay, Head of Product &
Branch Accounting
Mike Moores, Finance Director 2 August 2010

Mike Young, Chief Technical & Services Officer

Cc Mark Burley, Head of Projects (IT) Mike Granville, Head of Regulatory

Relations

Lesley Sewell, Head of IT Rob Wilson, Head of Criminal Law (RM
Group)

Andy McLean, Head of Service Delivery Mandy Talbot, Principal Lawyer (Civil)

John Scott, Head of Security Keith Woollard, Head of Compliance

Lynn Hobbs, GM Network Support Michele Graves, Executive Correspondence
Manager

Sue Huggins, Head of Network Planning & Change
Horizon — Response to Challenges Regarding Systems Integrity

Post Office Ltd has, over the years, had to dismiss and prosecute a number of
subpostmasters and Crown staff, following financial losses in branches. A
small number of these have made counter claims that they were not guilty of
the charges made but that the Horizon system was faulty.

Various lobby groups have been set up by former subpostmasters and these
have at times received national media coverage and in some cases been
taken up by local MPs. Most recently, Channel 4 has proposed a news article
about this area.

This paper has been compiled as an objective, internal review of POL’s
processes and controls around branch accounting. It includes an overview of
e POL’s control environment and POL’s response to accounting errors
e |T systems — Horizon versus Horizon Online and resolution of known
issues
e Third party perspectives — Court judgments, media and audit
e Statistics on branch accounting issues, suspensions and prosecutions

Executive Summary

The allegations to which we are responding follow on from cases where
thousands of pounds were missing at audit. We remain satisfied that this
money was missing due to theft in the branch — we do not believe the account
balances against which the audits were conducted were corrupt.

POL has extensive controls spanning systems, processes, training and
support. Horizon is robust, but like any system depends on the quality of
entries by the users. Horizon Online builds on this and brings benefits to
running costs and change management. It is not being done because of any
doubt about the integrity of Horizon.

The integrity of Horizon is founded on its tamper proof logs, its real time back
ups and the absence of “backdoors” so that all data entry or acceptance is at
branch level and is tagged against the log on ID of the user. This means that
ownership of the accounting is truly at branch level.

Page 1 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Subpostmasters are trained to use the system, they have support material in
branch and there is a wealth of helpline support available. Some transactions
and processes could be made more intuitive, but the support is there for
queries

Accounting errors do happen through user mistakes, but these can be
explained and resolved case by case. Systems issues have also arisen but
again POL has been able to explain them and rectify them. Whilst they have
affected the availability and functionality of the system, with consequent
impacts on customers and clients, they do not bring the integrity of the system
into question.

When POL takes a subpostmaster to court we have strong processes for the
compilation of evidence, compassionate factors are borne in mind and we
have a high success rate. This does depend on ensuring that the courts
focus on the facts of transaction logs and not on speculation about the “what
ifs”.

There are several improvement opportunities for POL and these are set out in
Appendix 1. They do not undermine POL’s assertion regarding the integrity of
Horizon, but they would tackle some of the other noise which complainants
feed on. They may also help when POL does take action.

Page 2 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

1. POL’s Controls

POL has extensive controls within Horizon and in the communication of
branch accounting records to the central finance systems (primarily the
POLFS system). POL also has clear processes for the recruitment and
training of staff and for access to support services such as Helplines.

1 (a) Systems

The independent IT consultancy Gartner has described the Horizon Online
architecture as first rate and the existing Horizon system has had positive
press. Horizon and HOL were both designed with the principle that only
authorised branch users can create or accept transactions in the system.
Robust security is an important and integral part of the design and
management of both systems.

Failures in systems and file transfer do happen, but POL has controls to
detect these. The frequency of file transfer failures has been unacceptably
high recently and is a top priority for IT

The system depends on the quality and accuracy of data entry by users, and
on branches controlling the permissions levels that they grant to their users.
POL has enabled controls at a branch level for the prevention and detection of
errors and these are supplemented in P&BA.

Hardware and software development, installation, enhancement and

maintenance

e Change management — formal processes and decision points with
authority levels

e Extensive testing including user acceptance tests

e Trained engineers on site and with requirements for proof of ID when
working

Physical Access, Systems Users and log-ons

e Physical security processes for branches to prevent unauthorised staff on
site

e Leaver / joiner controls for allowing and removing access to Horizon

e All users require log on IDs and passwords

e The person in charge in the branch can set the appropriate levels of
access for different users

e All transactions and events are tagged and traceable to the user

e Security is designed and managed in accordance with respected national
and international standards such as ISO / IEC 27001. It is subject to
regular independent audits

Transaction automation — minimising manual entry / choice and enabling

validation of entries

e Use of cards, tokens, barcodes and system reference data to minimise
manual data entry

e Cash centre automation and CCTV in the event of branches disputing
cash rems (England only

Business continuity and systems recovery
Page 3 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

e Alerts for failed transactions in branch and centrally eg. for power cut or
severed lines

Transaction recording, back up and proof against tampering

e Sequential referencing of transactions, customer baskets and associated
user IDs. Prevents gaps, duplication or anonymous transactions

e Transaction back ups — back up server updated as each transaction is
completed

e Audit file and “read only” control — transaction records securely sealed

e Events such as branch balancing are also securely recorded and are
traceable

e System drives double entry accounting and ensures it remains in balance

Interfaces to central finance systems

e Automated interface checklists, batch schedules and exception reports

e Batch controls (“BLE” and “BIMS”) between branch, middleware and
finance systems

e Non polled reports if no data is received from a certain branch

e SAP system and middleware — daily checks for stuck data and for
exceptions (iDocs)

e Reconciliation and alignment of different data feeds — eg. between data to
clients and to POL

Page 4 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
CONFIDENTIAL

1 (b) Processes

Accounting and control in branch

“Accurate accounting is not difficult for well run branches” — the systems and
support are in place for branches to maintain comprehensive, accurate and
timely accounts, and transactions can only arise in Horizon from actions of the
subpostmaster or their staff.

Branch accounting is included in induction training and support is available in
service.

Horizon operates on a “double entry” accounting basis and maintains a
balanced trading position. Staff are then responsible for ensuring that they
record transactions and methods of payment promptly and accurately. They
have the tools, and they are encouraged to do physical checks.

Mistakes do occur (intentionally and unintentionally) and this is where
supervisory checks are important in the branch and where detection
processes from central teams would come into play.

Balancing routines

e Daily cash declarations — an event where staff at each till position count and
report their physical cash holdings and Horizon then flags up any difference
compared to the system

e Cut off routines (daily and weekly) — for onward submission to P&BA /
Clients / Suppliers

e Weekly Balance Period Rollovers — a full check and declaration of all
branch assets and comparison to trading records. Discrepancies can be
ringfenced for resolution in suspense

e Monthly Trading Period Rollover — as above but requires the discrepancies
to be resolved either by putting cash in or “settling centrally” to a debt
ledger managed from P&BA

e Branch Trading Statement, physical signature and retention — a monthly
requirement

e Other control reports in branch eg. Balance Snapshots, Transaction Logs,
Suspense Reports, Daily Sales, Reversals etc. These help identify errors
and internal fraud and are available to subpostmasters at any time

Transaction capture

e Automated products — cards, tokens and barcodes force a transaction into
the system because the clerk has to scan or swipe something

e Matching routines for stand alone kit — branches may forget or make
mistakes in recording transactions at kit such as the ATM, Lottery terminal
or PayStation. P&BA get a feed from the terminal to compare to Horizon
and alert the branch to errors / omissions

e Balancing routines to detect omission of stock sales — physical stock
checks spot these

Page 5 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Cut off routines to detect omissions or misclassifications of vouchers
encashed and methods of payment accepted — the control is the physical
match against the system

System reference data — eg. postage and travel insurance have
embedded price tables

IT systems interventions and response to outages / disconnections

Incomplete transactions — systems could fail or lines could be
disconnected during online banking transactions. This could mean that
customer money has changed hands without the system being updated or
vice versa. IT controls would detect these outages and raise recovery
alerts to the branch such that the branch can check and update the
accounts if needed. This has been a more frequent issue recently with
“screen freezes” and “POCA outages” but recovery instructions have been
issued to branches to enable them to deal with any issues

Independent checks in branches

Around 2,000 branch audits are conducted each year, driven by risk model
All branches are receiving a high level cash count during migration to
Horizon Online

Area managers may from time to time enquire about branch accounts
during visits

Page 6 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

Accounting and control in P&BA

Central controls over accounting are primarily in the Product & Branch
Accounting team (P&BA) but also include activity in cash centres and alerts
from our method of payment processors.

P&BA has initiated a turnaround time commitment with Network for prompt
notification of errors to branches. P&BA has also worked closely with the
NFSP ET on tone of voice and constructive service as well as robust
intervention in the accounting arena.

P&BA tracks its delivery and its accounts accuracy through interface alerts,
reconciliation of data streams, a focus on prompt resolution and various
checks on individual account balances.

Complete, timely and accurate data feeds

e Joint working and alerts with IT teams in respect of expected interfaces,
batch routines and any incidents of data getting stuck in transmission

e Reference data and account mappings — these are secured in the system
and there is segregation of duties around changes

Data matching

e P&BA data matching — comparison of stand alone branch terminal data
against entries in Horizon (for ATM, Camelot, PayStation, Sodexho
Asylum Seekers, Post & Go)

e A&L paper matching — comparison by A&L of paper vouchers sent in by
branches against Horizon daily and weekly summaries

e Cash and bureau in transit matching — checks of what branches recorded
as sent or received compared to what cash centres recorded

e Cheques in transit — comparison of what branches reported as sent
against what the cheque processor physically receives

e Matching routines — automated routines with defined parameters and rules

Error resolution

e Thresholds and policy —- P&BA operates a “maintained error” policy
whereby differences below defined values are written off and not
investigated further on certain products

e Client enquiries — issues of completeness or timeliness of data files may
results in amendments to data in POL systems or client systems

e Customer enquiries — response to ad hoc queries received at P&BA and
Customer Care

e Branch ownership — branches are advised of issues and referred to
Operations Manuals

e Judgmental write offs and authority levels - P&BA has defined authority
levels for write offs and requirements for rationale which would not set
adverse precedents in branches

e Transaction corrections — “double entry” adjustments sent to branches for
their acceptance. There is no “back door” to force them into branch

Page 7 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

accounts. Visibility is key to ensure ownership of the issue and prevent
any risk of arguments about “back doors”

Dispute process — this has been communicated to branches whereby
transaction corrections and discrepancies may be challenged by any
branch

Prompt response — the commitment with Network is for 95% of issues
flagged within 3 months, but in practice most are soon after 1 month and
some key ones are next day

Account reconciliation, probity and audit

Individual accounts are subject to reconciliation with checks against
expectations and supporting evidence

Reconciliations are also subject to external audit

Internal audit reviews are conducted each year on “Critical Business
Processes” and these have covered some processes within P&BA

Page 8 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

The interaction of P&BA, Network, Audit, Security and Legal

P&BA is in the front line of detecting suspicious activity. This fits well as an
aspect of managing and assuring client, branch and bank balances.

P&BA works closely with colleagues in other directorates and has clear
escalation channels for alerting about any systems or process issues, for
proposing themes for fraud risk models and for highlighting individual
branches were a surprise visit by auditors or investigators may be needed.

P&BA also works closely with the civil and criminal law teams in the support of
court actions.

Conformance and Fraud Risk monitoring and intervention

e Accounts checks based on past experience of poor conformance and
fraud routes

e Prompt dialogue with branches enforcing the awareness that P&BA are
watching

e Joint working groups with Security etc - eg. Fraud Forum and Losses
Group

e Joint work with Cash Services on unusual cash trends and postings in
branches

e Cash delivery and collection optimisation to minimise the scope for theft in
branch

Debt Recovery

e Visibility of issues in branch — anomalies in the accounts or in physical
stocks are visible from standard reports and basic stock counts. This
creates a foundation for ownership

e Acceptance of debt by the branch — branches do actively choose options
in Horizon

e Contractual responsibility for losses — this is clear in the subpostmaster
contract

e Enquiries and transaction corrections — branches are informed of issues to
enable to them prevent future recurrence of the same themes

e Statements and reminders — there are clear processes and milestones for
reminders

e Repayment schedules are agreed with Network management and with
sensitivity to financial hardship of the payee

Suspension and follow on

e Auditors have defined processes for their tests in branch and defined
escalation routes

e Decisions not to suspend an agent require authority on a tiered basis
within the Network

Legal action

Page 9 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

When discrepancies are identified, the case goes to Investigations to
decide whether there is a criminal case to be pursued

Decisions on taking civil or criminal action involve qualified legal experts
Qualified decisions are made as to pursuing a specific debt under “theft” in
the criminal court or pursuing “false accounting” where the value awarded
can involve the judge

Court proceeding are driven by the Legal Team

Decisions not to continue legal action, to resolve out of court or to write off
are taken with informed authority and consciously with a view to not setting
a precedent

Decisions do take a variety of circumstances into account including
compassionate factors as well financial cost / benefit. We consider POL
errs more to the compassionate side than the draconian side in its legal
actions

Criminal prosecutions are not based on cost/ benefit. As a “Prosecuting
Authority” Royal Mail has to ensure a consistently robust treatment of
crime not based purely on value

Standard approach to statements for court including what should have
happened and what actually happened

Page 10 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

1 (c ) Recruitment and Training

Agents are recruited based on business cases, credit checks and behavioural
interviews. Agents are then responsible for the recruitment of their own staff.

Further induction controls and subsequent monitoring of agents in service
were considered within the Network Efficiency Programme but could not be
progressed for legal reasons.

Training is provided to Subpostmasters at induction. They are then
responsible for onward training of their own staff. Subsequent training or
communications happen when significant new products or processes are
deployed. . Branch staff are also required to take and pass appropriate
compliance checks to comply with legislations e.g. relating to Financial
Services.

Training and targetry have increasingly focussed on sales. Whilst regulatory
compliance has rightly had more airtime there may be a need to reinforce
awareness of the key accounting routines in branch and to facilitate more of a
“self help” model with greater accountability.

1 (d) Support

Support is available to branches through 3 main channels — Operational
Instruction manuals, the Network Business Support Centre (NBSC) and
Network line management.

Over time, however, branches have accumulated contact points in many parts
of POL and in suppliers and clients. This has therefore undermined the
consistency of support. A project is under way within Service Delivery to
clarify “Single Point of Contact” and this will be a helpful step.

Network Business Support Centre (NBSC)

e A tiered helpline which can refer callers to more specialist support lines.
The NBSC operates 8.15am to 6pm (Monday to Friday) but extended to
8pm on Wednesdays where more accounting support is required, and 8.30
— 2.00 on Saturdays. Emergency support such as for Security is available
24/7.

e The NBSC has a knowledgebase of standard guidance to advise branches
(which is generally the same information that branches have in their
support manuals). The knowledgebase has been updated for Horizon On
Line and has received praise from recent independent reviews.

e The NBSC will refer specific calls and trends to expert domains such as
P&BA for accounting or Fujitsu for software issues.

e The NBSC have weekly operational review meetings with Fujitsu’s Service
Desk.

Suppliers

Page 11 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

e Branches have contact numbers for various suppliers for technical support
(hardware/software issues). Some of these are options off the NBSC call
plan.

e Whilst branches sometimes stray into accounting queries whilst on the
phone, we always instruct suppliers to refer the branch back to the NBSC.

Suppliers

e Branches have contact numbers for various suppliers. These may be for
engineering matters but can stray into accounting eg. with Wincor Nixdorf
on ATMs

Reference material

e Counter Operations Manual — paper based file with monthly updates for
insertion

e Horizon Online Help — the incoming replacement for the paper based
operations manual

e Operations Focus — weekly updates and guidance on transactions and
services

e Memoview — messages direct to the Horizon terminal

e Various magazines which may include “training content” eg. SubSpace

Page 12 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

2. IT Systems
Horizon

Horizon was developed as an electronic point of sale to replace archaic paper
based accounting processes. It utilised hardware in branches which had
strong security features and interfaces to a central data centre with high
security. Data was replicated between units in the branch and once it
reached the central data centres it was replicated between those.

This gave three strengths which are important in terms of the allegations

being made:

1. Horizon infrastructure was robust from a security and access perspective

2. It was resilient in terms of being able to continue customer service and to
hold data in a queue in the event of incidents, and

3. It had strong back up and integrity features with data backed up in branch
and centrally

This provided a strong audit trail. Further narrative from Fujitsu is included at
Appendix 3.

Horizon v Horizon Online (HNG)

Horizon Online has been designed to give the Business Equivalence of
Horizon. It has been driven to reduce costs by having the system on a central
data store rather than being managed by end of day data collection from
individual branches. Horizon Online is made up of a combination of new and
migrating components.

Counter
e No data stored locally, all data is stored centrally on Branch Database
e System in now completely online so it is not possible to transact
without connectivity to the data centre
e Solution uses existing equipment in Branch (base unit, keyboard,
screen pin pad, scales etc)

Router
e Improved backup connections using the mobile network
e New Branch Router to allow discrete counter connection to data centre
without reliance on Gateway PC

Network
e Secure VPN’s used to connect to data centres

Data Centre
e Infrastructure now located in state of the art datacentres in Belfast
e Bladeframe infrastructure provides faster, more reliable infrastructure
e Full resilience - solution is n+1 (ie additional capacity to allow for
failures)
e Storage and backups are faster and more resilient spanning data
across the two data centres

Page 13 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Security
e No data held locally in Branch
e Vulnerability scanning, reporting and patching systems. Intrusion
Detection/Prevention systems in key areas.
e Segmented architecture with firewalls and routers protecting traffic in
and out of sensitive domains including cardholder environment

Page 14 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

3. Known IT Issues and Their Non Applicability to the Allegations Made
(a) Screen Freeze / Recovery

Many Horizon Online branches have been frustrated by system outages.
The root causes have been clarified and resolved and this is evidenced in
the accelerated rollout.

Branches were frustrated when they could not serve at all, but were also
concerned about accounts integrity when transactions were cut of in mid-
flow.

However, transaction alerts were in place and revised operational
instructions have now been issued to enable branches to complete or to
cancel the accounting entries dependent on whether they physically
completed the cash transaction with the customer. Further detail is
included at Appendix 4.

(b) Barcode Sticking

A small number of branches have experienced a situation where a
customer transaction (eg. a bill payment) sticks on the details of the
preceding transaction. In some cases the branch has spotted it
immediately but in some cases it has only come to light when the
customer complains that they are being chased for an “unpaid” bill.
Incidents go back to 2005.

Up to now it had been understood that it related to a version of scanners
where POL did not know which other branches had the same version. It
was not therefore possible to isolate other branches. It was also a rare
event on the scanners themselves. It was not a systematic failure with
every transaction on the particular scanner.

Fujitsu have investigated this and now advised that it is not hardware
related — it is a Riposte software issue. It will cease to be a problem with
Horizon Online, as HOL does not use Riposte.

This issue does not appear to have arisen in any of the legal cases in
question and the incidents have been resolved at all the branches where it
has been noted. This is not considered a systematic integrity issue for
Horizon and it should be resolvable from the facts of records in the
Horizon transaction logs.

(c) Non Polling

Small numbers of branches fail to poll due to issues such as telephone
lines being dug up. The system holds the data in a queue so this does not
undermine integrity. It just affects the timeliness of data, and this is
catered for in decision making by P&BA. The issue goes away with
Horizon Online as the data store is online not in branch.

Page 15 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

(d) File delivery failures

These do not affect branch records but have meant P&BA and clients may
not have received a days transactions. This is a priority fix for IT, but
carries a PR risk.

(e) Horizon / POLFS differences

In 2005, P&BA moved onto a SAP system (POLFS). This was an
exceedingly complex IT migration and there were some issues in
management of the cut off which meant P&BA was out of synch with some
branches in terms of opening balances for cash and bureau. This did not
affect the integrity of Horizon and has been catered for in error resolution
with branches, but it has affected service to some branches ie. Where
decision making on cash supply was based on wrong data centrally.

Some issues have continued to come to light recently but this is now under
control. It is not relevant to the allegations.

Page 16 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

4. Third Party Comment — Court Decisions, Media and Audit
4. (a) Court Decisions

There have been cases, when taken to court by POL, where the
defence has claimed that the accounting system Horizon was at fault
and that there were incidents such as “ghost transactions” or “electrical
supply issues” which have corrupted the Horizon records.

With 2 notable exceptions, POL has been able to rebut these
assertions by ensuring a focus on the facts of the Horizon transaction
logs and a request for the defence to be specific about which
transactions they consider to be “ghost” and why.

Since 2005, which was the start of the existing case management
system, there have been 382 Criminal Law cases forwarded for legal
advice of which 230 proceeded to court. Of those 169 have been
found guilty and 18 defendants cautioned. Of the remaining 43, 1 was
found not guilty but this was nothing to do with any Horizon challenge
and 42 cases were not carried forward. There is no suggestion in any
of these 42 that POL had any concerns itself about Horizon — the
decisions not to proceed included compromised passwords preventing
a case against the individual, “not in the public interest” such as where
there were medical issues, decisions by the Procurator Fiscal not to
proceed (which he need not narrate) and inability to identify the
suspect.

There are three “landmark” cases which feature in the arena of
challenges to Horizon.

1. Clevelleys (2001) — subpostmistress dismissed in 2001 soon after
Horizon was introduced. The defence produced a report which
showed how Horizon “could” have caused an error and POL did not
have the audit transaction logs to refute the claim. POL settled out
of court for £187k, but subsequently improved the retention of audit
transaction logs. This case would not have the same outcome
today because of improved liaison between Fujitsu and POL and
availability of logs.

2. Castleton (2004) — Lee Castleton claimed that Horizon was faulty
and found other subpostmasters to back him. However, POL
presented the audit transaction log to his solicitor who promptly
advised Castleton there was no basis to his case. Castleton
sacked him, lost the case, was found liable for £300k and went
bankrupt. The judge decided there was “no flaw” in the Horizon
system and said “the logic of the system is correct....the conclusion
is inescapable that the Horizon system was working properly in all
material aspects”. This case appeared to have put a stop to
allegations, however, Castleton has continued to promote lobby
groups, assisted others to find no win no fee laywers and remains
vocal in the press. Various publications have in turn quoted him,

Page 17 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

but we have made a strategic decision across the group so far to
quietly respond to each individual rather than mount a pro-active
PR campaign.

. Alderley Edge (2010) — The subpostmaster, Mr Darlington, did
plead guilty in Macclesfield Magistrates Court to false accounting,
but POL had initially pursued him for theft and had to reduce the
charge to false accounting due to printer issues with the legibility of
branch trading reports. Press comment has focussed on certain
comments by the judge. The judge said he had issues with the
proof of size of the loss and also said “there are issues relating to
the Post Office computer system which | do not feel able to judge”.
Critics of Horizon therefore focus on these comments rather than
the fact that Mr Darlington pleaded guilty.

In summary for POL, the record of prosecutions does support the
assertion that the subpostmasters have been guilty rather than that
Horizon is faulty. However, this does not stop speculation about the
system. It is not possible to stop people saying “..what if..”

There have been no cases challenging Horizon Online yet, but POL
remains as confident about the integrity of HOL as it does about
Horizon. IT Security have also reviewed incidents, with no common
theme or trend arising such as to confirm an integrity issue.

POL00026572
POL00026572

Page 18 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

4. (b) Media
Media and public discussion about Post Office systems has included:

1. TV-S4C’s ‘Tara Naw” programme in September 2009. This
included similar individuals to those involved in the current internet
groups. Welsh MP David Jones was proposing a Commons debate
about Post Office IT systems on the back of it. Comments were
made by NFSP ET which were supportive of POL but these were
not included

2. TV—Channel 4 continue their investigations and had proposed a
main news slot

3. The Grocer magazine — various articles linking back to Mr Castleton

4. Computer Weekly — links to articles including “MP seeks answers
over Post Office IT systems”, “Post Office slammed by MPs over
Horizon system” and “Bankuptcy, prosecution and disrupted
livelihoods — Postmasters tell their story”. This in turn led to
discussions with MPs to rebut the suggestion that POL was
delivering Horizon Online as a cover up to tackle errors in the basic
Horizon system

5. Accountancy Age — similar comments and suggestions from “IT
experts” that POL should get an independent review commissioned

6. Internet — “Justice For Subpostmasters Alliance (jfsa.org.uk)” and
“Postofficevictims.org.uk”

To date, POL has ridden the wave of press comment but chosen not to
pro-actively mount our own media campaign.

4. (c ) Independent Review and Audit Angles

POL has actively considered the merits of an independent review. This
has been purely from the perspective that we believe in Horizon but
that a review could help give others the same confidence that we have.

Our decision between IT, Legal, P&BA, Security and Press Office has
continued to be that no matter what opinions we obtain, people will still
ask “what if’ and the defence will always ask questions that require
answers beyond the report. Further such a report would only have
merit as at the date of creation and would have to be updated at the
point at which Horizon or the numerous component platforms were
upgraded.

Ernst & Young and Deloittes are both aware of the issue from the
media and we have discussed the pros and cons of reports with them.
Both would propose significant caveats and would have limits on their
ability to stand in court, therefore we have not pursued this further.

The external audit that E&Y perform does include tests of POL’s IT and

finance control environment but the audit scope and materiality mean
that E&Y would not give a specific opinion on the systems from this.

Page 19 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

It is also important to be crystal clear about any review if one were
commissioned — any investigation would need to be disclosed in court.
Although we would be doing the review to comfort others, any
perception that POL doubts its own systems would mean that all
criminal prosecutions would have to be stayed. It would also beg a
question for the Court of Appeal over past prosecutions and
imprisonments.

The reviews and audits that are currently conducted include an annual
LINK security standards audit which has been satisfactorily signed off.
Future audits will include PC] DSS (Payment Card Industry Standards)
and 1SO27001 Certification (covering data centre operation from the

start of HOL and the whole of Fujitsu’s HOL service from any day now)

Page 20 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

4. (d) Allegations on websites and in magazines
Comments on the “Justice For Subpostmasters” site (Jfsa.org.uk)

After years of being forced to suffer in silence, the injustices that have been
forced upon many Subpostmasters by the Post Office are being exposed
across the country. No longer will the Post Office be able to hold a financial
gun to the head of a Subpostmaster.......

settee "The problem is that the Post Office Horizon system is so flawed that
nobody knows how to fix it, but in the meantime subpostmasters are
continuing to be made to suffer."

cece JFSA has access to IT experts, forensic accountants, a criminal law firm
and a major national firm of solicitors who are acting for us in civil
matters........

e There has to be an independent investigation into the introduction,
operation, reliability and accuracy of Horizon.

e Acomplete change in the way subpostoffices are managed by the Post
Office. Together with a new and fairer contract for subpostmasters that
removes the pin-head dancing around a subpostmaster being an agent or
an employee. A new contract that actually covers the use of IT in
subpostoffices.

e An ombudsman or an independent third party has to be introduced
between the Post Office and the subpostmaster who would hear appeals
in issues of disagreement, as currently the Post Office act as judge, jury
and executioner.

e Finally, the removal of the cosy relationship between the Post Office and
the Federation has to happen (described by many as when the Post Office
says jump, the Federations only answer is, how high). This could easily be
achieved by establishing an extra and alternative representative
subpostmaster body.

Response to these allegations

Independent investigation

Third party experts have been involved in Horizon’s design, test and rollout.
Subpostmasters have been involved in defining requirements and in user
acceptance testing. We do not consider a report necessary. Even if one
were produced, it could not prevent speculative “what if’ questions.

Subpostmasters Contract and NFSP Relationship
These are not relevant to the integrity of the system.

Independent Appeals

Page 21 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

POL gives considerable resource to hearing both sides of the argument. Our
history of write offs supports the view that we are sensitive. Our success in
court cases does not suggest an independent appeals process is needed

Other common challenges include:

“Ghost transactions”

Horizon has secure access controls, transaction logs and no back doors. All
transactions are initiated or authorised in branch. No defendant has yet
identified and substantiated a “ghost transaction”

“Horizon did not let me access the records of all transactions recorded
against my branch”

Horizon does have transaction logs which are accessible in branch.
Transaction corrections issued by P&BA are also visible on receipt and for
later enquiry in the branch.

Page 22 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

5. Branch Accounting Issues — Most Common Issues and Work to
Tackle Them

POL conducts around 80 million customer sessions and 230 million
transactions per month, in the service of around 700 corporate and
governmental clients. This is delivered through 35,000 counter positions
across its estate of 12,000 branches. On a typical day this results in the
central finance team settling £175m to clients and tracking the clearance of
£100m of cheques and cards.

In 2009/10, P&BA issued 153,000 transaction corrections (TCs) to branches
(down from 165,000 year on year). Several of these were in turn a
consolidation for a month of a sequence of daily accounting errors by a
branch. The most common themes for TCs were:

Type % of total Volume Proposed solution

Caused by branch

Camelot 31 48,283 “Ping” automated data feed
Cash rems from branches 11 19,994 Branch conformance reminders
A&L banking and Giro cheques 8 11,863 Branch conformance reminders.
Cheques sent to EDS 6 8,585 Branch conformance reminders
Aon 4 5,694 Pricing automation rolled out
Bureau 4 5,410 Branch conformance reminders
PayStation 3 4,423 “Ping” automated data feed
Other 18 27,331
85 131,583
Not caused by branch

ATM retracts 5 7,864 Branch awareness of retracts
Cash rems to branch 4 5,426 Cash centre conformance
Stock rems from stock centre 2 3,833 Stock centre conformance
Other 4 4,957

100 153,663

Branch errors included under and over statement of transactions and the
omission of activities of both a deposit and a withdrawal nature.

The average value of a TC to credit cash balances was £546 and the average
for a credit was £527. Many individual TCs were small, but some such as
banking deposits where the transaction was miskeyed with too many zero’s
could be in the hundreds of thousands of pounds.

The decision to issue small value TCs is based on giving the branch the
comprehensive view of all their accounting issues and that it is more cost
effective for P&BA to automate the whole run rather than separate out low
value items. The NFSP have been supportive of this approach.

Whilst it is undesirable for this level of errors and corrections, the wider
evidence does not suggest a problem of data integrity or a systematic failure
in systems or processes. The correction level is less than 0.01% of the
underlying 230 million transactions per month. Furthermore the majority of
branch audits are satisfactory.

Page 23 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Turnaround times for notifiying issues to branches are underpinned by an
agreement with the network for 95% of issues to be notified within 3 months.
In practice P&BA is well ahead of this and key issues (eg. cheque despatch
concerns) would get intervention as fast as next day. The agreement caters
for branches monthly trading processes (and a cost/benefit decision to let
timing issues wash through rather than flag them all during the month). The
slowest notifications would arise where we are dependent on a customer to
flag the issue — eg. a keying error on a bill payment.

P&BA is working with Marketing and Operations to design out the scope for
error where possible, but this is not a short journey.

TCs are not an indicator of systems integrity issues. They are a reflection of
poor adherence to defined processes. Nevertheless the underlying errors
create noise in the system and an environment where it is easier to make the
broader allegations.

Page 24 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

6. Branch Audits and Outcomes

Branch audits are driven by a risk model which has taken input from relevant
teams across POL. Cash audits are also specifically being done as part of
the Horizon Online migration. These latter are not full audits, but they would
be expected to flush out situations where a significant amount of money was
missing.

The overall audit results for the last 4 years are as follows:

Reason for Suspension

‘Agents Bankruptcy 7 ‘Other (POCAT
Period Audits | suspended | Audit shortage | Administration | Property | Police Action)
[2007/08 1685 790 184 1 3 2
[2008/09 2326 229 27 a i 7
[2009/10 2303 214 199) 7 3 i
[2010/71 (Aprito June) | 458 a 37 0 3 7

Outcome
Resigned to Died during

Agents Summary Avoid —_|Reinstate|_ period of Case not
Period Audits| suspended | Termination | Termination d suspension | concluded
[2007/08 1685 790 94 60 36 0 0
[2008/09 2326 | _229 447 53 56 3 0
[2009/70 2303 214 94 72 48 0 0
[2010/11 (Aprto June) | 458 a 7 9 6 0 9

Losses in branches can be caused through several reasons, but the most
common is typically the theft of cash and the subsequent cover up by
falsification of accounting balances. The approaches and detection
mechanisms include:

Approach Detection Mechanism
Falsely declare cash balances — e Tighter (lower) cash holdings give
eg. branch has £40k, staff steal branches less scope to falsify cash
£10k but continue to declare without having to appeal for more
holdings of £40k deliveries
e Monitoring of unusual trends in cash
balances

e Branch audit

Falsify value of cash sent tocash |e Checks on contents at the cash

centre centre (under CCTV in England and
supervised in Scotland)

Journal between cash and « Daily matching of cheques

cheques in branch, then claim to despatched by branches compared

have sent cheques to EDS for to receipts at EDS

processing

Claim that customers paid by e Checks on returned stamps at

“savings stamp” and that the Chesterfield

stamps were sent off or lost e Current migration of stamps to
budget cards

Falsification of inpayment and e Favoured products have gradually

Page 25 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

outpayment transactions and been eliminated by automations
values e Remaining items such as “Giro
cheques” are checked by A&L and
evidence returned to us where gaps
arise between point of sale summary
and physical “cheques” sent in

Issues can arise in branch cash balances due to inadvertent keying errors by
the branches. The branch auditors would check this out with P&BA before
getting to a point of proposing suspensions and terminations.

Page 26 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

Appendix 1 - Improvement Areas
Branch awareness and ownership / accountability

1. Branch training — to raise awareness of key Horizon reports and scope
for self help

2. Absentee managers — to identify and address absentee
subpostmasters and managers

3. Ownership and accountability in branch — to improve the standard of
ownership

4. Password security — local commitment to not sharing passwords and to
locking keyboards when away from the counter (could be built into
Subpostmasters contract)

5. Prioritisation of conformance and accounting in the supervision and
targetry of branches

6. Cash remittances — better conformance by branches in making up
contents of rems

Single points of contact and speed of turnaround

1. Single point of contact — to rationalise and communicate contact points
for branches
2. Incident response — to improve response times and clarity of ownership

Readiness for court, focus on facts and strategy for dealing with public
allegations

1. Single accountability — for co-ordinating and responding to challenges
and allegations

2. Court cases — to ensure consistent use of Horizon transaction logs and
explanations. To include the resourcing point between criminal and
civil prosecutions

3. Consider contract change with Fujitsu to increase access to “ARQ
transaction logs” and whether POL uses its contractual allowance for
the right priorities

4. Learning points from the Alderley Edge case — care when amending a
plea from theft to false accounting. Even where a defendant has
pleaded guilty to ensure that allegation that POL has suffered no loss
can be refuted at Court

5. Case management system — to give single view of records between
P&BA, Network, Legal, IT, Service Delivery and Security

6. Press comment — to reconsider our media stance in light of past court
case outcomes

7. Pro-active briefings — ensuring key stakeholders do understand the
facts

8. Review strategy for response to allegations and speculation

Plain English instructions

1. Processes and instructions need to be clearer and punchier

Page 27 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Systems

1. Client file delivery and online services — to complete the improvements
under way

2. Software code changes and proof of authorisation — to improve the
sign off process and documentary evidence of sign off. This has been
a criticism in the 2009/10 external audit. It did not apply to Horizon, but
was a theme from reviews of Credence change control

3. Manual transactions — continued automation and greater use of user
entry checks

4. Cash remittances — automation of Scottish centres to same level as
England

5. Stock remittances and accounting — to improve tracking between
branch and stores and to make branch recording easier

Process and control documentation — improving accountability and version
control

Balance of firmness and compassion
1. Benchmark POL suspension and prosecution rates against other
retailers
2. Continue acknowledging hardship but could fairly charge interest on
debt

Minimising opportunity — keeping cash down and closing enquiries quickly

Internal Audit — consider alignment with existing Critical Business Process
and Control reviews

Page 28 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Appendix 2 — Current Cases With Possible Challenges to Horizon
Criminal Law Cases

As of April there were 12 live cases where it was thought the defence team
were challenging the integrity of Horizon. Case notes are below. In several
cases these do beg a larger question of “where is the cash” rather than “what
could be wrong in the data”. It will be important that POL and Group marshall
our resources to ensure a robust and consistent approach to responding to
these criminal cases as well as to the other population of civil cases.

[Post Office Date Loss Ek Other pertinent information(i.c. magistrates comments or external audit done)
Pir Unale eonrirmed that nis normal eas noting ngures were Ifthe region oF £4u,0UU. ne

then stated that due to a number of Horizon technical problems he had not been paying money|
ut to customers and had therefore generated a build up of cash. Forensic Accountants used
Newsome 2005 to 2008 169 by Defence.

Ms Hodgson explained that she had seen a planned order on Horizon in October 2008 asking
for £25,000 to £30,000 to be returned. She stated that she did not have this amount to return|
so started altering the figures at this time to agree with the Horizon figures. Throughout Ms
Carmichael insisted that she believed this to be an administration error and had not stolen any

JArrochar 2007 to 2009 32 of the money.

When asked why the office had been over £11,000 short on the day of the audit, again Ms
Hodgson stated that this was due to mistakes. She claimed that she didn’t always count the
cash & stock properly and instead relied on the Horizon data.

Kirkoswald 2008 to 2009 18

When asked to explain how the shortage had occurred Mr Dawson stated that he had made an
error during the summer of 2009, consisting of incorrectly entering @ cash deposit into Horizon
of around £31,800 rather than £3,180. He then stated that when he balanced that night
Horizon showed that he was £40,000 to £45,000 short rather than the expected £28,000 to
£29,000. Mr Dawson claimed that the Horizon system was ancient and was due for renewal in
January 2010. He also stated that he was aware of other offices that had experienced
electrical glitches causing unexplained losses. When asked to give examples of these Mr
Dawson stated that he would need to ask their permission before relaying any details. He has

Pitlochry 2008 16 not provided any further information, (electrical fault data) despite requests.
Audit conducted, shortage identified. Majority of loss was in the cash, Sub-postmaster believes
problem with ATM. Sub-postmaster also runs Conway Road SPSO (440614) which was audited
the following day, small shortage identified, Letter received from Solicitor stating suspect has
been ill, but can be interviewed the week commencing 1 March to 5 March 2010 . Allegation
that the Horizon data is not correct("ATM data haywire.) Unknown whether this defence will
Jold Colwyn —_Up to 2008 44 be presented in court,
Interviewed SPMR in June 2009, admitted to false accounting, but denied theft. Solicitor now
alleging that the Horizon data is incorrect.
Rinkfield 2008 to 2009 25
Accused changed plea to not guilty. Fresh court process underway.
Lazy Hill 2007 to 2009 3
Pleaded guilty in Macclesfield magistrates court. Sentenced to 3 months imprisonment
suspended. Awaiting court transcripts in order to verify if the magistrate did make comments,
lAlderiey Edge 2008 to 2009 45 as per press releases,
‘Accused suggesting Horizon data to blame, although no specific transactions identified. Trial
|West Byfleet 2006 to 2009 75 date set 15 March 2010
Told auditors on the day of the audit that he would be short. Disputing the amount, (60K) and
opposed to auditors finding of 74K, and "technical faults.” Did not raise Horizon at all during
Willesden 2008 to 2009 75 the PACE interview.
Porters Avenue 72 Offender instructed a forensic accountant to analyse the data/transactions
Matfielé 41 No specific transactions given relating to the Horizon database

Page 29 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Civil Law Cases

Current Civil cases where allegations about Horizon are an issue and where
proceedings have been issued are limited to the case of Deborah Poble
formerly of Sandleheath BO. We obtained judgement in default against her
and were then contacted by an independent accountant who claimed to be
acting pro bono for a group of aggrieved subpostmasters. He sought access
to the Horizon system to examine it to challenge a long list of alleged defects
with Horizon. His list was substantially culled from allegations made in the
Grocer magazine. POL rejected his demands robustly and Poble collapsed
consenting to a charge being issued against her property. This was sold in
October to pay the debt of£28,961.

There are a number of cases on which Legal are advising on the merits of
whether civil claims should be brought. These include the Alderley Edge
case, David Bristow formerly of Odiham BO where detailed allegation about
Horizon defects have been made and Sanger of Alfresford BO where more
general allegations have been made.

Lastly there is the threat of a class action by Shoosmith solicitors who appear
to be acting for a number of aggrieved subpostmasters.

Page 30 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Appendix 3 - Fujitsu Report on Horizon Data Integrity

© Copyright Fujitsu Services Ltd 2009 Ref: ARC/GEN/REP/0004
COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE AND WITHOUT PREJUDICE Version: 1.0
Uncontrolled if Printed or Distributed Date: 02/10/2009

Document Title: Horizon Data Integrity

Document Reference: ARC/GEN/REP/0004

Document Type: Report (REP)

Release: N/A

Abstract: This document describes the measures that are built into Horizon
to

ensure data integrity. Note that it only covers Horizon and not HNG-X
(Horizon Online).

Document Status: Final Draft

Author & Dept: Gareth | Jenkins

1 Purpose

This document is submitted to Post Office for information purposes only and
without prejudice. In the event that Post Office requires information in support
of a legal case Fujitsu will issue a formal statement.

This document is a technical description of the measures that are built into
Horizon to ensure data integrity, including a description of several failure
scenarios, and descriptions as to how those measures apply in each case.

Note that this document only covers Horizon. It does not cover HNG-X
(Horizon Online).

2 Horizon Data Integrity

The Horizon system is designed to store all data locally on the counter’s hard
disk. Once the data has been successfully stored there it is then replicated
(copied) to the hard disks of any other counters in the branch (and in the case
of a single counter branch to the additional external storage on the single
counter). Data is also passed on from the gateway counter to the Horizon
data centre using similar mechanisms.

The replication process is designed such that should the data fail to be copied
immediately (for example due to a failure on the local IT network within the
branch or another counter being switched off or the branch being
disconnected from the data centre), then further attempts are made to
replicate the data at regular intervals until it is finally copied successfully.
Once the data reaches the Data Centre a further copy is taken and added into
the audit trail where it is available for retrieval for up to 7 years. Data in the
audit trail is “sealed” with a secure checksum that is held separately to ensure
that it has not been tampered with or corrupted.

Every record that is written to the transaction log has a unique incrementing

sequence number. This means it is possible to detect if any transitions
records have been lost.

Page 31 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

While a customer session is in progress, details of the transactions for that
customer session are normally held in the computer’s memory until the
customer session (often known as the “stack”) is settled. At that point all
details of the transactions (including any methods of payment used) are
written to the local hard disk and replicated (as described above). It should be
noted that double entry bookkeeping is used when recording all financial
transactions, ie for every sale of goods or services, there is a corresponding
entry to cover the method of payment that has been used. When a “stack” is
secured it is written in such a way that either all the data is written to the local
hard disk or none of it is written. This concept of “atomic writes” is also taken
into account when data is replicated to other systems (ie other counters,
external storage or the data centre).

The data for a stack will have been successfully secured to the local hard disk
before the screen is updated indicating that a new customer session can be
started. Note that although an attempt will have been made to replicate the
data to an external system at this time, there is no guarantee at this point that
such replication will have been successful. For example if there is a Network
Failure followed by a Terminal failure there is a slight risk that transactions in
the intervening period could be lost.

All data that is written includes a “checksum” value (known as a CRC) which
is checked whenever the data is read to ensure that it has not been corrupted.
Any such corruptions detected on reading will result in failures being recorded
in the event logs which are held on the local hard disk for a few days for
immediate diagnosis and also immediately sent through to the data centre
where they are held for 7 years.

Any failures to write to a hard disk (after appropriate retries) will result in the
counter failing and needing to be restarted and so will be immediately visible
to the user.

Whenever data is retrieved for audit enquiries a number of checks are carried
out:

1. The audit files have not been tampered with (ie the Seals on the audit files
are correct)

2. The individual transactions have their CRCs checked to ensure that they
have not been corrupted.

3. A check is made that no records are missing. Each record generated by a
counter has an incremental sequence number and a check is made that there
are no gaps in the sequencing.

3 Scenarios
It should be noted that these scenarios are all to do with equipment failures
and these will always be visible to Fujitsu through the event logs which are

retained.

3.1 A counter fails

Page 32 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

When a counter fails, there are two possible scenarios:
“jdt can be successfully restarted

| It cannot be successfully restarted, so needs to be physically replaced
In each case the Data Integrity considerations are different and so are
described separately below.
Once the counter has been restarted (regardless of whether or not it has been
replaced) recovery may be carried out if recoverable transactions are
detected on the counter. This is also discussed below.

3.1.1 The Counter is Successfully Restarted

In this case all the data that had been secured prior to the failure is still
present on the counter and so is available for use. If the User is in any doubt
as to whether a transaction had been completed or not prior to the failure they
can use the transaction logs to confirm one way or the other.

3.1.2 The Counter is Physically Replaced

In this case there is no data on the local hard disk of the replacement counter.
However, since the data should have been replicated to other counters in the
branch (or in the case of a single counter branch to the external storage —
which should have been physically moved to the replacement counter), then
the data should be retrieved and copied to the new counter. If for some
reason the data were not available locally in the branch, then it will be copied
back from the data centre. This all happens automatically as part of the
counter replacement procedure.

Note that the hard disks are encrypted so there is no danger of data
protection issues once the old counter has been removed (or if it is stolen).

When a counter is physically replaced, there is a possibility that not all data
has been successfully replicated to another system prior to the failure. In this
scenario it is essential that the user confirms what the last successful
transaction on that counter was, again by using the transaction logs.

Page 33 of 36
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

3.1.3 Transaction Recovery

Some classes of transaction generate recovery data as they go along, so as
to ensure that in the event of a failure between the transaction starting and the
basket being secured, there is sufficient information available to enable the
transaction to be recovered. On Horizon there are two separate mechanisms
to cover different classes of transaction:

| Banking Recovery
ciCAP Recovery

Both these mechanisms are automatically invoked during Log On, should the
system detect that there has been a possible failure. These are described
below.

3.1.3.1 Banking Recovery

This covers credit card and debit card transactions and e-Top-Up transactions
as well as online banking transactions.

A check is carried out to see if any incomplete banking style transactions (i.e.
network banking, credit / debit card or e-Top-Up) exist in the transaction logs
for that counter. An incomplete transaction is one where an authorisation
request has been sent to the financial institution, and there is no
corresponding completion message which is normally secured as part of
settlement at the end of the Customer session.

In most cases, recovery information stored in the transaction log can be used
to ascertain the outcome of the transaction being recovered and a suitable
completion record is then recorded at the time of recovery.

In some cases the user is prompted to confirm whether or not the transaction
has completed successfully and the response from that prompt is used to
generate the completion record.

3.1.3.2 AP Recovery

In the case of Automated Payments (AP), the user is asked if they wish to
carry out AP recovery and they have the option of doing so immediately or
leaving it until later.

If the user carries out recovery they will be asked about the last successful AP
transaction (which can be seen from the branch copies of the AP receipts that
are printed) and the system will then check to see if it has been completed in
the system. If it has not been completed in the system, then the system will
use the AP Recovery data stored in the transaction logs to ensure that all
incomplete AP transactions on the counter up until the one specified by the
user are completed at recovery time. To assist with this process, each AP
transaction has a unique, incrementing sequence number which is printed on
the receipt.

Page 34 of 36
CONFIDENTIAL

Fujitsu understand that these processes are defined in Post Office’s Horizon
User Guides.

3.2 A counter has a “Blue Screen of Death"

This is just a special case of a counter failure, so please see section 3.1
above.

3.3 There are package collisions on networks

The replication protocols used to copy details of transactions between
counters and also between the gateway counter and the data centre ensure
that the data is copied successfully.

Should packets collide on the network (or should there be any other network
issues such as the IT communications link failing) then the replication
protocols will ensure that the data is re-sent. Such retries will continue until
the data is finally successfully transmitted.

Page 35 of 36

POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572
POL00026572

CONFIDENTIAL

Appendix 4 - Screen Freeze / Recovery

The HNG-X architecture allows transactions to be built up on the counter in a basket.
Simplistically, the settlement of the basket is the point at which the clerk is informed that
the customer transactions have been committed to the Data Centre and thus the signal
to the clerk to complete the exchange of goods and money with the customer.
However, some customer transactions have a more immediate effect as they happen; for
instance they generate valuable artefacts or involve interactions with external systems
before the point of settlement. Examples of such customer transactions are:

e = On-line Banking

« Settlement with Credit / Debit Card

e E-Top ups

« DVLA Transactions

e APOP Generic Online (including Postal Orders and Moneygram)

Should such customer transactions have been included in a basket that failed to complete
(eg due to system freeze, loss of connection), then some action is required to recover the
customer transaction and return the overall system into a consistent state. In order to
support this, recovery data is stored at the Data Centre regarding recoverable
transactions to assist with the recovery process.

Page 36 of 36
