                                                                                                                                        POL00028094
                                                                                                                                   POL00028094




                                 CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                                        BAIPOCL Review- Independent Panelmport

CONTENTS                                                                                                                   Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......           ...........    .......          ...                           .......:......:...               _2
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS .............                         ..............................                                    4
PART I - INTRODUCTION ...........................................         ........:..
       A.     Terms of Reference ........I................    .. ....................    5
       B.     Methodology . ................ .......... ............:............        5
       C.     Business drivers ... .....................        .......     ...    .... 6
       D.     Brief description of the system ............. ... ...       ............. .7
PART II -THE PANEL'S FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .. ............. .........
       A.     Current Status of the Programme. ...:..




                                                                                                                              in
                                                            ....    ...... ................ 10
       B.     Solution Design and Fitness for Purpose ..... ...          ... ............     10    0


       C.     Future Proofing         .......    . .........      ...........     ...........12
       D.     Timetable for completion ..... ........ ............................            13
       E.     Programme management, organisation and structures ...................... 14
       F.     Strategic Commitment..... .................................              ...    16
       G.     Likely costs of delivery ......................................       ........ 16              .   0




PART III - RESIDUAL ISSUES AND RISKS ..........................................           .....in
       A.      Strategic issues ..... . . .. ...       ......0      .........:....... ...... 18
       B.      Critical path issues ..........         .....     ...:      ..........     .. 19
       C.      Operational issues ................................................             91
PART IV - SUMMARY OF FINDINGS ..........'          .............                          .. ..........
                                                                                             0                       :... .... 21
ANNEX A -THE PANEL'S VIEW OF A POSSIBLE WAY FORWARD ......................                      22
      Option 2: Partial Restructuring .................................................         22
      Option 1: Full restructuring ......      ..................       . ..................    23
     Weighing the options        ........... .... .. ........... .          ................    24
     Financial Implications . ...........     ...'...        ... _ .... ...       ....        . 25
     Conclusion ........................                 .....     ....         ...... .. ... 26
     Implementation of a restructuring, ...:..      ...................            ....... ... 26
     Contractual/legal issues      ........... . ....... .... ..........             ......... 27
ANNEX B -THE INDEPENDENT PANEL'S RULES OF PROCEDURE .....................                                                     28
ANNEX C -THE PANEL'S MEETINGS.WITH THE PARTIES ......                                            .........           ....... 31
ANNEX D -OUTSTANDING ISSUES .....            . ........................................
                                               '                                                                              32
                                                                                                               POL00028094
                                                                                                          POL00028094




                                CONFIDENTIAL -COMMERCIAL
                                                                      BA/POCL Review -Independent Panelrepot


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background

•     In May 1996, the Benefits Agency (BA) and Post Office Counters Limited (POCL) signed PFI
      contracts with ICL Pathway. Pathway would set up and maintain a secure, automated
      infrastructure for POCL, to allow benefits to be paid to customers presenting a special
      magnetic strip card and to provide a platform for other POOL business.

•     Through the programme, BA alms to eliminate benefit encashment fraud, provide better
      accounting and management information, reduce administration costs and improve service
      delivery. POCL aims to maintain its income from benefit payments and other transactions
      with benefit customers, replace old systems, modemise the network and develop new
      services and commercial opportunities, with Pathway as a partner.

•     In the light of concerns over progress, this Panel, chaired by the head of the Treasury Task
      Force on Private Finance, was set up to make an independent assessment of whether the
      programme was technically viable, if so how quickly it could be completed and at what cost

Findings

•     The programme is complex, probably the biggest of its kind. Its scale, and particularly the
      development work required, were underestimated initially. The parties have since increased
      the resources devoted to the programme, but a range of issues remain to be resolved.

•     Our view is that the programme is technically viable. There must be some risk around
      scaleability and robustness because the system has had to be tested at the level of
      component parts, but we are satisfied-these risks are being well managed by Pathway.

•     There is good evidence of future proofing at all levels. The basic infrastructure is very robust
      for the future and, in the main, industry standard products have been used. The system
      should allow POCL to compete for new business a variety of markets, including banking
                                                         in




      and financial services. New applications based on smartcard technology should be relatively
      straightforward and economic. If on-line applications are required, they may take longer and
      require more investment

•     A further nine months delay to the programme is our best forecast, with September 2001 for
      national rollout completion. Critical path issues will have to be resolved fast to make this
      possible, and the date could be brought forward with commitment and goodwill on all sides.

      The new Horizon Programme Office in POCL has a vital role. The parties need to ensure it
      has the power and the resources to drive forward the whole programme end-to-end and to
      resolve critical outstanding (and future) issues.

•     Driven mainly by timetable slippage, the sponsors' business cases are eroding. The direct
      cost of delay is estimated at £180m, over half of which falls to the sponsors. Potential
      savings       fraud reduction would also be delayed. Pathway, on the basis of the figures it
              fr




                   om




      has provided, would make an overall loss if the contract continued on its present terms and
      would require an extension to break even.




                                                  2
                                                                                                                  POL00028094
                                                                                                                POL00028094




                                                CONFIDENTIAL -COMMERCIAL
                                                                           a4/POCL Review-Independent Panel m"

    Possible         forward
               way




          Given these findings, we sought to find a viable way forward for all the parties, subject to
          negotiations about the detail. Although the parties did not all agree, we believe that a
          restructuring of the full programme could offer such a way forward.

    •     This restructuring would extend the use of the card beyond the current contract end date. BA
          and POCL would prepare for a rapid increase thereafter in benefit payments via the banking
          system (ACT). POCL could by then be ready to offer competitively priced service for




                                                                  a
          customers who still wished to use Post Offices for access to cash in this new environment
          Pathway would be closer to recouping its investment

    •     A second option, less          programme management terms, would be to de-scope the
                                     risky_in




          programme by stopping the benefit payment card, while still allowing time for BA and POCL
          to prepare for ACT. However in our view thisoption would run a higher risk of protracted and
          costly contractual dispute, possibly leaving POCL without an automated.network. It would
          also prolong the      of paper based methods of payments.
                               use




    •     The first option (full restructuring) may offer the prospect of better value for money the
          longer term although, to achieve this, the programme would need to be driven much harder




                                                                                                     in
          and more professionally than far.
                                                  so




    •     If Ministers were to decide on any restructuring, it would be for the parties        negotiation to




                                                                                          in
          agree the details.
•   •     We suggest a neutral 'troubleshooter', directly responsible to Ministers and with their full
          confidence, be appointed to'assist this process, to ensure all the parties give their full
          commitment to implementation of the programme and that rollout is completed at the earliest
          agreed date.




                                                                                                      I




                                                          3
                                                                                                                POL00028094
                                                                                                           POL00028094




                                        CONFIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL                      -
                                                                        BA/POCL Review-IndependentPane!report


SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

To help the reader, we include below 'headlines' for our recommendations, with paragraph
references to the main body of the report

                                                                                                 Paragraph

•       The need to commit to firm baseline and plan becomes critical over the next             weeks. 23




                                                                                          few
                                a
•      As preparations for national rollout proceed, the need to clarify the resourcing and
       functioning of P0 CL's Service Management organisation will become increasingly urgent 32

•       We see considerable weight falling on the Horizon Programme Office, which needs to be
        property resourced in terms of numbers and skills.. .................      "... 52 and 92

•      All parties should agree to an open book' approach so that an end to end plan for the
       programme can be arranged and driven through by the HPO. .........           ..........            56

•       The HPO must drive for resolution of critical path issues before end July.. - ,.. .... 57 and 93

•       BA's constructive engagement in the programme management process will be needed to
        bring the programme to successful conclusion. ......   .............          ..... 59
                                    a




•      The HPO should manage the learning process from Release Ic and testing/trial activities 62

•       Resolution of a number of strategic issues is fundamental to the programme ..........             84

•       BA can do more to ensure that the other parties have confidence         its plans. ......     .. 88
                                                                           in




•       Pathway also has work to do to convince the other parties that the solution is complete and
        scaleable ..    . ..................................            ...    ...... . .. ..       89
                                                                                         ..........
•       The current adversarial approach of the parties will have to change.. .....                 91

        HPO and the Horizon Programme Board need real authority within POCL, with a remit to
        drive forward progress on outstanding acceptance issues.. .........................               92

Depending on the way forward Ministers decide, we would also suggest

•       A neutral 'troubleshooter', directly responsible to Ministers and with their full confidence,
        should be appointed. ...............            ..... . ........................          Annex A.

•       The Post Office Review should consider whether refinements to POCL's present
        management structure would better allow it to. implement the changes required. .. Annex A

•       The opportunity should be taken to restructure the contractual relationships ......         Annex A     -
                                                                                                                POL00028094
                                                                                                              POL00028094




                                     CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                          BA/POCL Revlew-Independent Panelm

  PART I - INTRODUCTION


   A.     Terms of Reference

  1.     - In May 1996, after a two-year PFI procurement process, the Benefits Agency (BA) and Post
  Office Counters Limited (POCL) signed.contracts with ICL Pathway (Pathway) under which 'Pathway
  would provide BA and POCL with a wide range of services. The'programme              the setting up




                                                                                involves
  and maintenance of a secure, automated infrastructure for POCL, which will allow payment of social
  security and other benefits across Post Office counters to customers holding a magnetic strip card
  and provide a platform on which other POCL business could be transacted.            -

  2.      In the light of concerns over progress with the programme, a Panel chaired by the head of
  the Treasury Task Force on Private Finance was set up to make an Independent assessment of
  whetherthe project was technically viable and if so how quickly it could be completed and.atwhat
  cost. The Panel was to report to a working group of officials from HM Treasury, DTI and DSS.

  3. ,    This report fulfils that remit Specifically we, the Panel, were asked to assess:
          •       whether the project can deliver a fully functioning system which meets the project
                  specification, and integrates fully with BA and POOL computer systems;
          •       whether the timetable for completing• the systems development, and starting andd
                  completing roll out, is deliverable and whether the necessary managerial and
                  organisational structures are in place;
         •        the likely costs of delivery, under current contract dates and with extension; and
          •       in each of these areas, the risks associated with these assessments, and whether -
                  robust monitoring arrangements and disciplines are in place:

 4.       All parties expressed a willingness to consider suggestions the Panel might wish to make for
 taking the programme forward successfully, and we have proceeded an the basis that our terms of
 reference should be read as including a power to make recommendations. Our view on a possible
 way forward is at Annex A. The Panel's rules of procedure are at Annex B.


  B.     ' Methodology

 5.      We have received written submissions and oral presentations from all the parties both
 separately and together. We have seen Pathway products demonstrated and been briefed on the
 wider.Govemment information systems agenda by the Central IT Unit (CITU). The panel's schedule
 of meetings with the parties is at Annex C.

  6.       PA Consulting has assisted us with detailed technical and programme planning
  investigations, conducting further interviews with the parties. The report draws on the parties'
• submissions and discussions with us, PA's findings and our independent view. A preliminary view of
  our findings has been discussed with the parties.

 7.      We would thank each of the parties for their open and co-operative approach to our
 investigations, recognising that their contributions have been given without prejudice to their
 contractual rights and remedies.
                                                                                                                       POL00028094
                                                                                                                  POL00028094




                                       CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                            BAiPOCL Review .Independent Panel report




C.      Business drivers

8.        In assessing the viability, timeliness and cost of the programme, we started from the parties'
business drivers, taking account of how they may have changed or been added to since the start of
the programme. The programme has to satisfy the various interlocking objectives of the parties and
is, therefore, complex and wide-ranging.

Benefits Agency

9.      For BA, the business drivers are:
        •            to eliminate benefit encashment fraud, estimated at £190m per year,
        •            to provide adequate accounting and management information for BA;
        •            to reduce administration costs; and
        •            to achieve a fundamental improvement in service delivery.

Post Office Counters

10.     For POCL, the drivers are:
                   :, to maintain income from benefit payments and 'footfall' (ie other POOL transactions _
        •.




                      with benefit customers);
        •            to replace legacy systems and modemise the nationwide Post Office network;
        •            to provide a platform for modemisation and development of other client services;
                     and
        •_           to acquirea strategic private sector partner to bring additional commercial
              {_     opportunities.

Pathway"

11.      Pathway's objectives at the start of the programme were:-
                     to meet sponsors' service needs by integrating a number of systems;
        •            to do this at a competitive price while achieving a reasonable rate of return over the
                     period of the contract;
         •           to establish a world class solution which could be marketed internationally; and
         •_          to become POCL's preferred strategic partner in thedevelopment of its wider
                     business.

12.     These remain Pathway's objectives, but the first has"had to be expanded to include
additional design, development, building and testing of the systems needed-to deliver the services
required. The enhancements required and delay in their implementation has caused a deterioration
  the financial returns the programme offers to the point where Pathway asserts that an extension of
in




the contract is required to restore its financial equilibrium.




                                                           6
                                                                                                              POL00028094
                                                                                                            POL00028094




                                             CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                          BA/POCL Review- IndependentPanetrepod



    Wider Government

    13.     Beyond the parties to the contracts, the Government has an interest in the programme's
    potential contribution to a number of objectives, including:
            •       the preservation of the social value of a nationwide network of POs;
            •       the reform of the welfare system;
            •       a move to an 'active modem service' for benefit customers;                                    -
            •       the target of completing 25% of Government transactions electronically by 2002; and
            •       the delivery of government direct.



                                                      _
•




    D.      Brief description of the system

    14. -   The programme comprises a number of interdependent systems and services,requiring
    work to be completed by Pathway, BA and POCL. Somewhat s"implified, these systems are as
    described and shown in the diagram below.

    15.     On the-benefit payment side, in the Pathway domain:
                   the Post'Office counter clerk uses the Benefit Encashment Service (BES) to make a
                   benefit payment to customers presenting a benefit payment card. The clerk swipes
            •      the card through a magnetic strip reader and is then prompted by the system through
                   the rest of the transaction;
           •       BES uses data         the Card Management Service (CMS), which holds details of
                                   fr




                                        om




                   cards issued, in service, stopped etc, and from the Payment Authorisation Service
                   (PAS), which holds details of all payment instructions received by Pathway;
           •.      CMS and PAS link        the CAPS Access System (CAS) to BA systems;
                                             via




           •       Payment Card Data Files (PCDF) link CMS to de la Rue which produces and         -
                   despatches cards and pick-up notices to customers;
           •       separately, the Order Book Control Service (OBCS) is anti-fraud measure which
                                                                          a




                   checks bar coded order books (until such time as they are superseded by the card)
                   against a national 'stop' list

    16.    In the BA domain, CAPS systems exchange data with,.CAS. These systems are:
           •       the Personal Details Computer System• (PDCS), storing personal details for BA,
                   customers;
           •       the Customer Payment Computer System (CPCS), containing details of payments in,
                   and out; and                     _
           •       an accounting system (PACS);
                   these systems rely on Feeder Benefit Systems, which support each benefit payment
                   system and provide details of payments due; and separately
           •       the Electronic Stop Notice Control System holds details of stop notices.

    17.    For POCL and its other clients, Pathway provide:
           •       an Automated Payments Service (APS) for bill payment and pre-payment using
                                                                                                                                                       POL00028094
                                                                                                                                                  POL00028094




                                             CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                            BArOCL Review - Independent Panel repor!


                           magnetic strip cards and smartcards; and
                  •        Electronic Point-of-Sale Service (EPOSS) for electronic cash register functions - the
                           'glue' connecting together other services at the PO counter.

         18.      Pathway's systems rely on, or provide data to, others in the POCL domain, particularly:
                  •        the Reference Data system, which holds details of post offices, products, prices, etc
                  •        the Host Automated Payment System (RAPS), handling existing automated systems
                           and taking a feed    Pathway's APS; and

                                             fr




                                                  om
                  •        Transaction Information Processing (TIP) taking data from Pathway for POCL's
                           accounting and management information systems.         -




                                                                                                            Naker
                      BA Systems                                       Pathway Systems                  -(             POCL Systems

                 CAP$      : Personal                              Card                  Pa,meMCa d
                              C4        I                      {Aana    nt .              Data Flea
                                                                                                                       Retennu
                                                                                                                         Data


                Feeder      Customer                   CMS                                 (knelt                             -                             .
r..:;.          Benett —    Payment                    Mass        I                                    -
   „R;         Syesert+s     System                    Syskm                               cas
                                            _                                  Qata
                                                             ---            Yanepement



                             System                             Payment                                                TransaGSon
                                                               Au:+atsa5on                                             kdxru:oe                         -       ..
                                                                 SthW           I                                   1 woasseq \
     .                                                   -                      I         t7ec7onk
                                                                                         P      uM
                                                                                                                                       po
                                                                                                                         II---
                           Oee7onie -             0(,W Book             -       '         Autttruted
                           Sbp NoSa                Cc t-ol                                 Payftitttt                  Actnmsted
                            Coat d                 Smite                        i          Setrke                       Peyn+ent

                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                           POL00028094
                                                                                                                         POL00028094




                                              CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                                        BNPOCLReview-lodea ndentPane)rePmt



        19.      Service charges from,BA and POOL to Pathway are calculated from a matrix of unit
        transaction prices. BA have a separate contract with POCL for counter services, the charges
        including fixed, semi-fixed and variable elements, with a'floor' providing that payments cannot fall by
    •   more than.a specified amount in anyone year, regardless of volumes. A simplified diagram of the
              is shown below.
        fl




             ows




                                          Horizon programme payment flows
                                          Benefit Payment Card and other applications

                                                       r   {a`A,
                                                                                        Variable counter
                                                                                            charges

                                                                       .Fixed charges

                           Card Management
                             and Payment
                             Authorisation             Benefit
                            Service charges         Encashment
                                                  Service charges                        Income from
                                                                                 .,




                                                                                         other clients

                                                                       Non-BPC
                                                                       charges
                                                       Pavra„yrt;...
                                                  P'


                                                   Payments to'
                                                  subcontractors .



        20.       The service interdependencies mean that releases of Pathway systems, CAPS and POOL
•       feeder systems need to be coordinated. Separate testing of systems, followed by integrated testing
        of 'model offices' and live trial, lead to the full national rollout of the service to all post offices and BA
        district offices, subject to acceptance tests at appropriate stages. Benefits migrate to the new system
        according to a schedule drawn up by BA. Finally the programme is complete and responsibilities for
        continuing service provision transfer to the supplier and sponsors.
                                                                                                               POL00028094
                                                                                                            POL00028094




                                   CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                          BA/POCL Review-Independent Panelmpod -


PART 11 -THE PANEL'S FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS


A.      Current Status of the Programme

21.    The programme.has, moved on since PA reviewed it towards the end of 1997. Indicators of
progress are:
        •       Release 1c (R1c), a partial solution providing the benefit payment card and'OBCS,
                has been working satisfactorily in just over 200 offices since November 1997;
        •       Pathway has brought in new technical skills and management resources, increasing
                headcount to around'270.staff and introduced new procedures to support the high
                level of software development needed;
                BA has increased its resources on the programme and Release 3.0 of its key feeder
        •




                system (CAPS) has been given DSS Seals of Approval;
        •-      POOL. has also increased its resources on the programme, establishing a pilot
                service management function and a National Implementation organisation, to,
                support Pathway in preparing outlets and training; the Horizon Programme Office
                (HPO) also started work on I April 1998.

22.     However there remain'problems, and difficulties in formally signing-off requirements and
solutions so that delivery dates nca planned and agreed. For example:
        •       there is not yet a stable baseline requirement formally agreed by all parties on which             I"
                plans and key milestones can be agreed;
        •       the parties have yet to sign off proposals to de-scope Release 2 (originally intended
                as the full solution) into New Release 2 (NR2) a partial solution ready for the start of
                national rollout and New Release 2+ (NR2+) the full solution to be available later,
        •       there is no agreed Acceptance Plan or time-scale for acceptance, which puts at risk
                the timetable for contractual acceptance of the system;
        •       there is no consensus on the length, of Model Office testing, live trial (the final stage
                before rollout) and the contingency to be allowed;
        •       there is no agreement on the rate -of rollout, or'beat rate';
        •      -there are no agreed timescales for change control decisions;
        •       version 4 of the Master Plan (covering the whole programme) has not been signed
                off and there is no formal agreement about the conditions for deciding that rollout
                has been completed; and                           -                 -
        •,
                hence the dates proposed for the start of live trial and rollout to all 19,000 post,
                offices are at risk.

23.     Under Pathway's current plans, preparations for national rollout began in earnest on 8 June
1998. This is not point of no return, but it does mean that increasingly more significant
                 a




commitments will be made on the way to the start of national rollout in April 1999. So the. need to
commit to a firm baseline and plan becomes critical over the next few weeks.


B.      Solution Design and Fitness for Purpose

24.     We believe the programme         deliver the contracted functionality. The technical
                                     can




architecture is necessarily highly complex: systems must be separated for contractual reasons; they


                                                    10
                                                                                                                     POL00028094
                                                                                                                   POL00028094



                                        CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                             BA/POOL Review- Independent Panel report

     have to have high levels of resilience and security; and they employ a number of different computing
     platforms. These factors have been well considered in the design*and structuring of the project and
     technical architecture.

     25.      The main architectural issues are scaleability and robustness. We are advised that a solution
     of this scale and scope with so many different platforms and products has, as far as PA Is aware, no
     precedent. We are satisfied that Pathway's approach to design, development and performance
     testing is sufficiently rigorous for such a major undertaking. At this stage of development, testing has
     to.be based on the component parts rather than the entire system. We believe this has been            .
     completed in an appropriately structured way; indeed it is a strength of the modular nature of the
     architecture that this approach can be taken. Significant attention is being given to testing at the
     correspondence server level where the highest risk of congestion occurs.

     26.      Given the size of the system, there is an unavoidable risk that it cannot all have been tested
     end to end In earnest However we are satisfied that Pathway has contingency plans to upgrade
     individual components of the architecture, should that prove necessary;We therefore assess the risk
     of the entire solution failing to operate as expected to be as low as could be achieved in the
     circumstances.

     27.     Although we believe.the architecture to be viable, there is a concern that the system is
     (necessarily) heavily dependent on the third party middleware product 'Riposte'. This risk will persist
     and steps must be taken to manage this risk over the operational lifetime of the system (in addition to
     those steps already taken in the development stages by ICL and Pathway). If, as is confidently
     predicted by ICL, this product becomes Postal industry standard, this risk is significantly mitigated.
                                              a




_.   Pathway has also taken steps to cover their dependency on Riposte by holding copy of the source


                                                                                        a
     code and by training their staff in its use.

     28.     The complex architecture demands supply of highly skilled technicians across a wide
                                                  a




     range of disciplines. Pathway has put in place extra staff with strong development expertise. There
     are now forward resourcing plans and extensive documentation supports the knowledge and
     expertise built up in people's heads. PA has been most impressed with the progress Pathway has
     made since last year in this respect.                                 -

     29.     The project is probably the biggest of its kind and many of the component parts, although
     sourced from industry strength products and companies, are being used towards their current limits
     and scale. Pathway has recognised the risks and has in place the controls we would expect to see in
     a development project of this scale.

     30.      The architecture modular and as the number of on-line offices grows, so specific server
                               is




     types can be added incrementally. Pathway has ensured that, at all levels of the architecture, more
     computing power is available from chosen suppliers should that currently planned for reach the limit
     of its capability.

     31.      There is no reason to suggest BA will not be able to deliver the-CAPS functionality required.
     Its resourcing and testing of this part of the programme, and its track record so far, all give
     confidence. As with the Pathway systems referred to above, there must remain some risk until the
     systems are connected together in earnest The same is true of POCL's parallel work its feeder
                                                                                                      no




     systems (Reference Data, TIP, APS etc.)          .

     32.        POCL has been establishing plans for its Service Management organisation and we are
     satisfied that the requirement is property understood, although POCL has not been able to describe
     to PA exactly how the proposed Service Management organisation will be resourced nor say how it
     will fit into POCL's organisational structure. What is clear however. is. that the system demand a
                                                                                               will
                                                                                                                    POL00028094
                                                                                                                POL00028094




                                       CONFIDENTIAL- COMMERCIAL
                                                                            8A/POCL Review-Independent PanelreDad




                                                                                                                         a_
    degree of central control and management not evident in the present regionally based POOL               -
    organisation. As preparations for national rollout proceed, the need to clarify the resourcing and
    functioning of POCL's Service Management organisation will become increasingly urgent


    C.       Future Proofing

    33. - There is good evidence of future proofing at all levels. We have been satisfied that all
    reasonable steps have been taken to ensure robust sources of supply and compliance.with industry
    standards in designing the architecture. Upgrades to software platforms and individual components
    are provided for, should they be necessary.

    34.       The networking infrastructure and the Riposte messaging system use the TCP/IP.protocol.
    This protocol is becoming an industry standard. The ISDN backbone network anottier technology




                                                                                    is
    that will be around a long time.

    35.    Pathway has taken steps to ensure the future of the Riposte messaging software, but there
    must continue to be a concern about this product unless and until such time as it becomes much
    more of an industry standard. Having said that it is worth noting that there are now Post Office
    automation projects based on Riposte committed in at least five more countries since this contract
•   was placed.

    36.      There is evidence that the architecture will support a variety of applications. The
    infrastructure-technology used will allow Internet type• developments. HTML and Java could be used
    for expansion into other services. The application code has been written using industry standard
    tools and languages such as Visual Basic and Pro C, which ensures that it can be adequately
    covered in the future by another agency if necessary.

    37.     Part of the system design was to make the equipment very user friendly, with touch screens
    and the like. Conversion to a'kiosk7 type system would be relatively straightforward.

    38.      The system has been designed to handle smartcard-based applications. Benefit payment
    applications use a magnetic strip'swipe' card, but future applications could use smartcard instead.
                                                                                         a




    If new applications are focused on smartcard technology, then to implement each one should be a .
    relatively straightforward and economic process as far as the basic infrastructure is concerned,
    although the necessary changes to correspondent systems may be more complex.

    39.     The basic structure to support banking applications will be in place. Pathway will have NT
    machines in the local branch, ISDN lines to all branches and a managed TCP/IP network available
    across the UK This      provide the basic, generic structure needed to run local applications on the
                         will




    counter and to support specialised terminals such as cash dispensers.

      40.     One caveat is that the whole system basically designed as a batch system. It can, and
                                                   is




      does, go on-line, but the Riposte system is,not centred around On-Line Transaction Processing
      (OLTP); it works on a regular collection (harvesting) of messages. The architecture may be, able to
      support a reasonable OLTP performance (and Pathway may have tested this) but it is not part of the
    • contracted functionality. Real time on-line applications, such as those used by the National Lottery, ll.
      could therefore require major changes to the system.

     41.      We do not know whether OLTP will be required to support POCL's future banking
     applications. It will depend the security needed whether, for example, cash withdrawal requires
                                on




     on-line authorisation. The advantage of smart cards is that significant parts of authorisation can be


                                                        12
                                                                                                               POL00028094
                                                                                                             POL00028094



                                         CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                          BA/POCL Review-ladependenl Panelmood

local, with less need to go




                              on-line.
42.     Until POCL decides which banking applications are to be provided, how they are to be
provided and, if using a smart (or other) card, on which technologies and standards they are to be
based, there will remain some uncertainty about how economically the system will support such a
venture and whether the Riposte architecture poses any limitations. A smartcard route should pose
few problems.


D.       Timetable for completion

43.     There have been a number of re-plans since the contracts were signed. The latest plan to
which the parties are working (although not contracted) shows national rollout to start in April 1999,
some 21 months later than was initially planned.

44.     There is no end-to-end schedule for the entire programme agreed between the parties, and
no end-to-end critical pa ana ysis as een done. W6.consider this to be a serious deficiency in the
management of the programme. In order to establish what risk there might be of further delay, PA
carried out their own critical path analysis.

45.     The likelihood of further slippage is Increased by a number of factors:
                 detailed acceptance criteria and the process for acceptance have yet to be agreed;
        •        the parties have yet to agree on: the duration of model office testing and trialling, and
                 the contingency to be allowed; the descoping of Release 2 into New Release 2 and
                 New Release 2+; and which benefits are to be included in the start of national rollout
        •        programme management arrangements are still not satisfactory;
        •        insufficient strategic commitment to the delivery of the programme by all parties; and
        •        the absence of property co-ordinated end-to-end planning, and the sheer difficulty of
                 co-ordinating the rollout of such an ambitious programme.

46. •    Given the disagreements between the parties on timescales,-PA had to make a number of
judgements about the duration of key activities. These judgements tended to be on the cautious side;
closer to BA's view, but not inconsistent with the history of slippage seen so far in the programme.

47.     Based on this analysis, we conclude that the start of national rollout might be further delayed
by up to 9 months to January 2000. This assumes that all outstanding issues with New Release 2
and New Release 2+ are resolved quickly by the HPO (by end July) and a baseline agreed. If so the
forecast date might be brought forward.

48.     Once rollout starts, it is planned to continue at a'beat rate' of 300 offices per week. There
are risks to the achievement of this rate, for example:
        •        there are no pauses for review, and.scaling up beyond, say, 10,000 outlets may give
                 rise to problems;
                 the rollout of EPOSS, if it requires process changes at the counter, runs the risk of
                 disruption to the benefit payment service;
        •        BA card rollout sequence plans may need to change at short notice;
        •        parallel. activity to upgrade parts of the Post Office estate may impose constraints on
                 rollout and



                                                    13
                                                                                                                                POL00028094
                                                                                                                              POL00028094




                                       CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                          BAiPOCL Review-Independent




                                                                                                           Panelrepo4
         •         agreement between the parties about the criteria for rollout completion maybe' hard
                   to achieve:

 49.      These factors have been taken account of in PA's analysis. Harder to model      the -




                                                                                          are
 demands rollout      place on POOL organisation, and the stress likely to be caused'as its regionally
                   will




 based organisation tries to       with a service management approach that demands a more

                                cope
 centralised organisation. With this caveat, we believe that the 300 beat rate has been




                                                                                                properly
 planned for by Pathway and should be sustainable, leading to a best estimate for completion of
 rollout by September 2001.                                                                                                           r

 50.      In order to de-risk software development and Improve the management of software releases,
 Pathway has committed resources both at a significantly higher level and with a different skills




                                                                                                                        mix
 than it had envisaged at the outset, requiring a total re-design of the project team structure and
 processes. Pathway's plans are now much more robust, realistic and better resourced in numbers'
 and skills and, if the issues mentioned above can be settled quickly, there Is every likelihood that ,
 Pathway can deliver to timescales.

_ 51.      BA appears consistently to be able to plan and deliver to timescales.'

 52.    'There remains a great deal of work to be done by POCL to develop programme and




                                                                                its
 service management capabilities: POCL's planning, for both implementation and service
 managementpf the programme, does not appear to have been given sufficiently high a priority within
 the PO Group. It needs to be properly resourced in terms of numbers and skills. Planning should
 provide for and manage an end-to-end critical path, including links and dependencies with its other
 key systems. This planning must be set in the context of POCL's longer term business strategy.


 E.        Programme management, organisation and structures

-53.      The programme is characterised. by inefficient decision making processes. The way change
 requests are managed is particular problem; Pathway are obliged to respond to change. requests
                            a




 within 3 weeks and impact assessments have to be made in 5 days, but no time is stipulated for
 decision-making by the sponsors. This imbalance is, in our view, harming progress.

 54.    The new programme management arrangements since April 1 are intended to improve this.                                   -
 The Horizon programme office (HPO) has a vital role, but it is not yet operating as planned - for
 example joint commercial teams are meeting while the technical and implementation boards are not
  although there are signs of its increasing effectiveness.

 55..     POCL and Pathway feel that they are collaborating more closely than before. This process of
 'joining   the parties must accelerate and embrace BA. Just as important are stronger links with
         up'




 POCL's emerging change, programmes.

 56.     We understand there are no end-to-end descriptions of the system and process
 architectures, which makes it difficult to plan and manage the programme. Without these, and a
 master critical path activity network, alignment between the parties will always be difficult and
 contentious. All parties should agree to an "open book" approach that an end to end plan for the
                                                                     so




 programme "can be arranged and driven through by the HPO.

 57.    The HPO must drive for resolution of all the issues we have identified as on the critical path
 (see Part III below) before end July, if there is to be any chance of improving on the forecasts we
 have made for completion of the Horizon programme.


                                                      14
                                                                                                                      POL00028094
                                                                                                                 POL00028094



                                               CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                            BA/POCL Review- Independent Panel repnd



    58.      Pathway has demonstrated its capacity to deliver the programme. The.evidence suggests
    that the primary focus for any learning from Release 1c has been at Pathway. We found no evidence
    of an explicit learning process across the programme, although there Is evidence that all parties
    have benefited from their experiences of Rio. Pathway has processes (problem management,
    service review, quality audits) to capture R1c experience and have changed Release 2 design and
    the production service as a result.

    59.     While BA has demonstrated its ability to develop and rollout CAPS, it more remote from




                                                                                          is
    the programme management process. Its constructive engagement will be needed to bring the
    programme to a successful conclusion.

    60.     As noted above, the HPO is not yet working as was envisaged. There is evidence of under-
    resourcing in terms of numbers of people, the necessary skills mix and funding. While BA and
    Pathway are buying in the resources and skills they need, POOL are using in-house staff where
    possible. If the HPO is to drive the programme as a whole, it is essential that key roles it are




                                                                                                    in
    resourced to standards comparable with those being achieved across the rest of the programme.

     61.      In     opinion, there are not enough high calibre staff In the HPO particularly key positions
                  our




                                                                                               in
    -such as programme office: only ew O.staff have relevant_ experience in managing such a large
                                           a




     and complex programme. Asa result, it is our view that the HPO director has been pulled in




                                                                                                         too
     many directions - contractual discussions, POCL business and so on. He far has had insufficient



                                                                                     so
     time to drive the Programme a day to day basis and so resolve the issues that are causing the
                                      on




     programme to falter. Although as this review has progressed there have            positive signs of
                                                                              been
     change,      believe that additional high quality resource is needed to support the HPO Programme
             we




     Director that, for example, end to end visibility of all parties' plans are available, challenged and
             so




     then integrated into a critical path network and master plan.

    62.      There is anecdotal evidence that suggests POCL is riot making the, most of opportunities
    afforded by R1c for improvements to its processes. We have not found any evidence of a process
    that ensures sharing between the parties of experiences and lessons learnt The HPO should
    manage the learning process (from R1c and from testing and trial activities still to come) to ensure all
    parties learn appropriate y.


•   F.       Strategic Commitment

    .63.     The HPO's ability drive the parties to agreeand to achieve programme milestones will
                                 to




     continue to be undermined in the absence of shared business objectives for the programme.

    64.      There is uncertainty about both sponsors', long term intentions: BA about alternatives to
    cards for benefit payment; POCL about its strategy to exploit automation. There is a recognition at
    POCL that successful implementation of the automation programme demands a significant change
    in culture, however plans to effect this are not well advanced.

    65.    Over and above the resource constraints noted elsewhere, we believe that the HPO does
    not have sufficient authority for the role it has been given. We see this in two key respects:
           T.           the Horizon programme director does not manage directly the dependencies of
                        POCL projects e.g. Reference data, TIP, yet the overall programme is dependant on
                        these projects delivering on time;
                        the programme requires substantial support of the POCL business as a whole when
                        it comes to implementation, use and•support of the service. The HPO director is a


                                                          15
                                                                                                                    POL00028094
                                                                                                               POL00028094




                                       CONFIDENTIAL -COMMERCIAL
                                                                          BAIf'OCL Review- lndependcnt Panel epod

                    member of the POOL top team but we are not yet convinced that the HPO locked




                                                                                                   is
                    into POCL's organisation, management and decision making processes sufficiently
                    to ensure timely decision making on . programme issues.

    66.    With the proper level of senior management commitment and delegated authority to the
    Programme Director, he would be much better placed to drive through the programme with the
    minimum need to refer upwards.


    G.      Likely costs of delivery

    67.     Increases to programme costs are driven primarily by timescale slippage. BA's costs include
    those attributable to CAPS development. In addition, BA will lose potential fraud savings, POCL's
    opportunity to generate other non-BA business is delayed, and Pathway lose income from system.
    charges.

    68.     Based on our forecast of 9 months further slippage, current programme run rates provided
    by the parties suggest that direct costs will increase as follows:

                             BA
                             POOL                  £15m
                             Pathway . -           £72m

    69.   For comparison, BA's forecast total costs on the programme are over £1 bn and annual
    payments to POCL and Pathway will be around £500m in steady state.

    70.      We have not verified the parties' run rates. They may contain an element of negotiating
Z   margin and may.not take full account of the possibility of reprogramming other work to mitigate the
    impact of further slippage. However they seem to us to be a reasonable guide to the costs of delay
    for the purposes of this report

    Pat
    hway

    71.,    Pathway tells us it has spent or committed £250m so far and expects to spend further
                                                                                              a




    £250m, much of it already contracted for, to complete the design and build stages. Pathway's peak
    cash requirement will be around £425m and. financing costs will therefore be substantially higher
    than budgeted for. On current planning assumptions, income from operations is estimated at £220m,
    leaving a deficit of £205m. This takes account of a financing cost of £170m. The cost 'run rate' is
    about £8m per month and steady state income lost for each month of delay is about £14m.

    72. - POCL has questioned the accuracy of Pathway's cost projections and the true extent of
    deterioration in its rate of return. We have not verified Pathway's figures, although it will be
    necessary to do so for the purposes of any commercial negotiations. Meanwhile we believe they
    should be accepted as the basis for decision on the future of the programme.
                                           a




    BA

    73.     In 1996, the NPV to 2003/2004 of BA's business case was £1 bn, taking account of benefit
    fraud savings but excluding CAPS costs and savings. When CAPS was taken into account (although
    we question whether it is appropriate to do so), the NPV dropped to £730m. On current assumptions


                                                      16
                                                                                                                       POL00028094
                                                                                                                     POL00028094



                                         CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                               BA,POCL Review - Independent Panel mport

     (le rollout starting in April 1999), this latter figure has dropped to £469m. Currently, the cost'run rate'
     of continuing with the programme in its development state is about £10m per month (including CAPS
     work) and, in steady operational state, the losses are about £15m per month based on the benefit
     fraud and administrative savings lost through delay'in migrating to the new system.

     POCL

     74.      In 1996, the NPV to 2003/2004 of POCL's business case was £65m. This has dropped to
     £46m on current planning assumptions and could drop further to about £22m depending upon the
     resolution of outstanding issues and risks. It is estimated that the cost'run rate' is about £1m per
     month (excluding costs associated with Reference Data and TIP). Operating cost savings of a similar
     amount are also being delayed.

   75.     With the exception of POCL, the parties have now resourced up to the numbers, skills and
   experience required for a programme of this scale and complexity. There remain questions about
   costs at POCL, partly the resourcing of the HPO tiut also reflecting our view that POCL has not yet
   worked:through-all the implications of automation. Preparing for and implementing an automated
fl counter environment and its exploitation, which could involve major organisational change, could
/1 mean a substantial un-budgeted cost

     76.     We believe that POOL continues to take an                    approach to resourcing this major
                                                            over




                                                                   -cautious




     programme, relative to the other parties. The POCL business case shows, for example, that the
     resource for national rollout is budgeted at £1000 per post office, that the HPO costs peak at just
     under £1 mper month and the Service Management Function is budgeted at £2.5m per annum. It Is
     understandable that POCL will want to keep implementation costs down. Indeed that presumably Is
I    why the PFI route was chosen in the first place. Having noted that, we believe that POOL may well
11   have to find additional resources to ensure the success of the programme.

     77.     A second area of risk at POCL concerns the state of its organisational readiness to accept
     an automated network. POCL themselves note thabthis-.programme'requires a significant culture
     change'. This-must be registered as a potentially costly risk to the programme until such time as
     POOL sets out detailed plans for implementing any organisation change for automation. These plans
     must be able to demonstrate that the confirmed Pathway plans for national rollout can be supported
     before this risk can safely be removed.

     78.      In summary, it can be seen that the financial return from the programme has deteriorated
     significantly for all parties. Pathway, on the basis of the figures it has provided, would make an
     overall loss if the contract continued on its present terms. For BA and POCL, the NPVs of the
     programme, although positive, have been substantially.eroded, and in POCL's case may have
     become marginal.




                                                          17
                                                                                                                    POL00028094
                                                                                                               POL00028094




                                        CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                         BAIPOCL Revrew - Independent Panelrep0,!


PART III - RESIDUAL ISSUES AND RISKS

79. - The programme          the start seems to have had two distinct sponsor visions, with no clear




                              fr




                                   om
Government-wide view. There has been no clear single ownerof the programme. Perhaps as a
consequence of this, we have seen a lack of grip at project level (at least until early '98), leading to
poor conflict management and a lack of prioritisation. There is some evidence of this changing, but
the change needs to accelerate.

80.    Despite recent changes to the programme management arrangements, the supply chain                                   _
remains unclear. This might be addressed in contractual negotiations if a restructuring of the
programme were to be approved.

81.      On a short operating franchise PFI, with business cases sensitive to delay, specification of
sponsor requirements was initially only at a high level. The supplier was prepared to enter into a
fixed price contract to deliver against them, but underestimated the programme complexity and the
resources required in light of the sponsors' specification. Delays so far have meant that for Pathway
to generate a positive rate of return is now heavily dependent on generating non-BA business for
POCL

82.     The relationships between the parties can be characterised by a low level of confidence in
various aspects of the eventual solution and in each other. _

83.     The parties presented us with a number of outstanding issues for resolution. Some have
been referred to already. Many we see as 'operational', ones which we would have expected to have
been resolved by routine programme and change management procedures. Others - identified below
as'strategic' or 'critical path' - have more serious implications. The full list, with our assessment of
which party should be taking the lead in resolving each one,- is at annex D.


A.       Strategic issues

84.    The following issues are fundamental to the programme, with severe risk of its failure if they
remain unresolved:
       •-      all parties need sound business reasons for a full strategic commitment to the
                programme, with a common vision and incentives for all to make it work in a
                reasonable timescale; original business cases are substantially eroded or no longer
               viable, and there is no process for resolution (we will return to this in Part V below);
         •       BA's commitment is perhaps hardestto achieve while the lower unit cost of an
                 alternative payment mechanism - Automated Credit Transfer (ACT) for at least the
                 majority of its customers - appears so. attractive; any lack of commitment on BA's
                 part could be highly corrosive; conversely a strategically committed BA could play a
                 major role in the success of the programme;
         •       the parties need to ensure the HPO is resourced and empowered to champion and
                 drive forward the programme; POCL must also convince the other parties of its
                 organisational capacity for rollout and service delivery, all within the context of a
     •           clear, well-implemented future business strategy;
                 Pathway must convince first POCL, then BA that Horizon can be exploited
                 cost-effectively to support banking, financial services and other applications for
                 clients and outside government, bringing economies of scale and reduced unit
                         in




                 costs for POCL clients;
         •       the lack of a single owner for the project is a major drawback.
                                                    18
                                                    .-j
                                                                                                                      POL00028094
                                                                                                                POL00028094




                                         CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                             BA/POCL Review-Independent Panelreport




B.       Critical path issues

85.     There is a further group of issues whose resolution is essential for the parties' agreement.
about programme milestone dates, especially the start of live trial and national rollout. Agreement is
needed quickly and should not wait for commercial and legal discussions to be complete..

86.     It is our view that, with goodwill from the parties and the right.drive from the HPO,.all critical
issues can be satisfactorily resolved; indeed resolution is close on some, for example Soft EVP. The
big issues of uncertainty relate to:
        •        the duration of Model Office Testing and Live Trial; current disagreement centres on
                 the amount of contingency needed;
        •        the ability of each of the parties internal programmes to all come together at the right
                 time to allow Live Trial to commence,
        •        the ability of the parties to agree acceptance criteria and process that acceptance




                                                                                          so
                 is achieved a timely way and,
                             in




        •        the risk that BA and POCL business process will need to change once the end-to-
                 end impact of the system has been fully assessed.

87.     In most cases it is the HPO which should be leading the resolution of these issues. It must,
for example, take early steps to:
        •        develop a master, baselined plan for delivery of contracted functionality, which takes
                 account of sponsors' other work programmes and reaches across interfaces with
                 other systems, including POCL feeder systems;
        •        finalise NR2+ contents description, resolving outstanding agreements-to  -agree;
        •        agree an achievable start date and duration for          trial;
                                                                   live




        •        get agreement on how far national rollout can proceed before NR2+ is available; and
        •        speed upacceptance and change control processes.

88.     BA can do more to ensure that the other parties have confidence
                                                                                   in:




        •        its plans to rollout CAPS;
        •        the schedule for migrating benefit types to the new system, and
        •        that CAPS personal data quality will be sufficient not to affect rollout adversely:

89.     Pathway also has work to do to convince the other parties that
                 the essential nature of the security requirement has been taken seriously;
        a




        •        service management products are fully available and scaleable;
        •.       subcontractors    be properly managed; and
                                  will




        •        there is consistent, complete and scaleable technical design.
                         a




C.      Operational issues

90.-    There remain a further group of 'operational' issues, for example around:


                                                    19.
                                                                                                                  POL00028094
                                                                                                                POL00028094




                                    CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                           BAIPOCL Review - lndexndcnt Pane!mport


        •        the effectiveness of BA data cleansing;
        •        the use of contingency in the programme timetable;
        •        problems with EPOSS;
        •        staff training and competency; and
        •        the proposed solution for small offices where full Horizon installation is difficult.

91.      We would have expected these to have been resolved at working level. With goodwill and a
willingness to compromise on all sides, these should be solved once key milestones are set.
However the current adversarial approach of the parties will have to change.

92.      We see considerable weight falling on the HPO, with the Horizon Programme Board used
effectively to reconcile conflicts and ensure progress: Both will need real authority within POCL, with
a remit to drive forward progress on outstanding acceptance issues. They must demand tough
delivery schedules of Pathway and command the confidence of POCL's biggest client (BA) to
concede authority over the programme to the HPO: Relationships with other POOL clients will also
be important in developing new business.

93.     In summary, if there is a commitment to the programme at the highest level (ie with the
                                           n the ability (or otherwise) of the 3 parties to clear all the
                                           nce) by end July.


                                                resolution before end of July 1998
                                               agement
                                               outstanding Agreements-to-Agree
                                               i for delivery of contracted functionality
                                                NR2+ contents description
                                               ice forlivetrial by Jan 99
                                                4000 outlets
                                               11 weeks for live trial
                                               )I processes
                                               account of sponsors' work programmes
                                               caster plan
                                               ;ptance process
                                               of Pathway subcontractors
                                               d complete technical design.
                                               gement products available and scaleable
                                               on
                                               ;ign
                                               rement taken seriously
                                               readiness
                                               amme office viability
                                               ference data
                                               AD code changes
                                               ~nefit migration

                                               lance .




                                                      20
                                                                                                              POL00028094
                                                                                                            POL00028094



                                    CONFIDENTIAL -'COMMERCIAL
                                                                         BAOCC Rcvkw-Independent Panclrnpat


PART IV - SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

94.      The BA/POCL programme is complex, probably the biggest of its kind. Its scale, and
particularly the development work required, were underestimated initially. The parties have since
increased the resources devoted to the programme, but a range of issues remain to be resolved.

95.      Our view is that the programme is technically viable. There must be some risk around
scaleability and robustness because the system has had to be tested at the level of component
parts, but we are satisfied these risks are being well managed by Pathway.

96.      There is good evidence of future proofing at all levels. The basic infrastructure is very robust
for the future and, in the main, industry standard products have been used. The system should allow
POCL to compete for new business in variety of•markets, including banking and financial services.
                                        a




New applications based on smartcard technology should be relatively straightforward and economic.
If on-line applications are required, they may take longer and require more investment

97. - A further nine months delay is our best forecast, with September 2001 for national rollout
completion. Critical path issues will have to be resolved fast to make this possible, but the date could
be brought forward with commitment and goodwill on all sides.

98.      The new Horizon Programme Office has a vital role. It needs to be given the power and the
resources to drive forward the whole programme end-to-end and to resolve critical outstanding (and
future) issues.

99.      Driven mainly by timetable slippage, the sponsors' business cases are eroding. The direct
cost of delay is estimated at £180m, over half of which falls to the sponsors. Pathway, on the basis of
the figures it has provided, would make an overall      if the contract continued on its present terms
                                                    -loss'




and would require an extension to break even:




                                                             21
                                                                                                                              POL00028094
                                                                                                                         POL00028094




                                                CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                                    BA/POCL Review- Independent Panelreport


            ANNEX A - THE PANEL'S VIEW OF A POSSIBLE WAY FORWARD

            1.       Given the findings in the body of the report; we sought to find a way forward on which all the
            parties might agree in principle, subject to negotiations about the detail. We considered all the
            options:

                                       1. Restructured full programme                   -
                                       2. Restructured partial programme - with no benefit payment card
                                       3. Extend the current programme
                                       4. Continue the programme as planned
                                       5. Partial termination -.no benefit payment card
                                       6. Complete termination

            2.      Taking the options In reverse order, each of the last four has fatal flaws if an'agreed way
            forward is sought - one or more of the parties would be unable to accept it
                    •       termination of the complete programme would leave POCL's automation plans set
                    •       back or at least two years (and very possibly more after potential litigation, re-
                            advertisement, procurement and implementation), with the likely loss of non
•                           Government business in the meantime; Pathway would face significant loss of -




                                                                                            a
                            prospects, reputation and revenue;'
                            partial termination with no restructurjgg,- to scrap the benefit payment card and
                            reduce the programme to POOL automation             OBCS -would unacceptably
                                                                          plus




                            reduce Pathway's revenue stream and.leave POCL with an infrastructure too highly
                            specified for its short term needs;
                    •       continuing the programme as currently planned would leave Pathway below break
                            even on its investment and POCL with its infrastructure incomplete for a_move into
                            banking and financial services; the introduction of the card for the short period
        •                   remaining of the initial contract term would expose customers to disruption if BA
                            moved to full ACT immediately thereafter,
                    •       a          extension would delay BA's move to increased use of ACT; prolonging its
                              simple




                            exposure to high unit cost of benefit payments; POCL would have little incentive to
                            modemise further.

    •       3.      We took the opportunity, when presenting our emerging findings to the parties, to set out
•           Options 1 and 2 as the most likely to provide an agreed,way forward. We invited the parties to
            respond indicating whether either might be acceptable.POCL and Pathway supported Option 1, BA
            preferred Option 2. We offer our assessment of these two options below.

            Option 2: PartialRestructuring

            -4.      Under this option, paper based payments would continue until POCL were ready to compete
             for ACT payments. BA would go to open market for ACT-fed payments after a lock-in period to
             assure income stability for POCL to prepare for the transition. The elements would be:.
                     •       no benefit payment card system, but BA continuing its present arrangements with
                             POCL until it had the capacity (technical and commercial) to compete for ACT
                             delivery;           -
                     •       OBCS implemented in key (high fraud) areas;                          -
                     •       automation of POCL infrastructure continues but migrates to support banking and
                             financial services applications, using smart card technology, with freedom to
                             compete in new markets;             '

                                                                22
                                                                                                                      POL00028094
                                                                                                                POL00028094




                                      CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                            RA'POCL Review=Independent Panel report


                •    Pathway compensated for reduced scope of contract

 5.         Advantages of this approach would be:
            •       POCL would get an automated infrastructure, capable of supporting banking,
                    financial services, etc
            •       BA would have an anti-fraud tool (OBCS), and a route to reengineering its payment
                    processes to ACT;
            •       the programme would be descoped, with therefore lower implementation risk; and
            •        Pathway would be well placed to compete for govemmentdirect business.

 6.         On the other hand its disadvantages would be:
            •       the perpetuation of a high cost paper-based method of payment until POOL were
                    ready to compete in the banking market;
                     POCL's infrastructure would be too highly specified for its needs, and yet the lack of
                     an automated payment component would handicap (so it contends) POCL's efforts
                     to win alternative non-Government business;
            •        delays to BA migration to automated payments and to robust BA accounting and
                     reconciliation systems (although BA believe OBCS might be adapted to provide the
                     necessary information); -
                     lengthy, costlynegotiation between the parties, with the strong possibility that
            •




                     Pathway would be unwilling to de-scope in this way;-
                     ICL would lose the substantial part of a prestigious project, suffer damage to its
                    _reputation, and could pursue claims for substantial compensation; and
            •       the failure to capture the full extent of the fraud savings expected from the complete
                    system, the burden of any compensation payable to Pathway and POCL's inability to
                    sustain any significant reduction in ;the payments it receives from BA combine to
        •            make the option uncertain value for money.

• Option 1: Full restructuring

 7.    Under this option,.the benefit payment card would go ahead, with card based payments until
 POCL were ready to compete`for ACT payments. BAwould then go to open market for ACT-fed
 payments. The elements would be:
       •        card based payments from the start of national rollout; order books and giros
               withdrawn completely by the end of rollout; BA to compete its payment business
                once POCL had the capacity to compete (technically and commercially) for ACT
                delivery;
                POCL infrastructure migrates to support banking, financial services and other
                applications with. smart card, with freedom to compete in new markets;
       •        planned BA transfer to full ACT on schedule beyond the current contract end date,
                                                        a




                to be agreed in negotiation, by which time POCL would have re-engineered its
                business to compete electronically and Pathway would have come closer to
                recouping its investment;
                card (magnetic strip and potentially smartcard) based and-ACT payments coexisting
                throughout



                                                       23
                                                                                                                                    POL00028094
                                                                                                                                  POL00028094




                                         CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                                          BA/POCL Review-Independent Panelrepo,.t



8.          Restructuring the programme in this    would have a number of advantages:




                                                      way
        •          benefits would be automated, with administrative savings for BA and payment fraud
                   eliminated;
        •          benefit recipients would be educated in the use of card-based technologies;
        •          BA would see clear route to ACT and an end to POCL's'monopoly';

                                     a
        •          POCL would gain an automated infrastructure, with incentives to compete for
                   business (including    BA) and platform for social banking, financial and

                                           from




                                                                 a
                   govemment.direct applications, but with time to re-engineer its business as'
                   necessary;
                   Pathway would be well placed to compete for new business;
        •          there           be little likelihood of litigatron.
                           would




9.      There would, however, be disadvantages and issues to be resolved:
                   BA would have to accept some delay.to ACT migration, but this should be similar to
                   the delay under Option 2;
        •          the residual issues and risks with the programme would have to be resolved
                   urgently; ..
        •          the parties would have to satisfy themselves they could pursue this option without
                   fear of legal challenge.

Weighing the options

10.     In both;Options I and 2:
                                                                          "'




        •          the maintenance of an efficient national network of Post Offices is achieved;                                           .
        •          the provision by Government of the. necessary commercial freedoms to POCL to                               '
                   compete in banking and financial services is a pre-requisite;.
        •          the timescale for BA's move towards ACT-fed payments is similar,
        •          there are incentives for POCL to re-engineer its business quickly and in good order,
                   (but with time to do so); and
        •
              V

                   the overall cost to the public purse, while difficult to assess at this stage, should be
                   similar.

11.     The potential for litigation and programme blight is greater under Option 2. The attitude of
the parties 'suggests there is the almost certain prospect of litigation, prompted either by BA
                                                                                                                    (on




grounds of breach of contract through delays by Pathway) or by Pathway (on grounds of termination
by BA for convenience through de-scoping the requirement) or by POCL (againstBA), or possibly by
the other contractors who were unsuccessful the initial bidding. In any event, long, acrimonious
                                                            in




and costly legal disputes would be likely, during which progress             replacement programme
                                                                               on




                                                                                    any




would be blighted.

12.       Under Option 1, the prospect of serious dispute (though not of difficult negotiations) is
virtually eliminated and the investment already made in time, effort and money on the payment card
is not wasted. There would be no call for compensation by either of the parties and Pathway would
have a reasonable (although not risk free) opportunity to recoup its investment. The contracts
between the parties would, however, need to be restructured and certain legal issues resolved.


                                                                     24
                                                                                                                                      POL00028094
                                                                                                                                POL00028094




                                                CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                                             SAVOCL Review- Independent Panelteport



    13.      A major influence in the choice between the two options is the speed of migration to ACT
    payments and the feasibility of enforcing 100% adoption of ACT. Under either approach, migration to
    ACT-fed payments will take several years, requiring two systems to                 The benefit payment




                                                                                        co




                                                                                             -exist.
    card is a more cost effective basis for non-ACT payments than the existing order book system.
    Against this, BA argue that, if a move to 100% ACT-fed payments Is accepted as an immediate
    objective, it would be disorientating and inefficient for benefit recipients to have to familiarise
    themselves with the use of a benefit payment card which wouldbe use for only a short while until




                                                                                   in
    100% ACT became effective. But, unless an element of compulsion is provided, there will be a
    continuing           the medium term for a non-ACT system to provide payment for customers who
                need




                              in




    are unable to          bank account or are simply unwilling to do        preferring payment cash. So
                       have




                                   a




                                                                             so,




                                                                                                                in
    unless Ministers are.prepared.to compel BA's customers to open bank accounts (and to subsidise
    the costs of doing so for those customers for whom banks would otherwise be unwilling to provide
    banking facilities), Option1 will represent a more efficient way of providing cash payment facilities in
    the medium term than Option 2.

    14.     Option I provides a platform for the Government to make an early start on its social banking
    and electronic access policies, and provides much needed customer education in the use of card
    technology.

    15.      There are serious risks to POCL's business under Option 2. The partially restructured
    programme should carry less risk of further delay then the continuation of the full programme, since
    most of the complexity is associated with the payment card system. However, the absence of an
    automated payment system could leave POCL exposed commercially both in maintaining existing
    clients and in attractingnew clients from the bankingand financial services sector. It will be in the
    interests of POCL and Pathway to de-risk the continuation of the full programme under Option 1.

    FinancialImplications

    16.    Both restructuring options would require the preparation of new business cases and realistic
    programmes. The financial terms of any restructuring should recognise:
           •       BA's need to establish a fixed timescale for the progressive introduction of ACT
                   payments;
           •       POCL's inability to sustain a significant reduction in payments from.BA until it is in a
                   position to compete with other banking service providers for delivery of ACT-fed
                   payment services to BA customers; and
•          •       ICUs concern to secure a reasonable retum (though not a guarantee, as Pathway
                   must share with POCL the risks of diversifying the commercialisation of the system).

    17.     The variables would therefore be:
            •                 the length of the plateau until competition for ACT delivery, and the speed of the
                              transition;    •
            •                 the level ofPOCL's guaranteed income;
            •                 the balance between (I) contract,extension to remunerate Pathway's investment, (ii)
                              the rate of return fairly allowable to Pathway and (iii) the split of returns from
                              commercialisation of the system between POCL and Pathway;
            •                 POCL's financial prospects after transition;
            •                 review of the risk profile at completion of national rollout.



                                                               25
                                                                                                                   POL00028094
                                                                                                               POL00028094




                                     CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                            BA/POCLReview-Independent Panelrepaf



18.      Any restructuring of the programme must be based on a realistic reappraisal of dates for the
start and completion of national rollout. As noted above, we believe a delay of up to 9 months on the
present scheduled date for the start of national rollout is likely. We understand that, for contractual
reasons, the parties may not be prepared formally, to acknowledge the likelihood of further delay at
present for fear of influencing decisions regarding the future of the programme. But it would be a
serious mistake to embark on a restructuring process without an end-to-end programme for the
commissioning of the entire system, agreed by all parties. At the same time the restructuring plan
must allocate the costs of further delay between the parties and establish fresh incentives to
motivate each to seek to minimise any further slippage and achieve the earliest practicable
completion dates.                                                                      ~.-

19.     It would be for the parties in negotiation to agree the details. The way forward should seek to
reconcile key business drivers of all stakeholders. Factors in the decision would be which option best
met the priorities of the Post Office review and promoted the social benefits of the network, and how
much strategic factors weighed in a value for money assessment.

20. .- We suggest that,•as a basis for decision between Option.1 and Option 2, the parties should
address the detailed cost implications of each, and which option will allow POOL to compete most
effectively and expeditiously for ACT-fed benefit payments in competition with other banking service
providers.

Conclusion

21.      Option 2 (partial restructuring) is, in our view, attractive only in relation to the lower risks it
might carry by comparison with Option 1. It hab the major disadvantage of resulting almost certainly
in prolonged contractual dispute, possibly leaving POCL without any automated network until the
legal position is resolved and a fresh procurement completed.

22.      Option I (full restructuring) may offer the prospect of better value for money in the longer
term although, to achieve this, the programme will need to be driven much harder and more
professionally than so far. This will entail a major change in the status of POCL and a major shift in
its management and customer service culture from monopoly supplier to an efficient competitor in an
open market for banking and financial services.
                                                      - ftar~
23.      The parties have not agreed on either option as a way forward.

Implementation of a restructuring

24.        If Ministers decide to adopt either option, we would like to see a neutral 'troubleshooter',
directly responsible to Ministers and with their full confidence, appointed to ensure the parties give
their full commitment to the implementation process and that the rollout is completed at the earliest
agreed date. The first priority would be a restructuring plan, agreed with the parties, containing:
         •        an action plan to remedy the risks and deficiencies identified in this report; with
                  incentives for, prompt delivery and wider commercialisation of the programme; and
         •        open book resolution of outstanding commercial issues.

25.    The troubleshooter would have a challengingrole. For any restructuring to succeed, it will be
necessary for all parties to bury their differences and to build a new commitment to see the
programme to a successful conclusion. The troubleshooter's contribution would be essential in


                                                       26
                                                                                                                  POL00028094
                                                                                                             POL00028094




                                    CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                        BAiPOCL Review -Independent Panelreport

setting the tone for the continuing relationships between the parties. The troubleshooter could have a
longer term role if Ministers wanted some external monitoring of progress against the agreed plan.

26.     Adoption of the programme as a platform for the development of banking and financial
services applications will require POCL, as it recognises, to effect a major cultural and organisational
change to prepare itself to compete in the wider commercial world. The Post Office Review being
conducted by the DTI should consider what refinements to POCL's present status and management
structure would be desirable to allow it to implement the changes required.

Contractual/legalIssues

27.     Early indications are that Option I would run fewer risks of challenge under the EC
procurement directives, by the Commission or by other bidders, than Option 2. However the parties
willneed to assess this question in light of the details of the original competition.

28.     Either of the options      lead to modification of the programme contracts. In our view,
                             will




although the scale of the work involved will be substantial, the opportunity should be taken to
restructure the contractual relationships to:
        •       establish POCL as the clear owner ofthe programme;
        •       clarify its status as a supplier to BA; and
        •       reflect the tighter programme.management arrangements suggested in this report_
                                                                                                                    POL00028094
                                                                                                               POL00028094




                                    CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                           BA/POCL Review-Independent Panelreport


ANNEX B - THE INDEPENDENT PANEL'S RULES OF PROCEDURE

1.       Introduction

1.1      Difficulties have arisen with the project to automate payment of social security benefits
         across Post Office Counters, for which the Benefits Agency (BA) and Post Office Counters
         Limited (POCL) have contracts (the "Contracts')with ICL Pathway (ICL). BA, POCL and ICL
         are referred to collectively in these rules as the Parties'. In order to inform decision-making
         in relation to these difficulties it has been decided to prepare an urgent assessment of
        -whether the project is technically viable, and if so how quickly it can be completed and at
         what cost.

1.2     To ensure that this assessment is based on a thorough and impartial review it is proposed to
        establish a panel chaired by the head of the Treasury Task Force on Private Finance, Adrian
        Montague. The Treasury Taskforce was setup as a result of the recommendationsof the
        Bates Report on the Private Finance Initiative (PFI). One of its functions is to assist in PFI
        projects facing difficulties. Its responsibilities include monitoring PFI projects to ensure
        progress is being made in accordance with agreed timetables.

1.3     The Parties have agreed with the Panel and each other to participate             the proceedings of




                                                                                   in
        the Panel in accordance with these rules (the "Proceedings').

Terms of reference

1.4     The Panel's terms of reference will be to conduct the Proceedings (which will be without
prejudice to the Parties' legal rights) with the intention'of preparing a confidential report to consider.

                 whether the project can deliver a fully functioning system which meets the project
                 specification, and integrates fully with BA computer systems; this will include
                 examination of BA's and POCL's systems and arrangements           roll out;
                                                                                   for




                 whether the timetable for completing the systems development, and starting and
                 completing rollout, is deliverable; and whether the necessary managerial and
                 organisational structures are in place;

        —        the likely costs of delivery, under current contract dates and with extension;

                 in each of these areas, the risks associated with these assessments, and whether
                 robust monitoring arrangements and disciplines are in place.        -

1.5     'The focus of the Panel's review will therefore'beon the deliverability of the currently defined
         project, and the risks associated with estirnates of timescale and costs. It is not concerned
         with allocating blame for delays experienced so far, or with negotiations as to whom might
         bear any additional costs.


Practical arrangements

1.6     The composition of the Panel is:

         Adrian Montague - Chairman
        -Alec Wylie
         Bill Robins



                                                      28
                                                                                                                                POL00028094
                                                                                                                              POL00028094




                                                    CONFIDENTIAL -COMMERCIAL
                                                                                        BAIPOCL Rc»ew - Independen t pa nef mpcvt

         The Treasury may, at its discretion, make changes in the composition of the Panel.

1.7      The Panel                       be assisted by a Secretariat provided by the Treasury.


                                  will
1.8      The Treasury has appointed PA Consulting act as Consultants to the Panel.




                                                                        to
1.9      The addresses, phone and     numbers and email addresses for HM Treasury, the




                                                     fax
         Secretariat, BA, POCL and ICL are as set out in the attached Schedule 1.

1.10     Meetings between the Panel and the Parties will take place at HM Treasury unless otherwise
         specified by the Panel.

1.11     The members of the Panel (other than the Chairman) and the Consultants will be retained
         and paid by CCTA. The other costs of the Panel will be met by HM Treasury. Each of the
         Parties will bear their own costs.

1.12     The Panel may terminate the Proceedings at any time if it considers that there is no useful
         purpose be served continuing.
                             to




                                               in




2.       Procedure and Timetable

2.1      The procedure is set out below. A timetable illustrating the possible stages of the
         Proceedings is set out in Schedule 2. The procedure and timing of the stages may be varied
         by the Panel as it thinks fit subject to the points about timetable in 2.6.

2.2      The Parties are invited to submit to the Panel and to exchange with each other-by the date
         set out in paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 a document not exceeding 10 typed A4 pages setting
         out

         2.2.1          a summary of their view of any issues they believe to be outstanding arising out of
                        the issues referred to in the Panel's terms of reference, including amounts at issue;

         2.2.2          the proposed resolution of these issues; and

         2.2.3          a list of any documents which have an important and direct bearing on the issues
                        outlined in-the summary.

2.3      The first full meeting of the Panel will be attended by all the Parties and the Consultants. The
         Parties      not be legally represented (either•by external or employed lawyers) at this
                 will




         meeting or at any subsequent meetings. At the first meeting the Panel will invite the Parties
         to make short presentations to the Panel about the outstanding issues and how those issues
         can be resolved. The Panel         in its absolute discretion, determine the order which the
                                                     will,




                                                                                                            in




         presentations are to be given, the number of presentations and the time limits for the
     •   presentations.

2.4      Following the first meeting the Panel will establish a list of issues to be investigated. It will
         invite further submissions from the Parties and will instruct the Consultants to investigate the
         matters in dispute. The Consultants will ask the Parties to provide any information the
         Consultants think could be useful to the investigation. The Parties shall at all times        such
                                                                                                                 give




         assistance as may reasonably be requested by the Consultants to enable the investigation to
         be completed. The Consultants will report to-the Panel any failure by any of the Parties to co-
         operate the investigation and the Panel will be free to draw adverse inferences from that
                        in




         failure.



                                                                   29
                                                                                                                           POL00028094
                                                                                                                        POL00028094




                                           CONFIDENTIAL -COMMERCIAL
                                                                                   8M'OCL Review - Independent Panelmpo4


        2.5     The Chairman of the Panel may deal with procedural questions without consulting the other
                two members of the Panel where he is unable to contact them and an urgent decision is
                required. In all other. matters decisions will be made either unanimously or by majority vote,
                at the Chairman's discretion. Where there is no clear majority, the Chairman's decision
               'prevails.

        2.6    The second full meeting of the Panel will be attended by all the Parties and the Consultants.
               At the second full meeting between the' Panel and the Parties, the Panel will invite the
               Parties, on the same basis as in 2.3 above, to respond briefly to the Panel's draft findings.
               Following the second meeting with the Parties, the Panel will finalise the findings and submit
               its report to the interdepartmental working group. A strict time limit of two months from the
               date of the Panel's initial letter to the Parties is set for the Panel to submit its final report. The
               Panel will actively seek ways of shortening this timetable.

        2.7    The Panel may convene further meetings with the Parties, together orseparately, as it thinks
               fit. The Panel will fix the date, time and place of those meetings.

        2.8    No member of.the Panel, or the Consultants, shall be liable to the Parties (or any of them) for
               any actor omission whatsoever in connection with the Proceedings, nor shall they be under
               any obligation to make any statement to any person about the Proceedings, nor shall any
               Party seek to make them a witness in any legal proceedings arising out of or in connection
               with the contracts.
}




        2.9    The Proceedings are private, confidential, privileged and informal. All materials, documents
    •          or submissions, whether in writing or oral, made or created for the purpose of the .
               Proceedings by the Panel, the Consultants or the Parties (the Materials') shall be
               confidential and without prejudice to the Parties' legal rights. The Materials shall not be
    •          subject to disclosure to or discovery by any Party in any legal proceedings arising out of or in
               connection with the Contracts or otherwise without the consent of the other Parties.

        2.10   The report of the Panel shall not be subjectto`disclosure to or discovery by any Party in any
               legal proceedings arising out of or in connection with the Contracts or otherwise without the
               consent of the other Parties. ICL will not be shown those parts that deal with BA's and
               POCL's performance. The chairman of the Panel will debrief the Parties on the Panel's
               findings once the Panel's report is complete but will not comment on or disclose to ICL the
               parts relating to BA's and POCL's performance.
                                                                                                              POL00028094
                                                                                                         POL00028094




                                   CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                     BM'OCL Review-Independent Panelrepod't

ANNEX C-- THE PANEL'S MEETINGS WITH THE PARTIES

The Panel held meetings with the parties, both together and separately,        follows:




                                                                          as
 11 May       Initial shared presentation of issues by parties                 All parties

-11 May       Private presentations, of issues by parties                      ICL, BA, POOL separately.

 19 May       Presentations of parties' business cases                         ICL, BA, POOL separately

 28 May.      Demonstration to Panel of Horizon products                       Pathway

 8 June       Final presentations by parties                                   ICL, BA, POOL separately

 11 June      Presentations to parties of Panel's initial findings             ICL,-BA, POOL separately -




                                                   31
                                                                                                                   POL00028094
                                                                                                              POL00028094




                                     CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                              BA/POCL ReVkW-/ndePendentPane1MP&1

ANNEX D - OUTSTANDING ISSUES

The following table lists issues to be resolved and, for each one, an assessment of its classification.-
strategic (S), critical path (C) or operational (0) - and the party with lead responsibility for resolving it.


                                                                       Classification        Responsibility
 Issue                                                                  (S, Cor 0) -         for resolution
 I. Requirements
          Finalisation of NR2+ contents, description                           C                  HPO
          Resolution of outstanding A2As                                       C                  HPO
          Robust service management organisation                               S                 POCL
          Security requirement taken seriously                                 C                Pathway
          Interface management                                                 C                  HPO
          Position of non-economic offices                                _    0                Pathway
 II. Performance and viability
          Consistent and complete technical design -. -                        C                Pathway.
          Baselined plan for delivery of contracted                            C                  HPO
          functionality
          Issues with EPOSS                                                    O                 POCL
          Issues with reference data                                           C                 POCL
          NR2 limited to 4000 outlets                      -                   C      -           HPO
          Large scale FAD code changes                                         C                 POOL
          Scaleable design                                                     C                Pathway
          Future proof design                                                  S                Pathway
          Service management products available and                            C                Pathway
          scateable
          R1c validation - are lessons being captured?..                       0                  HPO
          NR2 acceptance for live-trial by Jan 99                              C       -          HPO
          Card rollout and production.                                         C             Pathway, BA
          CAPS performance                                                     C                   BA
          Management of Pathway subcontractors                                 C                Pathway
 III. Timescale
          Reasons for previous (and future?) slippage                          0                  HPO
          300 beat rate                                                        S                  HPO
          Change control processes                                             C -                HPO
          Oct-Dec 98 contingency                                               0                  HPO
          Sufficiency of 11 weeks for live trial               -               C                   HPO
          Speed of acceptance process                  -                        C                  HPO


                                                       32
                                                                                                         POL00028094
                                                                                                   POL00028094




                                  CONFIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL
                                                                   BA OCLReview-IndependentPaneireport


                                                              `Classification     Responsibility
Issue                                                           (S, C 0),         for resolution




                                                                     or
IV. Costs, resources
        Business cases                                              S                  all
        Training of POCL staff (incl. turnover training)            0'                POCL
        Training competency check                                  -0                 POCL
        Need to take account of sponsors work                       C                  HPO
        programmes
        Effectiveness of data cleansing                             0                   BA
        POCL estate readiness                                       C                 POOL
        POOL organisational readiness                               S                 POCL
        Scheduling benefit migration                      -         C                   BA
V. Management, etc                               ..:::.
        Horizon Programme office viability .                        C                 POOL
        Need for business champions - ownership_not clear .         S'     =          POOL
        Escalation process                                          O                  HPO -
        Horizon Project Board to meet? -         -                  0                  HPO
        Adversarial approach                                        0 _                  all
        Programme master plan                                       C                  HPO
        Better use.of contingency (time)                            0                  HPO
        Evidence of strategic commitment                            S                    all




                                                     33
