                                                                                                                         POL00107160
                                                                                                                       POL001 07160




    De         lm oi n tte,                                                      STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL




    Horizon:
          n: Desktop Review of ss                                                                  r     .. .


    Sources and Key ControlFeatures

    Draft
        , _ r discussion
■




    23 May 2014




    This report and the work connected therewith are subject to the Terms and Conditions of the engagement letter dated 09
    April 2014 between Post Office Limited and Deloitte LLP. The report is produced for the General Counsel of Post Office Ltd,
    solely for the use of Post Office Limited for the purpose of assessing assurance sources and the design of certain controls
    relating to the Horizon system. Its contents should not be quoted or referred to in whole or in part without our prior written
    consent, except as required by law. Deloitte LLP will accept no responsibility to any third party, as the report has not been
    prepared, and is not intended for any other purpose.


    DRAFT: Version 16
    SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE
                                                                            POLOO107160
                                                                          POL00107160




Contents

1    Executive Summary                                               3

2    Introduction                                                     7

3   Approach                                                          9

4    Understanding the Horizon Processing Environment                19

5   Assessment of Assurance Sources                                  25

6    Matters for Consideration                                       29

Appendix 1: IT Provision Assurance Source Mapping and Gap Analysis   35

Appendix 2: Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features                 38

Appendix 3: Inventory of Documentation Reviewed.                     56

Appendix 4: Engagement Letter                                        61

Appendix 5: Change Order 01                                          70




                                                                                        ■
                                                                                        ■




                                                                                        I
                                                                                        I
                                                                                        ■




                                                                                        I

DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                2       L
                                                                                                                                                                                      POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00107160




    I Executive
■
I
    Context
I
    As outlined to us by the Post Office Limited ("POL") litigation team, " POL is responding to allegations from Sub-
®   postmasters that the "Horizon" IT system used to record transactions in POL branches is defective and that the
®   processes associated with it are inadequate (e.g. that it maybe the source and/or cause of branch losses). POL is
    committed to ensuring and demonstrating that the current Horizon system is robust and operates with integrity,
    within an appropriate control framework. "

    POL is confident that Horizon and its associated control activities deliver a robust processing environment through
    three mechanisms: POL have designed features directly into Horizon to exert control; POL operates IT
    management over Horizon; and POL have implemented controls into and around the business processes making
    use of Horizon. Collectively these three approaches of inherent systems design, ongoing systems management
    and business process control are designed to deliver a Horizon processing environment which operates with
i   integrity

    Since its implementation in branches, POL has commissioned or has received a number of pieces of work relating
    to the Horizon processing environment, to provide comfort over its integrity. This work, referred to in our report as
    the "Assurance Work", provides documented assertions relating to aspects of the design and operation of the
®   Horizon processing environment. The Assurance Work includes IT project documents; operational policies and
    procedures; internal and external investigations and reviews; independent audits; and emails confirming otherwise
®   verbal assertions.

    Deloitte has been appointed to:
        • consider whether this Assurance Work appropriately covers key risks relating to the integrity of the
             processing environment,
®       • to extract from the Assurance Work an initial schedule of the Horizon Features,
        • to raise suggestions for potential improvements in the assurance provision.

     "Horizon Features" is a term we have introduced to represent those features of the Horizon processing environment, including IT management
     and business use controls, which provide that:
        •     movements in Branch ledgers have the full ownership and visibility of sub-postmasters; and
®       •     audit trails kept by the system are complete and accurate.

                                                             Key assertions requiring assurance, to underpin confidence in processing integrity
                                                                              TIHt Ciciysiem w.s~iitxwY~sa ,n,_'                                                        7rut aaur„cw m
                                                                               nMed es es,, d ,.sen fa51 n                                                               Lose, ,,n are
    We have structured our work around the                         2(19(1
                                                                                     FMS mgor                                gy [
                                                                                                                                                                           _____'e
                                                                                                a na Cxsyn______.e.ers                                                  Trac scevo,;aw ;r
    key control assertions shown in the                                     Today            ihStaren ub      &mmeC ,, ara
                                                                                                                                                                    pror:sao aor
                                                                                                                                                                   Lcm:a of
                                                                                           rKIXeC CX51eey u«      Wy —t m a
    diagram (right), which has been agreed
    with POL. We consider these to be key                                                              f~      TRliwKly FOS:Ctl
                                                                                                                                      Ttu2 cc Wait Sirers a~
                                                                                                                                      CPMIdt:C3fl hL:;:C 3,        TM°f~Ortf-0]01~
                                                                                                         y~   'eamztn9 TrxvatGws'        a9efB.ancA l.:ager•
    matters that POL should control in order to                                                                                                                    e.or.M (ramec


    gain comfort over the integrity of
    processing.

    We have considered P0 L's three design
                                                                                            -.I    i s
                                                                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                Tat '    ,o,122
                                                                                                                           `~                                  ~areca C5A awns
                                                                                                                                                                w S aroa Ka
    approaches when evaluating the                                                                                                                             B= OY.aSase Rtt
                                                                                                                                                                Past 5.9te GL°i
    Assurance Work.
                                                                              i1+al ¢:a posh ,5fl
                                                                              'let ayl~^'hS Wa kLams
                                                                             0.                                            [NW4!
                                                                             9s a-sAq k and +cccxsE                       ,t46 dns1



                                                             LEGALLY rRMLEOED AND CONFIDENML                                                                                o Debi".a LLF 4014
       •. .


                         a                                                           •


                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                POLOO107160
                                                                                                             POLOO107160




A key element of the approach was to identify the Horizon Features. POL did not have an existing document that
could be described as representing the Horizon Features in a demonstrably complete way, therefore we have
drawn out an initial view of the Horizon Features from the underlying documentation and considered Assurance
Work relating to them (Appendix 2) for the purposes of this review.

As communicated to us by management, we have also considered the following 5 key control objectives during our
activities to identify Horizon Features:

    1. Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactions to be processed;
    2. Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
       copied to the Audit Store;
    3. Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and 'digitally sealed', to protect their
       integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
    4. Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
       and
    5. Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters of all centrally generated transactions processed to their
       Branch ledgers_

These key control objectives are an important subset of the overall set of key control assertions highlighted in the
diagram above.

We have grouped the Assurance Work provided to us into three areas, corresponding to POL's three mechanisms
of exerting control over the processing environment, as follows:

    •    System Baseline Assurance Work: This aims to provide comfort that the original Horizon implementation
         and other changes performed under formal projects were well governed (compared to Deloitte project
         management methodologies) and that detailed testing was performed against agreed business
         requirements. Such activity would verify that the system was, at that point in time, fit for purpose and
         implemented as intended. This assessment considers the point when the system and processes are
         created.                                                                                                          I
    •    IT Provision Assurance Work: This aims to provide comfort that the IT management activities required to
         run the Horizon system with integrity are designed and operating effectively. Such activity verifies that key
         day-to-day IT management activities (e.g. security, IT operations and system changes) are appropriately
         governed and controlled.

    •    System Usage Assurance Work: This assurance aims to provide comfort that the controls in and around
         the business processes which make use of the Horizon system are appropriately designed, in place and
         operating as intended.

Our work has been performed as a desktop review of documentation made available and has neither tested the
quality, completeness or accuracy of the Assurance Work provided to us or tested any controls relating to the
Horizon processing environment.

Summary of Observations
Substantial Horizon-related system documentation exists, comparable to that typically seen in organisations of a
similar scale where IT activities are outsourced and formal assurance activities are not mandated. Some
organisations are externally mandated to have a greater level of end-to-end, risk orientated documentation and
testing, e.g. in financial services. POL is not so mandated.
Based on our review of the available documentation, our key observations are:
    •    The extensive Horizon system documentation is structured from a technical rather than a risk and controls
                                                                                                                           a




         perspective and provides an understanding of the Horizon Features. POL should conduct a formal


DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.                                                         4
                                                                                                                      POLOO107160
                                                                                                                   POLOO107160




            assessment to identify a complete set of Horizon Features that respond to POL's control objectives.
i




        •   The integrity of the Audit Store is designed to be preserved by a system of "digital seals" and "digital
            signatures". This feature underpins the ability to confirm the completeness and accuracy of data kept in the
            Audit Store, and that of subsequent reports generated from the Audit Store. These digital seals and digital
            signatures are both key components in the Horizon Features which are both validated during the extraction
®           process from the Audit Store.


•      •    POL is relying on the Horizon Features being implemented and operating as described. Whilst our review
            focussed on the design of the Horizon Features, the Assurance Work we have assessed does not
            completely test these features for implementation and operating effectiveness. Only those Horizon
            Features relating to IT Provision have been validated and tested by independent third parties. In addition,
            during the course of our engagement, one of the Horizon Features has been discovered by POL to not be
®           implemented as expected.

       •    Business use (process) documentation is not complete or up to date, by some years in cases. As part of
            completing or updating the documentation of Horizon Features, all relevant business uses should be
            identified and evaluated from a control objectives perspective to identify potential additional matters being
®           relied upon.

®      •    Pre 2010 Baseline Assurance Work could not be provided by POL. This Assurance Work is required to
            evaluate the comfort that the system was originally built and tested to specific business requirements. The
            implementation in 2010 of HNG-X is asserted by POL to have riot significantly impacted the design of the
            Horizon Features.

       •    Governing controls over key, day-to-day IT management activities have been independently tested and
            opined by Ernst and Young (since 2012) to a recognised assurance standard (ISAE3402).

       •    A number of third party systems are used by Horizon on a day-to-day operational basis. Documentation
            asserts that these interactions do not impact on the Horizon Features.

    Scope Limitations

    Our work has been subject to the following exclusions:

       •    Only matters relating to the Horizon Features within the Horizon processing environment have been
®           considered during our review;

       •    We have not provided a legal or any other opinion as to the completeness and accuracy of processing of
®           Horizon at any point throughout the work;

       •    We have not had direct contact with any third parties other than named contacts that you have provided to
            us (Appendix 3);

        •   We have not verified or tested any information provided directly by you, or directly or indirectly by third
            parties (the schedule of information received is in Appendix 3);
■




        •   We have not reviewed any contractual provisions in place between you and third parties;
■




®       •   Our work was limited by significant gaps existing in the information available, relating to both the granularity
            of information and the existence of the Horizon Features over the entire timeline of operation of Horizon.
            The effect of which is that there are in gaps within what we are able to comment upon over this timeline.

    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                   POL00107160
                                                                                                              POLOO107160




        Our findings below are written in the context of the information available, which relates to the current
        system;

   •    An event occurred in 2010 which required the use of the exceptional Balancing Transaction process in
        Horizon to correct a Sub-postmasters position from a technical issue. Information has not been provided on
        the circumstances that lead to this system issue and how the issue was identified. It is assumed that verbal
        assertions received from Fujitsu that this was the only time this process has been used hold true;

   •    We have not tested any of the Horizon Features; and

   •    We have not validated or commented on the quality of the Assurance Work supplied to us.




Our work was also based on the following assumptions:

   •    The documents provided are a complete and accurate representation of the Horizon design. We therefore
        cannot comment as to whether the Horizon Features described below are complete nor whether other
        processes or mechanisms exist which would need consideration in the context of the Matters.

   •    All changes made after the initial implementation have been properly approved, tested and validated as not
        undermining the Horizon Features i.e. that the system's controls have retained their integrity throughout
        and thus the controls identified within the documentation have been consistent over the system's lifetime.

   •    The assertions received relating to the major upgrade of Horizon in 2010 not materially changing the
        design of the Horizon Features hold true.

   •    The cryptographic keys underpinning the digital signatures in Horizon have not been compromised.

   •    The mechanisms for issuing cryptographic keys for signing baskets is secure and authenticates requests to
        prevent unauthorised provision of keys.

   •    Fraud or collusion to undermine or work around the Horizon Features has not occurred, in particular within
        database administrator and security teams in Fujitsu.

    •   Assertions made by POL and Fujitsu staff have been accepted as accurate without corroboration or
        verification.

                                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                                                            ■




                                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                          .




                                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                                                            ■




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                      6     ■
                                                                                                                    POLOO107160
                                                                                                                  POL00107160




    2 Introduction

    Introduction
    The Horizon system has been used by POL since 1995, During this time it has processed many millions of
I   transactions across thousands of branches. Horizon is accredited by Payment Card Industry Data Security
    Standard (PCI DSS) and ISO27001. It is currently used by more than 68,000 users across 11,500 POL branches
    and is administered by Fujitsu as part of a managed service agreement. It is a key operational system for POL and
    integrity of processing on the system is crucial to the day-to-day operations of the business.
•
    POL is responding to allegations that the Horizon processing environment, used to record transactions in POL
    branches, is defective and/or that the processes associated with it are inadequate.
I
    In order to respond better to the allegations (which have been, and will in all likelihood continue to be, advanced in
    the Courts), POL management want to demonstrate that the Horizon processing environment is robust and
    operates with integrity, within an appropriate control framework.

    In particular, management at POL has highlighted two key statements they would like to assess their comfort over
    in response to the allegations, being:

        1. That Sub-postmasters have full ownership and visibility of all records in their Branch ledger; and
        2. That the Branch ledger records are kept by the system with integrity and full audit trail.

    These statements have then been further sub-divided into the following statements:

        1. Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactions to be processed;
        2. Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
           copied to the Audit Store;
        3. Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and 'digitally sealed', to protect their
           integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
        4. Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
           and
        5. Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters of all centrally generated transactions processed to their
           Branch ledgers.


    POL management have previously either been provided with or commissioned work (including independent
®   assurance reviews) into matters relating to Horizon's operating environment and processing integrity. Documents
    outlined in Appendix 3 have been provided to us and considered as part of the planning and delivery of our review.

    Objectives and Activities Undertaken

    The purpose of this report is to provide, based upon the information made available to us by you, an independently
•   produced summary of the Assurance Work undertaken over your current day Horizon processing environment and
    make recommendations on further work that could be done to enhance these assurance sources.

    The work we have performed to produce this report has included:

®           Obtaining an understanding of the Allegations; POL's key risks in and internal controls over the Horizon
            processing environment relevant to the integrity of processing; the measures in place to record and
            preserve the integrity of system audit trails and other background matters that we may deem necessary to
            complete our review;



$   DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL, SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
$
                                                                                                                  POL00107160
                                                                                                               POL00107160




   •    Obtaining an understanding of the key differences between the current Horizon processing environment,
        and the system which this replaced (here-to referred to as the "Legacy System");

   •    Reviewing, understanding and consolidating the Assurance Work (e.g.: investigations, assurance activities
        and remediation actions) which POL or third parties have undertaken;

   •    Holding discussions with relevant members of POL staff and other key stakeholders;

   •    Reviewing project documentation relating to the 2010 implementation of Horizon, in order to compare the
        nature and extent of project governance and documentation with Deloitte's good practice project
        management methodology;

    •   Preparing an initial schedule of Horizon Features and assessing the level of comfort over these, provided
        by POL's Assurance Work (including the use of a specialist to assess the design of the Audit Store's
        tamper proof mechanisms); and

    •   Recommend further activities that management could undertake to improve the assurance provision.

Scope limitations and assumptions are outlined in the Executive Summary above.


.Understanding of Historical Issues and Concerns
As an initial step, in building the requisite understanding required of the historical context leading to this review, we
have reviewed the documentation provided by POL in order to understand the history of issues and concerns which
have been raised in relation to the system.

From the documents provided, we have identified the following matters which have helped to provide us with a high
level understanding of the nature and extent of the potential concerns with the Horizon processing environment,
and thus focus our work in certain higher risk areas:

Branch 14 Issue - Involved a processing errorwhere historic accounting entries in the 2010/11 financial year were
replicated in accounts for 2011112 and 2012/13.

Branch 62 Issue - Involved a Receipts and Payments mismatch in Horizon when discrepancies were moved into
the local suspense account (this is an account which aggregates all discrepancies into a single gain or loss for a
branch trading period).

Falkirk Issue - The Falkirk Anomaly occurred when cash or stock was transferred between stock units.

Spot Review Bible — This outlines a sequence of matters raised during the work performed by Second Sight over
the allegations raised over the Horizon system, and summary commentary on 10 issues within.

Lepton Detailed Spot Review Information (included within Spot Check Bible) — Detailed documentation has
also been provided in relation to Spot Review 1. The issue raised was that a Sub-postmaster will not be notified
about automatic reversals of transactions when not connected to the data centre.
                                                                                                                             ■




Reflecting on the nature and substance of these issues, and documentation relating to their follow-up and
resolution, we have understood the importance of the audit trail to provide evidence relating to disparities between
Sub-postmaster accounts of events and subsequent investigations, based on audit trail evidence, by POL/Fujitsu.

As a result of the above understanding, our work relating to IT Provision and System Usage Assurance Work paid
particular (but not exclusive) focus on information System Operations (IT environment processing), and business
processes controlling relevant key data flows (the key data flow for our assessment being that of the complete and
accurate transmission of data from the Counter system at the Branch to the Branch Database and subsequently
into the Audit Store).
                                                                                                                             ■




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                        R    ■
                                                                                                                   POLOO107160
                                                                                                                 POL001 07160




    3 Approach

    In the absence of POL's own holistic risk assessment relating to the Horizon processing environment, key to our
    assessment of sources of assurance has been the formulation of an initial "risk universe", against which coverage
    of the associated risks by the relevant sources of assurance can be assessed ('mapped").

    We have considered this risk universe across three key areas:

        1. Control objectives and risks relating to the 'System Baseline'.
        2. Control objectives and risks relating to 'IT Provision'.
        3. Control objectives and risks relating to `System Usage'.

    Risks relating to the System Baseline — these are risks that the original implementation project and other
    changes performed under formal projects were not conducted in line with good project management practices, and
    that detailed testing was not performed against agreed business requirements. These risks are governed and
    controlled outside of day-to-day system operating procedures. Controls which mitigate these risks are often
    referred to as Project Controls" and "Inherent System Controls" (those designed and built into the IT system).

    Risks relating to IT Provision — these are risks that the underlying IT activities, necessary to provide a system
    that can run and be used with integrity, are not designed and operating effectively. Such risks relate to key day-to-
    day IT management activities, relating to security, IT operations and system changes. Controls which mitigate
    these risks are often referred to as "General Computer Controls". Our work focussed on assurance provided over
    Fujitsu's activities in these areas.

    Risks over System Usage — these are risks that key features of Horizon and corresponding business use
    activities (processes), aiming to prevent or detect matters that would impact the integrity of processing, are nut
    designed, in place or operating as intended. These are the more detailed risks in relation to particular aspects of
    capturing and processing transactions across the Horizon processing environment. Controls which mitigate these
    risks are often referred to as "End User Controls", "Application Embedded Controls" and "Process Controls". Our
    work focussed on the internal datafiows within Horizon (Counter to Branch Database to Audit Store for example)
    and we also considered the relevance of interfaces with other systems such as the DVLA.

    In the context of these three areas of risk we have performed knowledge gathering activities in order to understand
    the Horizon processing environment in sufficient detail to identify specific risk areas and those Horizon Features
    identified to exert control over these risks.

    1. Approach to Understanding of System Baseline Risks

    In considering Baseline risks we have considered past iterations and changes to the Horizon IT system, including:

        •   Any that lead to changes to the Audit Store;
        •   The Horizon Implementation Programme in 2010-2011;
        •   The Data Strategy Foundation project in 2012 and 2013 (which updated the dataflows into Horizon from
            certain third party transactional systems, including 'Post and Go', and 'Paystation +'); and
        •   The original Horizon platform delivered in 1995.
i




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                            144]
                                                                                                            POL00107160
                                                                                                          POL001 07160




2. Approach to Understanding of IT Provision Risks

Our understanding of IT Provision risks has been formulated through our understanding of the system via
documentation review and verbal discussion with supporting POL and Fujitsu SMEs. Due to the nature of the
System Provisioning risk areas, the formulation of this understanding has been mainly through interview with
Fujitsu and POL security team members.

3. Approach to Understanding of System Usage Risks

Our understanding of System Usage risks has again been formulated through documentation review and verbal
discussion with supporting SME's to identify additional support areas. Due to the nature of the System Usage risk
areas, the formulation of this understanding has been mainly through interview with Fujitsu, POL Finance Shared
Services and POL Security team members.

4. Approach to Consideration of the Horizon Features

In the formulation of our risk universes across the three areas highlighted in 1 —3 above we have considered the 5
key matters relevant to the Horizon Features as instructed by management:

    1. Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactions to be processed;
    2. Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
       copied to the Audit Store;
    3. Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and 'digitally sealed', to protect their
       integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
    4. Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
       and
    5. Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters of all centrally generated transactions processed to their
       Branch ledgers.

5. Combining the Above

Following our assessment across these four areas, the diagram below (see overleaf) describes the key risks
identified within the Horizon processing environment. We have number coded the risks in the below with (1)
corresponding to Baseline Risks, (2) corresponding to IT Provision Risks, and (3) corresponding to System Usage
Risks.

This diagram thus represents the framework of key risks that need to be controlled by Horizon Features and
appropriately assured in order to provide the comfort required by POL management.



                                                                                                                         ■
                                                                                                                         ■




                                                                                                                         ■
                                                                                                                         ■




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                            POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                          POL00107160


 •
 ■            ICey assertions requiring assurance, to underpin confidence in processing integrity
                             That the system was fitforpurpose and                                                                             That assertions on
                      I       worked as intended when first at in.                                                                              this diagram are
                                    That major changes since implementation have not                                                               corn late,
                    2010                 Em acted the deaf n features adverse) .                                                               That supporting IT
                                                                                                                                               processes are well
                           Today                    That transactions from the Counter are                                                         controlled.
                                                   recorded completely, accurately and on a
                                                                 timely basis.

                                                                                                        IThat the Audit Store i
 .                                                         !                  That directly posted        complete and accurate              That information
                                                                            Balancing Transactions"      record of Branch Ledge              reported from the
                                                                   2,•   I are visible and approved.           transactions.                Audit Store retains
                                                                    o~
  ®                                                                                                                                          on inal integrity.
                                             ~f4
 ■
                                                   Y
                                      . 'r         ~   Oversight                               -                    Audit           A   y
                                             C~                                                Ov        f          Store
                                                                                                                  (7 years)

                                                               `           Branch Database                   Centers Audit Server

                                                           m                                                                            That DBAs or others
                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                        granted DBA access
                                                                                             3.                                          have not modified
                                      ••                                                      °5                                         ranch Database nor
                                                                                                                                          Audit Store data.


 ■
                           0 hat data posted from                                           Iii
                            other systems and teams                                         Credence
                            is visible to and accepted                                     (100 days)
                               by subpost-masters.


             LEGALLY PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                                    0 Deloitte LLP 2014


      It can be observed that the majority of the risks identified are System Usage risks, which is expected based on the
      complexity of the IT processing landscape and the diversity and volume of transactions being handled.

 11




 ■
I I




      DRAFT FINDINGS
      STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                                   POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                            POLOO107160




Sources of Assurance Work relating to the Horizon Processing Environment

The diagram below summarises key examples of the Assurance Work reviewed and referred to as part of our
assessment.


                                 END TO END Horizon PROCESSING ENVIRONMENT


                                                                                                                                 .- -




                                                    InitJl                                                                L"
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                  ii!I rYY
                                                                                                               7/
                                                    rstl ,11~                                                                              I»i Yit ail
                                                                                     ~                                                  {:9w.tW.cY.ilnll




                                                                                                  i ')
                                                  I~tlu114i LY                                                                             (o Kif 9}




                               IrZet M s iY31:1~{~ w lip7•lo1'.Cl31wtJ d ah,             C7 b9~i~7ibiliYY~2   IUKY   > Ayiil'fft      '/ a ~iY }w 7a l        !            I
               •                RSe` .)mC\% _       1ti/F4[Yd~VJ5. i0}YYolp*'        ~   ~Iwl ._P.ilw t?an~~~Xdl+ [YHX~    Lw lltl tl -1XIfJ1E4 ss II) A~ EB;~i~

               •               "~'fia=i'o ;c'YYe;c'`.>;`I.31'nl,=liV/I Xiliil   {1   i




         1~47Girc~r                             il+~°~L~                                                      trst~~l/~!r;9tjl~l:~iiiTl
          ~rr:<t~yi


    I
           c1-i`Y1~-70     __
           I       C Y-                         1Xo        ~e,il
                                                                                     1


When considering the sources of assurance over IT Provision Risks, System Usage Risks and System Baseline                                                                 4
Risks, a number of parties have been (and continue to be), involved in performing work over the Horizon
processing environment which contributes to the overall assurance management has over the correct operation of
the system.

Assurance Work from the following organisations, in addition to information provided from POL, have been
identified and considered in our work:
•       Fujitsu, who designed, built and now operate Horizon;
•       Bureau Veritas, who perform IS027001 certification over Fujitsu's networks, including that of Horizon;
•       Information Risk Management (IRM) who accredit Horizon to PCI DSS;
DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                        POLOO107160
                                                                                                                    POL00107160




        •   Ernst & Young, who produce an ISAE3402 service auditor report over the Horizon processing environment;
            and
        •   Internal audit, who perform risk based reviews within POL.
        In considering the Assurance Work provided to us by management during the course of this engagement we have
        considered whether they constitute assurance provided under an assurance engagement, as defined by IFAC, or
        are sources of information that provide comfort in other ways. For the purposes of clarifying the Assurance Work,
        we have assigned each document received to one of two classifications, defined as follows:

        'Assurance"-The Assurance Work has been provided under an assurance engagement by an independent third
        party, suitably qualified in the subect matter constituting the focus of the engagement to provide a valid opinion.
        Sources of such assurance include:

            •   Internal Audit functions;
            •   External Audit; and
            •   Other third party reviews, not involved in the original design nor day-to-day operation of the system
®               containing (a) a formal opinion, such as those performed in line with recognised standards, such as
                ISAE3402 or (b) no formal opinion (i.e. a report based on evidence and facts without interpretation).

®       "Other Sources of Comfort"- The Assurance Work is either not produced by an independent party or by an
        individual who is suitably qualified in assurance engagements, or both. Other sources of comfort include:

            •   IT Project Documentation;
            •   Operational Documentation, such as policies, procedures and process I system information produced by
                functional teams;
            •   Reviews or investigations performed by outsourcers (e.g. deep dives, diagnostics, spot reviews);
            •   Business peer group review teams and functions; and
            •   'Second line' compliance teams,

        In Appendix 3 we have documented all the Assurance Work we received and added our classification of those
        sources by these two categories.

    ]   Summary of Work Performed

        Based upon the concepts outlined above we have performed the desktop based work below (further detail of which
        is outlined in our Engagement Letter shown in Appendix 4). We have not performed any testing to validate the
        information provided to us as part of our work.
■




        Step 1: Analysis and Review
■




            •   Activity 1. Documentation Review - We have reviewed a number of documents produced by several
                different organisations in order to understand key matters relating to the Horizon system and the
                Assurance Work available.

            •   Activity 2. Risk Universe Formulation - We have then, in the absence of a holistic risk assessment being
                performed by POL and thus for the purposes of our assessment, created a risk universe based on our
                experience of information processing systems encompassing the three primary risk areas previously
                identified IT Provision, System Usage and Baseline Risks. The five key matters for consideration outlined
                by management were also considered during this process.

            •   Activity 3. Review of Assurance Work - The available documentation was reviewed in order to
                understand the Assurance Work available to POL, against each of the three identified risk areas.

I
        DRAFT FINDINGS
        STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                           POLOO107160
                                                                                                        POL00107160


                                                                                                                      ■
Step 2: Gap Analysis and Assessment

Based on the analysis in Step 1 we have produced:
                                                                                                                      S
   •    Activity 4. System Provisioning Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis - Considering key
        potential gaps or areas of ambiguity in the available assurance sources when considering the System
        Provisioning risk universe.

   •    Activity 5. System Usage and Baseline Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis — Assessing the
        documentation relating to System Usage Risks and then performed deep dives into the following areas of
        specific risk:

            o   Horizon interfaces (including DVLA);
            o   Branch Database;
            o   Audit Store;
            o   Horizon Implementation Project;
            o   Audit Store Changes; and
            o   Data Strategy Foundation project.

    •   Activity 6. Peer Comparison to Assurance Available to Similar Organisations — We have assessed
        the Assurance Work available to similar organisations over System Provisioning Risks (the area of risk
        where a benchmark is most valid due to the level of information available from POL) and assessed
        therefore whether POL has comparable levels of assurance.


Step 3: Reporting

The analysis and interpretation in Step 2 has allowed us to formulate:

    •   Activity 7. Produce an Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features, and Recommendations —
        Mapping control assertions, Horizon Features and Assurance Work and reporting on the level of comfort
        that we have assessed in each of these areas. Identification of the key considerations for management
        arising from our analysis and plan of action to respond to these recommendations.

A more detailed description of these activities performed follows.


Activity 1: Documentation Review
All of the documentation reviewed during the course of our review has been documented within Appendix 3. This
documentation can be divided into the following classifications:
                                                                                                                      ■
    •   Technical documentation on the Operation of the Horizon System — Reviewed in order to gain a deeper
        understanding on how the Horizon system works, how complex it is, and where we should be focusing             t
        further efforts and analysis;
    •   Independent Third Party Assurance documentation — This documentation has been reviewed in order to
        understand the existing assurance sources relevant to the environment;
    •   Documentation of Historical Issues and Allegations in relation to the Horizon System —This documentation
        has been reviewed in order to understand the background context and better position the IT Provision,
        System Usage and Baseline System risk work performed over the environment; and
    •   Service Provider Analysis and Response to Issues — This documentation has been reviewed to gain an            I'
        understanding of the work performed by Fujitsu in investigating the issues raised, and how these will be
        responded to.



DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                 14   ~'
                                                                                                                   POL00107160
                                                                                                                POLOO107160


11
     A number of individuals from POL have been interviewed during the course of formulating this report to supplement
     our understanding from the provided documentation.


     Activity 2: Risk Universe Formulation
     System Baseline Risk Universe

     The original implementation of Horizon in 1995, together with subsequent changes (whether routine via change
     management processes, or large complex change programmes such as the Horizon system implementation in
     2010-11), represent events affecting Baseline System Risk.

     To assess these risks we have understood the history of the Horizon system and selected three areas for more
     detailed investigation including:

         •   Horizon Implementation;
         •   Data Strategy Foundation project; and
         •   A sample of changes to the Audit Store (subsequent to determining that this key risk area for the system
             had been left largely untouched by the key implementation events highlighted in the previous two bullets).

     For each of these change areas we have assessed the Assurance Work from a governance and control
     perspective, and POL ability to take comfort that the Horizon system was fit for purpose at the time of the change
     and operated in line with management intentions (through business requirements definitions and project testing
     against these).

     IT Provision Risk Universe

     This risk universe was formulated from our prior experience of auditing and assuring information systems and
     involved the identification of high level risks across three core areas:

         •   Information Security;
         •   Information System Operations; and
         •   Change Management.

     Once the IT Provisioning risk universe had been formulated a mapping of control objectives within the Assurance
     Work was performed in order to assess coverage.

     The three sources of assurance included within this mapping were:

         •   ISAE3402 report on the Horizon managed service;
         •   PCI DSS compliance report on Horizon; and
         •   ISO27001 Statement of Applicability.

     System Usage Risk Universe

     As POL has not conducted a holistic assessment of risk in this area, a full understanding and assessment of
     assurance over the System Usage risk environment was not available for our review.

     Instead we focussed our assessment on two key areas of risk: those relating to the completeness and accuracy of
     the Audit Store, the Branch Database and key system interfaces with a significant third party, such as the DVLA.
     We sought to understand the Assurance Work that has been done against each of these areas.

     This involved:

        • Enquiry with relevant SMEs;
        • Review of documentation;
     DRAFT FINDINGS
     STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE,
                                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                                POL00107160
                                                                                                             POL001 07160




    •   Formulation of a risk universe in these specific areas; and
    •   Understanding of existing assurance work over controls which mitigate these risks.

Horizon Features

Across each of the three risk universes we identified features within the processing environment that exert control
and provide that:

    1. Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactions to be processed;
    2. Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
       copied to the Audit Store;
    3. Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and digitally sealed', to protect their
       integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
    4. Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
       and
    5. Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters of all centrally generated transactions processed to their
       Branch ledgers.

We refer to these identified features as the "Horizon Features" and identification of these features in response to
the matters for consideration listed above was a core component of our work.


Activity 3: Review of Assurance Work
With the background context of the three risk universes outlined within the previous section, we reviewed the
available Assurance Work in order to assess the coverage and nature of the comfort provided by the work.

The documentation reviewed during this stage has been listed within Appendix 3, as are the names of individuals
consulted in relation to our work.


Activity 4: System Provision Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis
Once the System Provisioning risk universes had been formulated a mapping of control objectives within each of
the main assurance sources was performed in order to assess coverage. The three sources of assurance included
within this mapping'were:

    •   ISAE3402 report on the Horizon managed service;
    •   PCI DSS compliance report on Horizon; and
    •   IS027001 Statement of Applicability.

The results of this mapping exercise are summarised within Section 5 and reproduced, in detail, within Appendix 1.

In parallel to this assurance exercise we have also summarised key matters relating to each assurance source.
This involved considering the context and focus of the relevant Assurance Work and comparing these to the
context and focus that would be required for coverage of the key risks (this was in recognition of the risk that some
of the documents could be used or applied out of context from their original purpose).


Activity 5: System Usage and Baseline Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis
Following our understanding of the system and historical issues the following areas were singled out as relevant for        I
deeper analysis, and this approach was agreed with POL management:

    1. Audit Store — The audit store has been used frequently in investigations by POL f Fujitsu and is used as
       supporting evidence during legal proceedings. Therefore its integrity is paramount to responding to these
       issues. However the audit store cannot be relied on in isolation, as its integrity is dependent upon the
       correct processing of transactions by the wider Horizon system (upstream events if processed incorrectly
       will be recorded incorrectly by the audit store).

DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL, SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                    POLOO107160
                                                                                                                 POL001 07160




I
        2.   Horizon interfaces (including DVLA) — Horizon is reliant on a significant number of batch processes and
             online services (including interfaces with third party systems) in order to function correctly. These routines
             need to be functioning correctly and accurately for the transactions processed by the system and ultimately
             recorded in the audit trail to be reflective of the underlying commercial realities and business transactions
             they pertain to represent.

        3.   Branch Database — The Branch Database is a key `staging post' for data being transacted on counters
             within individual branches prior to transmission onwards to the Audit Store. As data from branches in held
             within the messaging journal table on this system for up to a day before being processed into the audit
             store the security controls and processes protecting this data whilst in temporary storage here are
             paramount.

        4.   Horizon Implementation Project —This change represented the largest single change to the Horizon
             system since implementation, and also the change implemented prior to adoption of the current major
             release of the system, and so was considered of particular relevance to our overall understanding of
             Baseline System risk.
1
        5. Audit Store Changes — Our understanding of the HNG-X Implementation Project quickly highlighted that
           this project had very little impact on the Audit Store itself. As a result we performed procedures to
           understand some of the changes which had been made to the Audit Store following its original
           implementation.

        6. Data Strategy Foundation Project — We determined during the course of our work that this was another
           key implementation project in the recent history of the Horizon system of particular relevance to a sub-
           group of the system interfaces on Horizon. This project was therefore also deemed key for our
           understanding of system Baseline risk.

    For each of the areas outlined in 1 —6 above an assessment was made of the coverage and nature of the
I   Assurance Work provided.

    For areas 1 - 3 (System Usage Risks) the functionality of the particular area was further understood and key
    controls over the corresponding risks then sought.

    For areas 4 - 6 (System Baseline Risks) we adopted a different approach, whereby the typical good practise
    documentation requirements and project governance methods as stipulated by `Prince 2' (amongst others) were
    utilised as a baseline, and the approach to each of the sampled change initiatives assessed from the available
    documentation, This work was conducted through a mixture of verbal discussion and the receipt of supporting
1   evidence where applicable.


    Activity 6: Peer Comparison to Assurance Available to Similar Organisations
    As part of our analysis we have also assessed whether the IT Provision assurance POL has obtained is
    proportionate to that provided to similar organisations.
•
    We have also considered the best practice approach outlined by the COSO framework, as published by The
    Committee of Sponsoring Organisations of the Treadway Commission, in formulating suggestions for potential
    areas of improvement in the risk, control and assurance activities of POL.




I
    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                         POL00107160
                                                                                                       POLOO107160




                            The COSO Cuba: Presents a framework for best practice
                             approaches to risk, controls and assurance activities.




Activity 7: Produce an Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features and raise
Recommendations and Plan of Action
We have written up our assurance schedule, which maps the Assurance Work to specific controls relating the
Horizon Processing Environment, and commented on the level of comfort that the Assurance Work provides in
each area.

Our report also contains recommendations for management together with a suggested plan of action for
management consideration.




                        s     r                           a
                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                          POLOO107160
                                                                                                                    POL00107160




           .
        4 Understanding
               rt     g the                                               r               Processing
          Environment

        The Horizon IT system was designed specifically for POL, and therefdre an understanding of its operations,
        processing environment and configuration was required in order to fully quantify the risks applicable to the IT
        components of the processing environment.

        Horizon has been the main operational system of POL since 1995 and:
           • Has a user base of 68,000 users;
1          • Terminals within 11,500 branches;
           • Processes an average of 6 million transactions a day; and
■




           • Interfaces with over 20 third party systems.

        As highlighted in our Approach' section above, we have categorised the risks posed on the system into three
        distinct areas (System Baseline Risk, IT Provision Risk and System Usage Risk), and the remainder of this section
        outlines our understanding of the IT system that underpins these.


■       System Baseline Risk
•       Horizon (HNG-X) Project

■       The change to the HNG-X system in 2010 was governed using Royal Mail's °Harmony" project methodology (the
        governing project standard at the time). The project saw the phased implementation over 18 months of the HNG-X
        solution (also known as "Horizon On-Line"). Individual POL Branches were migrated from the Legacy System to the
        new HNG-X system, one by one.
■
        No historical data was migrated, although six months of data was maintained within the Legacy System. Our review
•
        of Assurance Work shows that a number of key controls were operated over the project, which was managed by
        Fujitsu on behalf of POL. These included

            •   POL signing off acceptance criteria;
            •   A phased migration including a model office pilot; and
            •   Branch by branch reconciliation between opening balances on the new system and closing balances on the
                legacy system.

        Wipro, an independent third party, were commissioned to provide a report on the performance testing strategy
        including gap analysis and recommendations, and Gartner provided an assessment of the overall system design
■       and strategy.

■       The benefits from the migration included the removal of transactional data being held at local branches levels and
        this data instead being stored centrally within the data centres.

        Data Strategy Foundation Project

        The project focused on moving the Accounts Payable file feed which was initially received into Credence via
        Transaction Integrator to processing via Fujitsu Horizon systems (i.e. not the Counter). The goal of the project was
    ■




        DRAFT FINDINGS
        STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                POLOO107160
                                                                                                             POLOO107160




to provide a longer term system solution which would provide complete reconciliation, resilience and disaster
recovery capabilities, as well as reduce the risk of client withdrawal.

The POL strategic requirements to expand its offerings to other platforms beyond Horizon introduced the
requirement for a data integrator function. Originally POL approached Fujitsu Services to supply this service as
plans to incorporate an integrator service within the Horizon architecture were considered to represent a clean
solution. However, Fujitsu Services were unable to respond within the desired timescales as it would have diverted
their resources from key Horizon on-line delivery milestones.

POL therefore investigated alternative options, finally selecting the use of IBM datastage as the Transaction
Integrator. This was delivered as part of the POLMI project. Fujitsu Services then submitted a high level design
proposal for the provision of a service for processing client transaction files which would provide end-to-end data
validation / reconciliation, with resilience and DR (the incumbent IBM datastage solution did not provide resilience,
DR or end to end reconciliation, presenting a threat to relationships and future contracts).

Assurance Work provided included:

    •   Project overview document;
    •   Business Case;
    •   Weekly Project Meeting Committee Presentation;
    •   Business Requirements;
    •   Test Strategy;
    •   Test Sign off; and
    •   Test Report.

Audit Store Changes

In assessing change risks in relation to the Audit Store, documentation has asserted that the recent significant
changes above did not result in significant changes to the operation of the day-to-day Counter transaction flows or
the operation of the-Audit Store.

To assess Baseline risk for the Audit Store the original implementation documentation for the Audit Store was
requested. Due to the data retention policy this documentation could not be provided and so a review of Fujitsu
provided documentation over subsequent changes over a large period of the Audit Store's history was performed.

In producing the diagram on page 9, we have considered the key System Baseline Risks in the context of two
control assertions below, which became the overall focus of our work in this System Baseline area:

    •   The Horizon Features were fit for purpose and worked as intended when first implemented; and
    •   Major changes since implementation have not significantly impacted the Horizon Features,




                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                           I

                       • te r •
                                                                                                                           ■




                                    '                       .          --
                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                       POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                     POLOO107160




IT Provision Risk
As part of our work, through review of documentation and discussions with subject matter experts in POL, we
familiarised ourselves with the topology and operations of the Horizon IT system.

The systems documentation and understanding obtained (shown in summary in diagrams below) highlights the
complexity of the Horizon IT system and the level of data being transacted via batch and real-time data flow. This
volume and level of complexity in the data flows, including interactions with other systems, highlights the
importance of effective IT Provisioning controls to the integrity of the processing environment.

                                                           Estemal RAC Message.based Clients                      Extemal Web Servlrev
                             External
                             Systems            Vora Ink
                                                            L
                                                                AAL
                                                                   IJiEI             ss enene        e-Pay


                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                 DVLA                BT
                                                                                                                                                              Postcode
                                                                                                                                                              My-ae




                                                                                                                                                  :.': .:.
                                                                                                                       SeM..             Money ram        Neopos[
                                                  CSM




                               (JatB                             1lotlo C gents                N tentS            y1k SCNit2s
                              Centre                        3           I                  Persls[enP Score
                                                                                                                  l GWS 1      DVUI       MGRM
                                                                                                       J                I

                                                                                                                  ~            APOP
                                                                                                                                                             Service Hub


                                                                                                                  Tra5ng Web SeMe
                                                                                                                          CLOT
                                                                                                              (slmulatesAPDP, BBND. BKAC,
                                                                                                              DOS, ETS, DVLIt MGRM, ASS.
                                                                                                                         PGDD)


                                                                                       Database


                                                                                                                                          CSM



                                                                                         Brandy Aeeeas Layer
                                                                              (Atetlxnbcabon, recovery and service muting)




                                                                                   Rauterg B Load Salandnp(da CSM network) —_

                            ...................................................................... ...............................................................................


                                   Branch
                                   Estate
                                                                                               Counters
                                                                                                                                                     5e5555 IdSspMlb

Diagram provided by Post Office Limited



The Horizon IT system is built in line with key principles that all data is held centrally within the data Centre with the
exception of some standing data which is held locally within the branch. This centralisation principle applies to all
`completed' transactional data (known as "baskets") and to the Audit Store.

To support this principle the network architecture of Horizon is formulated on:

     •      Data centre;
     •      WAN Services (connecting datacentres, POL central sites, and Fujitsu sites); and
     •      Branch Network.




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                          21
                                                                                                                                                                          POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                        POL00107160




The diagram below provided by Fujitsu shows the high level IT system infrastructure:




                                   Client Systems                     Post Office Systems        Fujitsu Support Sites                        Test Sites

  —Normal data pat.—.
                                    Client WAN                   PO WAN                             Support WAN
                                                                                                                                            Test Access


  ---Backup data path"`
                                                                                                     a          a




           Sa Oi
                                    Cliert
                                    DMZ
                                               PO
                                               DMZ
                                             eniral lA
                                                       Support
                                                        DMZ
                                                                  1        __________




                                                                           lnlercampus
                                                                               L.ANI
                                                                                                   Client
                                                                                                   DMZ
                                                                                                               PO
                                                                                                               DMZ
                                                                                                                      Support
                                                                                                                       DMZ
                                                                                                            Central LAPY~

                                                                                                                    Secondary
                                                                                                                                   Disabled in
                                                                                                                                   case or DR
                                                                                                                                        . —~



                                                      Primary
                                            10         Data                                                   10      Data
                                   Bmnch DMZ          Centre                                     Branch DMZ          Centre



                                                                         Branch WAN
                                                                                                                                         GPRS/EDGE Receiver
                   Earth station

                                                                                                                                       EDGE I GPRS /30 Backup




     der&Dish                                  Q       '                                    Q      Q

                           PC                   PC         PC    PC                         PC      PC
     BroadBand VSAT                                                                                                    Mobile Branch
          Branch                                     Large
                                                         e Branch                        Small Branch
                                                                                                                                             NetLogicel VlsfoDosumant
                                                                                                                                                        0.d




The IT system is hosted on Bladeform technology with systems software being provided by:

    •     Windows 2003 Server (Enterprise and Standard, 32Bit and 64Bit);
    •     Red Hat Enterprise Linux (Release 4, 32Bit and 64Bit);
    •     Solaris 10 (Discrete platforms only); and
    •     Windows XP, Windows 2000 and Microsoft NT operating systems for some legacy services.


A number of internal and external interfaces are necessary for the reliable day-to-day processing of the IT systems,
and hence the integrity of the Horizon Features which control these activities and interfaces; which is key to the
effective operation of the overall system.

External interfaces include (not an exhaustive list):

    •     DVLA;
    •     Lottery; and
    •     Bank Payment Channels (Vocalink, e-pay, Streamline).

Internal Interfaces include (not an exhaustive list):

    •     Paystation;
    •     POL SAP
    •     Pay and Go; and
    •     ATMs

A number of batch processes also run in facilitating the successful processing by the system.



DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                             22
                                                                                                                POLOO107160
                                                                                                             POL001 07160


I
    Managing the processing of the real-time and batch processing environment is Tivoli Workflow Scheduler (TWS)
    which is used to execute, monitor and handle exceptions within the processing environment. 'TWS is managed and
    monitored by Fujitsu as part of the managed service contract between the two parties.

    in producing the diagram on page 9, we have considered the IT Provisioning risks in the context of the following
®   assertion:

        •   Supporting IT management processes are well controlled.


    System Usage Risk
    Responsibility for the administration of the system rests with Fujitsu who provide change control, security
    management, system operations, and end-user support.

    Responsibility for the effective usage of the system, including complaint and effective business processes, remains
    the responsibility of POL.

    The user base of Horizon can be subdivided into two core areas:

        •   Central Users — including Finance, and users at the Network Business Support Centre.
        •   Branch Users -- Sub-postmasters and their staff who are processing shop floor transactions.

    Outside of the POL user base, Fujitsu provide administration services, and hold service and super user account
    privileges within the system.

    Horizon supports the processing of a multitude of different transactions including:
        .   Purchases of goods;
I      • Purchases of services (for example Lottery tickets or tax discs);
I       .   Payments to discharge customer debts (payment of mobile phone bills for example);
       • Refunds; and
       • Transaction corrections.

    Several transaction mediums are accepted, for example:
       • Cash;

I       .   Credit and debit cards; and
       • Cheques.

    A number of controls are in place to support the integrity of transactional processing including:

I       •    The Audit Store, a secure area of Horizon which pertains to store all transactional information in
             sequentially numbered records, along with key system events;
        •    Monitoring controls'facilitated by Tivoli Workflow Scheduler and associated exception handling processes;
        .    Handshakes and call offs between systems include various controls around the integrity of transmitted
I            data (such as digital signatures); and
        •    Backup communication routes between branches and the central data centre (mobile technology).

    Reconciliations are performed regularly both in branch and centrally. Key reconciliation processes carried out
    include:

        •   Daily branch cash declaration and reconciliation to Horizon balances;
        •   Weekly balance of cash and stock and reconciliation to Horizon balances;
        •   Monthly trading period roll over (including resolution of any suspense account issues rolling over from
            weekly or daily reconciliations); and
        •   Central finance processes to reconcile central records to cash remitted to POL, cheques remitted to POL
            etc.

    In response to discrepancies as a result of these reconciliation processes investigations may be conducted by the
    Finance Service Centre, and if required transactional corrections processed. These corrections are subject to
    significant investigation and are subject to approval by Sub-postmasters in the first instance.


    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                     23
                                                                                                         POL00107160
                                                                                                      POLOO107160




Workarounds are not usually required, the main workaround being in relation to mobile connections from branch to
data centre in the event that the main connection to the central data centre cannot be utilised.

In producing the diagram on page 9, we have considered the primary System Usage risks in the context of the
questions posed within the scope of our work, and refined these risks into the following control assertions:

   •   Transactions from the Counter are recorded completely, accurately and on a timely basis centrally;
   •   Transactions processed to Branch Ledgers are recorded completely and accurately in the Audit Store;
   •   Directly posted 'Balancing Transactions" are visible and approved;
   •   Information reported from the Audit Store retains its original integrity;
   •   Data posted from other systems and teams is visible to and accepted by sub post-masters; and
   •   Database Administrators (DBAs) or others granted DBA access do not modify data directly.




                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                       I



                                                                                                                       I




                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                       ■
                                                                                                                       .i

                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                       ■




                                                                                                                       E

                                                                                                                       I



DRAFT FINDINGS                                                                                                         ■
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                              24
                                                                                                                                        POL00107160
                                                                                                                                     POL001 07160




 IT Provision Risk Assurance Sources ! Gap Analysis
For the IT Provision risks the existing assurance sources appear to provide a good level of coverage over the risk
universe associated with this area of the Horizon processing environment.

Our high-level analysis of this coverage against the three core risk areas is as follows:




Detailed analysis at an objective level is included within Appendix 1.

In considering this assessment, POL management should be cognisant of the inherent limitations of each report,
given the purpose for which it was written:

LTrI

IS027001 Statement of   This document has been produced by Fujitsu, limiting its value from an independence perspective. It should be
Applicability           noted however that it is supported by an independent assessment of IS027001 compliance by Bureau Veritas, an
                        accredited certification provider.


                        The main focus of IS027001 is on security, although it does also focus (to a lesser degree) on the other core IT
                        Provision risk areas, Change Management and Information System Operations.


ISAE3402 Report         This document has been produced by an independent third party, Ernst and Young. It has good coverage of all three
                        IT Provision risk areas, and is produced according to testing standards stipulated within the ISAE3402 standard.


                        In relying on this report management has considered 'Section 6 Complimentary User Entity Controls' which
                        stipulates the controls that POL should be operating in addition to the controls at Fujitsu in order to complete the
                        control environment over Horizon.


PCI DSS Report          The scope of the PCI DSS report is the narrowest of the three assurance reports. It is focused exclusively on the
                        security of cardholder data, and does not span the other two IT Provisioning risk areas to the degree of the other
                        assurance sources. It provides minimal coverage in particular of the Information Systems Operations System
                        Provisioning risk.




Of note when considering coverage of IT Provision assurance sources is that the majority of the focus is over
Information Security, whereby based upon the historical issues and allegations being levelled at the system,
DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                               kk1
                                                                                                             POLOO107160
                                                                                                           POL001 07160




Information System Operations and Change Management would appear to be higher risk areas in the context of




                                                                                                                      a
this particular piece of work.




                                                                                                                      a
Peer Comparison of IT Provision Assurance Available to Similar Organisations




                                                                                                                      a
Our comparison to peer organisations yielded the following results:




                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                . .




                                                                                                                      s
    ..
•




Print Media                               External Audit                N/A
                                          Ad-hoc Risk Consultancy


Retail                                    External Audit                FCA (CCA)




                                                                                                                      a
                                          Internal Audit




                                                                                                                      a
Retail                                    External.Audit                FCA (CCA)
                                                                                                                      1
                                          Internal Audit                Loan Loss Provisioning Reporting
                                          PCI DSS




                                                                                                                      a
Retail and payments processing            External Audit                FCA
                                          Internal Audit
                                                                                                                          I
Government                                External Audit                Data Protection
                                                                                                                      I
                                          Internal Audit
                                          PCI DSS
                                          Risk                                                                            I


This highlights that the level of IT Provision Assurance Work that POL has performed is comparable to that in other
similar organisations which are not subject to risk and control regulatory requirements.

This should however also be interpreted in the context of the allegations being made against the Horizon




                                                                                                                          ■
processing environment which may suggest that a higher level of assurance is warranted compared to these
similar organisational benchmarks.



                                                                                                                          a




                             .   Ir   •   •                 R       •   ..
                                                                                                                                                        POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                      POLOO107160




    Baseline Risk Assurance Sources I Gap Analysis
    Our assessment of Baseline Risk was based upon three core scope areas:

         •    Horizon Project;
         •    Data Strategy Foundation Project; and
         •    Audit Store Changes.

    For each of these scope areas we queried relevant POL and Fujitsu personnel in order to understand the project
    and change governance documentation available, and form an assessment as to the project controls applied to
    these change events, compared to Deloitte's Project Management methodology.

    Our findings are as follows:




    Audit Store                Changes to Horizon, such as the migration to HNG-X in 2010involved minimal changes to the operation of the Audit Store. As
                               a result these large scale projects are of minimal interest with regards to establishing a Baseline Risk position in relation to the
                               design and functioning of Horizon Features relating to Audit Store.


                               Some small changes have been madeto the Audit Store in more recent years. Samples of documentation correlating to
                               changes throughout the years the Audit Store had been in place were requested in order to understand whether these
                               changesto the system had been managed to good practise standards.


                               Further at the point of implementation of the Audit Store verbal representation was provided that a 'Security Report' was
                               produced which pertained to demonstrate that the functionality of the system was as designed. This would be a key piece of
I                              Assurance Work, demonstrating the correct functionality of the Audit Store atthat point in time, but it could not be located by
                               POI and thus could not be reviewed as part of ourwork.


    HNG-X Implementation       Detailed business and technical design documents have been verbally represented to have been created during the delivery of
    (2010)                     the project life cycle.
I
                               Detailed test plans, MI, Defect Management and other keytesting artefacts were produced during the course of the project.
I                              Several acceptance criteria related to the closure of testing defects. Examples of testing documentation have been provided to
                               our review team during the course of our work.


                               Migration checklists and instructions have been provided. These illustrate that site visits would be conducted during the
                               migration to support the Sub-postmaster with the migration and support the resolution of any queries.
a




                               We have been provided with verbal representation that detailed project acceptance criteria were agreed between Fujitsu and
                               POL, and then signed off during the lifecycle of the project. An example of such acceptance criteria in relation to Non-
                               Functional Requirements has been provided to us to support this verbal representation.


    Data Strategy Foundation   Detailed business and technical design documents have been verbally represented to have been created during the delivery of
    Project                    the project life cycle.


                               Assurance Work was provided to demonstrate business scoping and approval of changes to be applied (including a benefits
                               realisation and coatings map), requirements tracker document, testing strategy plan, testing report plan and migration
                               summary documents. We were also provided with an example of the weekly reporting process at project close which
                               demonstrated the level of governance and oversight the project had from senior stakeholders.




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                27
                                                                                                                 POL00107160
                                                                                                              POL001 07160




Summarising the work we have performed against Baseline risk we conclude that for each sampled change,
Assurance Work has been produced in accordance with defined change management or project methodologies.
We have not however been furnished with all key items of documentation we would have liked to review, due to the
availability of such documentation to POL, and much of the Assurance Work provided to us were confirmations of
verbal representations made during our work.

Further work will be required to perform a 'deep dive' review of project and change documentation on particular
high risk areas (for example the original implementation of the audit store, and acceptance criteria sign off for the
Branch Database commissioning as part of the Horizon HNG-X Implementation project), in order to provide
assurance that the system baseline position were appropriately implemented and tested (timeframes of such
positions varying depending on the component of the system under investigation).

Assessment of Assurance against System Usage Risk Areas
Our assessment in each of these areas is based upon information contained within system documentation from
Fujitsu and operational policy and procedure documentation from the finance service centre, as well as emails
confirming verbal assertions we received during the course of our work.




                                                                                                                             a
No testing or independent sources of assurance were identified over these System Usage risk areas.

Our understanding of the design of Horizon Features responding to key risks is a core output of our work and is
outlined within Appendix 2 where we have provided a documentary listing of all of the Horizon features.




                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                             I




                                                                                                                             ■
                                                                                                                             a




                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                             I


                                                                                                                             I


                                                                                                                                 ■
                                                                                                                                 ■
                                                                                                                             a




                                                                                                                             I




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                                             POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                        POLOO107160




: 6 Matters for Consideration
■




    In this section we set out our key matters for management consideration, further to the work we have performed
    above.

    We have structured this section as follows:

       •         Key Matters for Consideration, by Risk Area reviewed;
       •         Factors to Consider in Formulating an Action Plan; and
       •         Proposed Action Plan.
1
i   Key Matters for Consideration



:
                      I
                          a. Risk Appetite: During our work, only occasional linkage of work to the risk appetite of POL
                            was noted. Whilst not unusual in the consumer business sector, such articulation and
                            embedding of risk appetite assists with the delivery of better optimised and prioritised key
                            controls and assurance activities.
                          b. Holistic Risk and Assurance Framework: A holistic, risk intelligent assessment relating to
                             the identification and mitigation of key risks to the integrity of processing should be
           (1)               considered in order to validate the completeness of the Horizon Features referred to in our          N/a
                             work and thus provide a complete schedule of key controls that require assurance. Whilst
       General
                             Assurance Work has been provided demonstrating the use of key forums for tracking the
                             risk environment surrounding Horizon (such as the Information Security Management Forum
                             and Fujitsu Services Security Reports), these aren't set up to specifically consider the
                             holistic risk and assurance framework necessary to enable an overall comment on the
                             design, implementation and operating effectiveness of the Horizon Features.


                          a. Project Governance: Governance procedures described to us (verbally) suggest that the
                             expected levels of business involvement in pre-go live system and user acceptance testing
                             is performed as part of system implementation projects over the Horizon IT system; and that
                             business users would be appropriately involved in signing off of system requirements and
                             readiness to go-live (full system reconciliations). To supplement these verbal assurances,
                             management has provided us with samples of documentation from the three sampled
                             change areas (Horizon Implementation, Data Strategy Foundation, and Audit Store
                             changes). Despite these sources of evidence, management should consider whether further
           (2)               investigations Into sources of assurance from the original Horizon implementation would be          Verbal
                             worthwhile, given the importance of establishing a well-founded baseline position over the      representations
       System                Horizon Features.
       Baseline                                                                                                                 Limited
                          b. Audit Store Baseline: The implementation of Horizon HNG-X in 2010-11 was asserted to            documentation
R                            not have had a significant impact on the Horizon Features. In particular no changes were
                             made to the Audit Store as a result of the implementation. Therefore the 'baseline' position
                             for the Audit Store was established as being at the original implementation of the Horizon IT
i                            system. Key documentation around the baseline position for the Audit Store has not been
                             able to be provided to us during the course of our work. We note that a security report was
                             verbally represented to us to have been commissioned during the original implementation of
                             the Audit Store, although this report could not be located and provided to us.
■




I
I
I
®   DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                               29
                                                                                                                                      POL00107160
                                                                                                                                POL001 07160




              a. End User Entity Control Considerations: The ISAE3402 report requires interpretation in
                 the context of these controls at POL. They are outlined in section 6 of the ISAE3402 report.                                  ■
                 Without such analysis, the assurance provided by the ISAE3402 is weakened. We are
                 aware that POL has nearly completed work in order to address such considerations.
              b. Assurance Clarifications: In the context of detailed testing and assurance procedures,
                 there are areas of the ISAE3402 report which would benefit from further clarification, in order
                 to remove the risk of ambiguity from its interpretation, and overlaps with other sources of                                   I
                 assurance that may be performed. For example:
                o       the report does not state from where populations of data tested in samples were                                        I
                        obtained and thus how exposed conclusions may be to internal fraud or deliberate
                        override of control (e.g. for change management testing, were samples picked from the
                        population in the secure Audit Store, or from another source?);                                 Extensive
     (3)                                                                                                              documentation
                        the report does not draw out certain key features in the control design, which we would
                o




     IT                 assume are present, for example, control objective 4.8.11 (relating to access to the           Independent
  Provision             system being restricted to appropriate users) does not explicitly state and test that users      testing
                        must have and use their own unique username, thus underpinning audit trail integrity;
                        and controls relating to the management of administrator access could be more specific
                        as to the extent and nature of the design of controls and testing performed.
                        the report is not explicit in the sample sizes used for testing; and
                o




                o       the report contains tests which could be strengthened, for example, control test 6.5 in
                        section 7 appears to test through discussion with personnel only, without clarifying if
                                                                                                                                               ,I
                        anything was done to corroborate such verbal assertions.
              c. Internal Audit Work — Internal audit work conducted highlights progress in responding to
                 and closing down issues in relation to internal audit risks, but a number of issues remain
                 outstanding. Internal audit have also not done any specific assurance work over the
                 allegations being raised on the Horizon system and POL's response to the issues raised.




                                                                                                                                               ■
              a. Risk Driven Considerations: The current documentation over System Usage Risks has
                 been largely written in response to key incidents or events, by non-independent parties and
                 from operational perspectives. Whilst detailed, it is also not written from a risk and
                                                                                                                                               ■
                 assurance perspective and is rarely evidential in its content.
              b. Risk and Control Framework: There are areas where an understanding of the design and
                                                                                                                                               ■
                 nature of operations relating to System Usage Risks is available, but the design,
                 implementation and operating effectiveness of key controls has not been aggregated into a
                 risk driven framework nor formally assured through evidence based testing. Further, the                                       1
                 ability of documentation to fully support information relating to the detailed design of controls
                 relating to System Usage Risks is unclear (e.g. whilst JSNs are sequential is there a
                 systems operations control which checks the completeness of this sequence proactively?).
                 The Schedule of Assurance over Horizon Features we have formulated as part of our work
                 (and documented in Appendix 2) provides a basis for such a risk and control framework, as                                     i
                 well as targeted testing over key controls. Management should consider enhancing their
                 assurance provision by verifying the completeness of this schedule, and conducting
                 implementation and operating effectiveness testing of the key controls there-in.                        Partial
                                                                                                                      Documentation
              c. interfaces - DVLA: Whilst environmental risk relating to system operations is largely
                 assured in the ISAE3402, we note that no evidence of specific or detailed testing or
     (4)         assurance work has been carried out over System Usage Risks relating to the DVLA
                 interface (both IT and business in nature). We note that many interfaces observed do not
  System         relate directly with the Horizon Features in scope for this review, but we recommend that
  Usage          such activities be considered for inclusion in the overall risk and control framework relating
                 to the Horizon processing environment.                                                                                        ■
              d. Audit Store: We observed the following:                                                                                       I
                o       It is not clear from the documentation we have been provided whether POL has agreed
                        that the current capturing of certain, key system events, is complete and appropriate for
                        potential governance and investigation needs;
                        We have not identified controls which formally report, review and consider the impact
                    o




                        and resolution of any exceptions identified during the Audit Store extraction process, nor
                        reconcile the data from other reporting systems in the business to those data sets
                        contained within the Audit Store;


DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                           POLOO107160
                                                                                                                         POLOO107160




     Risk Area                               Key Matters for Consideratic



                        Investigatory work on the Audit Store has at been performed by Fujitsu who, whilst
®




                   o




                        technically qualified, do not constitute an independent or risk experienced party for
                        assurance driven purposes. POL could consider doing more independent analysis of
                        Audit Store historic data to verify that it is recorded in line with expected characteristics;
                        and
                   o    From the documentation we have reviewed, controls to assess that the digital signature
                        is valid and verify that there is a complete sequence of JSNs are retrospective. No
                        proactive checks we're documented which describe the performance of such verifications
                        prior to the copying of data to the Audit Store.
                 e. Proactive monitoring of key System Usage Risks: The current assurance environment
                    appears to be "reactive" in nature, with exceptions in processing triggering diagnostic and
                    remediation activity only when reported. It would appear that no use is being made of the
                    Audit Store, for proactive monitoring of unusual or exceptional system events potentially
                    worthy of further investigation and action.
                 f. Hardware controls over the Audit Store: The Centera EMC devices used to host Audit
                    Store data have not been configured in the most secure EC+ configuration. As a result
                    system administrators on these boxes may be able to process changes to the data stored
                    within the Audit Store, if other alternative software controls around digital seals, and key
                    management are not adequately segregated from Centera box administration staff.
                    Privileged access to the cryptographic solution around digital signatures, and publically
                    available formulas on MD5 hashed digital seals would potentially allow privileged users at
I       .           Fujitsu to delete a legitimate sealed file, and replacement with a 'fake' file in an undetectable
                    manner.
                 g. Branch Database: We observed the following in relation to the Branch Database being:
                        A method for posting 'Balancing Transactions' was observed from technical
                   o




                        documentation which allows for posting of additional transactions centrally without the
                        requirement for these transactions to be accepted by Sub-postmasters (as 'Transaction
                        Acknowledgements' and 'Transaction Corrections' require). Whilst an audit trail is
                        asserted to be in place over these functions, evidence of testing of these features is not
                        available;
$                  o    Processes around Transaction Acknowledgements and Transaction Corrections are
                        subject to out of date documentation, or in the case of Transaction acknowledgements,
                        no documentation at all. Such documentation should be produced or brought up to date;
                   o    For 'Balancing Transactions', 'Transaction Acknowledgments', and 'Transaction
                        Corrections' we did not identify controls to routinely monitor all centrally initiated
                        transactions to verify that they are all initiated and actioned through known and
                        governed processes, or controls to reconcile and check data sources which underpin
                        current period transactional reporting for Subpostmasters to the Audit Store record of
                        such activity;
                        Security on the Branch Database around the 'Messaging Journal table' is a key area of
                   o




                        risk due to branch transactional data being held on this table for up to a day before being
                        written to the Audit Store. It was unclear from the documentation reviewed whether
                        specific assurance work had been carried out in this area: and
                   o    Controls that would detect when a person with authorised privileged access used such
                        access to send a 'fake' basket into the digital signing process could not be evidenced to
                        exist.




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                             31
                                                                                                                                                      POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                    POL00107160


                                                                       •                                                                                          •
       R.ecommendationS

       We have identified three areas where POL should consider further actions to strengthen the quality and nature of
       assurance in place over the Horizon system.

       These are actions that may:                                                                                                                                ■
            •        Further support Project Sparrow;
            •        Integrate knowledge obtained from this work into the Future System Requirements project; and
            •        Help POL to move towards a more holistic Programme of Assurance.

       We have aligned each of the actions we would recommend to POL management to one of these areas, and we
       present these below.

       Actions that may further support Project parrow
                                                                                                                                                                  I

                                                                                                                                                                  ■
                Al          Perform a detailed review of Balancing Transaction use: Instruct a suitably qualified party (independent of
                            Fujitsu) to carry out a review of the circumstances leading up to the need to use the Balancing Transaction                           I
        Investigation
        of Balancing
        Transactions
                            functionality in Horizon, including an assessment of the communications with the relevant Sub-Postmaster prior to
                            any adjustment being made to their ledgers. This work should include a more detailed walkthrough of the current day
                                                                                                                                                                  ■
         Use in 20101
                            "Balancing Transaction" policies, procedures and key controls, making recommendations for improvement .
                                                                                                                                                                  I


                A2
                                                                                                                                                                  ■
                                                                                                                                                                  ■
1 14
                            Perform implementation testing of Horizon Features: Instruct a suitably qualified party (independent of Fujitsu) to
         Verification
          Work that         carry out implementation testing of the Horizon Features (or a selection of key Horizon Features) identified in this
           Horizon
                   are      report. The work should aim to provide POL with comfort that the Horizon Features extracted from documentation are
        Implemented         actually designed and implemented exactly as described in that documentation.      *j           ~2    c        ~
        as Described                                                                                                                                              a


        t             -     Analytical Testing of Historic Transactions: Audit Store documentation asserts that the system contains seven                         I
                            years of Branch transactions, and a number of system event activities. In addition, a number of assertions relating to
                                                                                                                                                                  I
        i                   data integrity, record i field structure and key control features (such as sequencing of JSN) are made in
                 3
                            documentation, but have never been validated by parties outside of Fujitsu. With modern day technologies, the                         I
         Analytical         analytic profiling and testing of such Big Data sets is likely to be feasible, thus POL should consider instructing a
         Testing of
          Historic .        party independent of Fujitsu to perform independent risk analytics on an extract of all Audit Store data to verify that               ■
        Transactions
                                                                                                                                                                  ■
                            (a) key characteristics are seen in the data as expected and (b) what other matters! exceptions I insights can
                            potentially be derived. This exercise would also provide valuable insight into those Horizon Features that could be
                            automatically monitored as part of the optimised risk and control environment described below.
                                                                                                                                                                  I


                A4          Update / Create documentation formalised all key adjustment and reporting processes in operation over
                                                                                                                                                                  ■'
       Documentation
                            Horizon in the FSC: Identify and document all key activities in the FSC relating to both adjustment processing to
                                                                                                                                                                  ■
       of all Horizon       Sub-Postmaster ledgers and to the control activities that ensure that transactional data visible to Sub-Postmasters is
         adjustment
              p
       and reporting        fully reconciled to the Audit Store's 'high integrity' copy of Branch Ledger transactions. Use this exercise to verify the            a
        processes in        completeness and appropriateness of Horizon Features so far identified from verbal assertions, and then perform
          the FSC
                            implementation testing (perA2 above) of such controls.                      \
                                                                                                                                                                  ■
                                    /.




                                                                                                                                                                  ■
                                                                                                               cam.-
        RAFT FINDINGS
       STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE
                                                                                                                                                         32
                                                                                                                                                POL00107160
                                                                                                                                              POLOO107160




    Actions that will integr to knowledge obtained from this work into the Future System Requirements
    project.                                     —1,            A j                          7     1"             ,V




                      Produce Future System Requirements Document: Produce a schedule of key system requirements that any
         61
                      future Horizon replacement platform should deliver against, as an underpinning baseline for the integrity of
       Produce        processing. This schedule would outline key control objectives, with current day control activities I Horizon Features
       baseline
                      and /or other examples cited to show how such control objectives could be addressed in any future system. The
       for future     schedule should include matters that will support the delivery of such design confidence in efficient ways, and
    replacement of
      the Horizon     providing foundations for preventative, detective and monitoring control activities. It could also highlight key
        System        questions for POL to consider, such as the longevity of data head in the Audit Store and the type of cryptographic
                      mechanisms applied to the system.



    Actions that may help POL move towards a more holistic programme of Assurance

    This area is the more significant piece of work recommended in a broad context for POL to consider as a result of
    our assessment.

    The development of such a holistic assurance programme should be seen as a `strategic' response to the issues
    raised. If delivered successfully it will bring assurance benefits beyond the confines of assuring the integrity of
    processing within Horizon.

    Whilst not raised specifically below, such an exercise would first require the appointment of a role in POL




                                                                                                                                        who
    would be responsible for the coordination of assurance across the whole organisation and the reporting of key
    areas where assurance provision could be improved (a "Head of Assurance"). This would ensure that POL
    Management and the Board have the ability to map, coordinate and assess assurance sources (and their quality)
    on an ongoing basis for the organisation.                                                         __


                         Risk Workshops: Conduct an exercise with key stakeholders in POL, including those In charge of Governance, to
           C1
                         create a baseline understanding of risk and risk management concepts; share examples of how similar organisations
         Risk
       Workshop          manage, define and control key risks; and obtain suggestions and consensus as to if, where and how POL could
                         become a more "Risk Intelligent" organisation and reporting of risk and assurance matters could be improved.


                         Construct Risk and Control Framework: Extend and confirm the completeness of the Horizon Features which are
           C2
                         designed to exert control over the Horizon processing environment. The framework can be used to prioritise key
     Construct Risk      areas for improvement (including clarifications /the removal of ambiguity in existing sources) and embed agreed
      and Control
      Framework          changes in current assurance sources. A key component for the construction of this risk and control framework is the
                         initial information produced as part of our analysis and reproduced in Appendix 2. This Framework could be
                         extended to cover POL's overall risk and control framework, not just those areas relevant to Horizon processing.

                         Test Controls: Once the framework is verified as complete, key controls can be identified and evidence based
           C3            testing performed to validate that they are operating effectively. Such operating effectiveness work could be
         Test            performed on a sustained basis and could be delivered by an independent party in line with a recognised assurance•
        Controls         standard. In addition, this exercise can be used to feedback on the design of the control environment that it can
                                                                                                                                 so




                         be optimised (i.e. maximise coverage of key risks, with minimal duplication).

           C4            Sustain Assurance Delivery and Implement More Proactive Monitoring2: The longer term assurance map can
                         be designed to sustain assurance delivery for POL over key risks. This may include a transition to a more proactively
        Optimise
        ongoing          monitored control environment ("continuous controls monitoring"), where automated alerts are generated if certain
         testing         key behaviours in the system are identified.
                                                                              +




                                                                                        w)




®   DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                  33
                                                                                                                 POL00107160
                                                                                                           POLOO107160


                                                                                                                        III
Notes:

'Risk Workshop: Risk appetite statements may be considered as part of this exercise, but are typically found by
key stakeholders to be a different area to understand. Such statements are effectively matters which help an
organisation to avoid imprecise or open statements relating to risk, which do not assist with the effective
management of responses to such risks. Statements are mechanisms that also help management to define
parameters relating to risk, against which key decisions and escalation activities can be performed.
                                                                                                                        S
`Key risk indicators' are often a tool used by management, and those in charge of Governance, in these areas.
Whilst POL needs to consider their own risk statements and indicators, some examples of those that may be
worthy of consideration in relation to the integrity of processing in Horizon could include:

         •   The number of allegations or concerns raised by Sub-postmasters during a defined period;                    i
         •   The number and value of adjustment postings being performed by FSC
         •   The use of balancing transactions
         •   The number of security incidents on the Horizon system during a defined period;
         •   The value of unreconciled differences between systems / ledgers
         •   The number and nature of errors or exceptions in processing; and                                            I
         •   Key dontrols found to not to be operating effectively in a period.

The above are not exhaustive and key risk indicators need to be considered thoroughly in response to the
particular risks and controls which are required in response to the risk universes formulated over the Horizon
processing environment.

2Sustain Assurance Delivery and Implement more Proactive Monitoring: Benefits of these activities could
include:




                                                                                                                         i
         •   Minimising duplication in the control framework, and the assurance activities there-on;
         •   Support targeted assurance provision in the context of existing or potential future allegations;            ■
         •   Provide more measureable benchmarks of performance against other organisations;
         •   Underpin further efficiencies in the assurance provision, for example the automation of existing manual
             controls;
         •   Incentivise ongoing improvement in both the processes and the assurance provision, by highlighting
                                                                                                                         1
             deficiencies on a timely basis and reporting these directly back to those business or outsourced            I
             owners who need to take a remediation or corrective action; and
         •   Support the maintenance of the completeness of documentation over the Horizon Features.



                                                                                                                         ■
                                                                                                                         S




                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                             ■
                                                                                                                             ■




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                   34        I
                                                                                                                                                       POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                   POL00107160
wrl~wuw®wwwwwwwwww~l■•■~wwww~■■~■www■~wwww


 Appendix 1: IT Provision Assurance Source Mapping and Gap
 Analysis

 The mapping below outlines the more detailed IT Provision assurance mapping against IT Provision risks, as summarised in Section 4:

                                                        •

                                                      A.10 Communications and
               Data converted from legacy systems     Operations Management
               or previous versions introduces data   A.12 Information Systems                                         Requirement 6: Develop
  Change                                                                          4.8.10 Change
               errors if the conversion transfers     Acquisition,
                                                        d          Development    Management                           and maintain secure
  Management   incomplete, redundant, obsolete, or    and Maintenance                                                  systems and applications.
               inaccurate data.
                                                      A.10 Communications and
               Inappropriate changes are made to      Operations Management
               system software (e.g., operating       A.12 Information Systems                                         Requirement 6: Develop
 Change                                               Acquisition, Development    4,8.10 Change
               system, network, change-                 q                p                                             and maintain secure
 Management
     g                                                and Maintenance             Management
                                                                                       g
               management software, access-                                                                            systems and applications.
               control software).

                                                      A.10 Communications and
                                                      Operations Management
               Inappropriate changes are made to      A.12 Information Systems                                         Requirement 6: Develop
 Change        the database structure and             Acquisition, Development    4.8.10 Change                        and maintain secure
 Management                                           and Maintenance             Management
               relationships between the data.                                                                         systems and applications.


                                                      A.10 Communications and     4.8.2 Backup
                                                      Operations Management       4.8.5 Incident
               Financial data cannot be recovered     A.14 Business Continuity    Management                           Information System
 Operations    or accessed in a timely manner         Management                  4,8.6 Major Incident                 Operations not within
               when there is a loss of data.                                      Process                              scope for PCIDSS review.
                                                                                  4.8.7 Security Incident
                                                                                  Process




 DRAFT FINDINGS
 STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                                                                                                                                      POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                  POL00107160




                                                                  •    ra'
                                                                   . ~..
                                                               A.10 Communications and        4.8.3 Job Scheduling
                                                               Operations Management          4.8.4 Availability and
                                                                                              Capacity Management
                      Production systems, programs,                                           4.8.5 Incident                  Information System
                      an o Jobs result ininaccurate,                                          Management                      Operations not within
     Operations       incomplete, or unauthorized                                             4.8.6 Major Incident            scope for PCIDSS review.
                      processing of data.                                                     Process
                                                                                              4.8.7 Security Incident
                                                                                              Process
                                                               All Access Control
                                                                                                                              Requirement 3: Protect
                      Inappropriate changes are made                                          4.8.12 Access to                stored cardholder data.
                      directly to financial data through                                      databases, data files, and      Requirement 6: Develop
     Security
                      means other than application                                            programs                        and maintain secure
                      transactions,                                                                                           systems and applications.
                                                               A.10 Communications and
                      Inappropriate changes are made to        Operations Management
                      Application systems or programs          A.12 Information Systems
                      that contain relevant automated          Acquisition, Development
                                                                                  p                                           Requirement 6: Develop
                                                                                                a        nge                  and maintain secure
     Security         controls (i.e., configurable settings,
                                                         9     and Maintenance                Management
                      automated algorithms, automated                                                                         systems and applications.
                      calculations, and automated data
                      extraction) andlor report logic.
                                                               A.8 Human Resources
                      Individuals gain inappropriate access    Security
                      to equipment in the data centre and                                                                     Requirement 9: Restrict
                                                               A.9 Physical &                 4.8.1 Physical and              physical access to
     Security         exploit such access to circumvent        Environmental Security         Environmental Controls          cardholder data.
                      logical access controls and gain
                      inappropriate access to systems.
                                                               A.11 Access Control
                      Systems are not adequately                                                                              Requirement 6: Deelop
                      configured or updated to restrict                                       4.8.10 Change                   s   mainatd a ppury
     Security         system access to properly                                               Management
                                                                                                                                      and applications.
                                                                                                                              systems a
                      authorized and appropriate users.
                                                               A.11 Access Control
                                                                                                                              Requirement 6: Develop
                      The network does not adequately                                         4.8.9 Networks                  and maintain secure
                      prevent unauthorized users from                                         4,8.10 Change                   systems and applications.
     Security                                                                                 Management                      Requirement 11: Regularly
                      gaining inappropriate access to
                      information systems.                                                    4.8.11 Security                 test security systems and
                                                                                                                              processes.




     DRAFT FINDINGS
     STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                      36
L®   W            ■      M U M M O®                               r            ■          w   ®®■■■                        w■■■          O M M r          r   r   r    IlM   r
                                                                   POL00107160
                           ...-- -------- -- ----               POL00107160
                 .................-




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL.SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                    37
                                                                                                                                                                          POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                    POL001 07160




    Appendix 2: Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features

    We present below a schedule of the Assurance Work and sources we have identified which relate to certain groups of Horizon Features.

    We have structured these in line with our three areas of assessment (System Baseline, IT Provision and System Usage), as defined in our report.

    We have also recorded our assessment of the level of comfort that POL has over that Horizon Feature, defined as:

         •   "Significant" means we have seen Assurance Work that delivers comfort through evidence based testing by independent parties.
         •   "Partial" means we have seen Assurance Work in the form of descriptions in formal documentation, but no testing of implementation or operating effectiveness.
         •   "Limited" means we have seen Assurance Work that documents verbal assertions we received during our work.
         •   "None" means that Assurance Work has not yet been provided to us.




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                             38
             N        N         N■                                                              M■               O     N   N■                                   N             N




                                                                                                                                                                      r




                                                                                                                                                                                  mlm
                                                                                                                                     r■■




                                                                                                                                                      r■
                                                                                                           mom
                                                                      r■




                                                                                ■rim■
                                                r




                                                      r




                                                           r■
                           r




                                           r
r




     r




                 r
                                                                                                                                       POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                   POL00107160
                                                                                                                       IA I♦   A   A   1


System Baseline




Baseline i The system was    The design of key elements of the      No information provided    Preventative   Manual
           fit for purpose   Horizon system relevant to the
           and worked as     integrity of auditing and capturing
           intended when     transactions was formally agreed and
           first put in?     signed off prior to systems
                             deployment.
 Baseline The system was     Traceability Matrices have been        No information provided    Preventative   Manual
          fit for purpose    documented, implemented and
          and worked as      periodically reviewed to ensure that
          intended when      business requirement documents
          first put in?      have been regularly reviewed against
                             project progress.

Baseline The system was      During the initial implementation of   No information provided.   Preventative   Manual
         fit for purpose     the software, Key Project Governance
         and worked as       mechanisms were put in place to
         intended when       ensure the:
         first put in?       Working Group
                             Steering Group/Project board
                             Requirements Review Group
Baseline   Major changes     Traceability Matrices have been        No information provided.   Preventative   Manual
           since             documented, implemented and
           implementation    periodically reviewed to ensure that
           have not          business requirement documents
           impacted the      have been regularly reviewed against
           system.           project progress.




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                       39
                                                                                                                                                                          POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                       POL00107160




                                  E :.        b        A.                   A        A   N     8   -              N       N   SA.    N       N   A   85    A   5   N
                           N


                     q                                                                                                                                     N       N


                                                                                                              ®                          N


                                                                                                                      N   4




     Baseline   Major changes     Key Project Governance mechanisms         No information provided.          Preventative          Manual
                since             have been enacted and operated over
                implementation    significant changes to the system since
                have not          implementation. Examples of such
                impacted the      mechanisms include:
                system.            - Working Group
                                   - Steering Group/Project board
                                   - Requirements Review Group
     Baseline   The system was    Prior to implementation into the live     For Audit Store Baseline:         Preventative          Manual                Partial
                fit for purpose   environment (and in some cases post)      Example acceptance criteria
                and worked as     acceptance criteria in relation to key    document entitled Acceptance
                intended when     system elements important for             Report 20070917BL01.13WIP
                first put in,     auditing and capturing transactions       (note no sign off of
                                  were formally agreed and signed off.      acceptance criteria is included
                                                                            within this document).

                                                                            For 2011Horizon
                                                                            Implementation (BRDB
                                                                            Baseline):
                                                                            Testing plans were provided in
                                                                            the document 'Copy of IT
                                                                            Health Check 23-07-2009.xls,
                                                                            a Risk Assessment of the
                                                                            project has been provided in
                                                                            'Security All Risk Extract
                                                                            090928 v2.xls' and Migration
                                                                            instructions have also been
                                                                            provided in the document
                                                                            'Migration lnstructions.pdf'.
                                                                            Also a report by third party
                                                                            consultancy firm Wipro has

    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
I                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                     POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                 POL00107160
                                                              W■•              I®                        Wit     ®®■                  W         W■    0   0    I




                                                                                                                                  a




                                                                                                                                          n
                                                         wi




                                                                                                                           r■
                                                                                                          r


                                                                      been provided to demonstrate
                                                                      the project was delivered as
                                                                      planned in the document
                                                                      'Horizon : Performance Test
                                                                      Audit Post Office Limited
                                                                      PO L)'.

                                                                      For 2012 Data Strategy
                                                                      Foundation (External Feeds
                                                                      Baseline):
                                                                       - Example acceptance criteria
                                                                      document entitled CFD New
                                                                      Requirements v1.11.xls (note
                                                                      no sign off of acceptance
                                                                      criteria is included within this
                                                                      document). Additionally, an
                                                                      example of a designed, and
                                                                      reviewed Migration Strategy,
                                                                      titled 'Migration Strategy CFD
                                                                      v0.4', was provided, in
                                                                      addition to a Test Report,
                                                                      'POLTSTREP0010 - CFD E2E
                                                                      Test Report vO 1'.
Baseline   The system was    The testing of key elements of the       For 2011 HNG-X                      Preventative   Manual       Partial
           fit for purpose   system important for the auditing and    Implementation:
           and worked as     capturing of transactions was formally
           intended when     agreed and signed off and then           For 2012 Data Strategy
           first put in?     delivered against.                       Foundation:
                                                                      - Test Strategy Document
                                                                      entitled 'Acceptance Testing
                                                                      Strategy' - authorised version

DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                     41
                                                                                                                                                         POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                      POL00107160




                                                                                                                                    '        W


                                                                                                          A                     ®       W




                                                                       dated 10/11/2011.
                                                                        - Test Exit Report entitled
                                                                       'Client File Delivery Report E2E
                                                                       - Exit Test Report', draft
                                                                       version 0.1 dated 06/01/2012.
     Baseline   Major changes    Sign off for design of significant    2005 Design Proposal               Preventative       Manual         Partial
                since            change is formalised and documented. ASDPR027.doc
                implementation                                         2005 Audit Centera API
                have not                                               Implementation
                impacted the                                           DELLD026.doc
                system.                                                2002 Change Proposal
                                                                       CP3240.rtf
                                                                       2004 Change Proposal
                                                                       CP4021.rtf
     Baseline   Major changes    Acceptance criteria related to key.   2002 Acceptance Test               Preventative       Manual         Partial
                since            areas such as the branch database and Specification IAACS002.doc
                implementation   audit store.
                have not
                impacted the
                system.

    Baseline    Major changes    Test Strategy and Execution have          2003 Acceptance Test Report                       Manual         Partial
                since            been documented and signed off, and       IAACR003.doc                   Preventative
                implementation   provide an adequate audit trail for the
                have not         testing of key system features such as
                impacted the     the Audit Store and Branch Database.
                system.




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                         42

~   r■■             r ®■ ■~ r w r■■                                        r ■i ■ r r r r                     llllf   M N■     e w r r■■              r s■
                                                                                                                                                     POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                 POL00107160




                                   ®wr■■rrr•




                                                                                  r■®rr■




                                                                                                                 ®




                                                                                                                       ■■rw■■ww■
 Baseline   Major changes    Independent Assurance over design of    No information provided.     Preventative       Manual        (.ow
            since            HNG-X system by Gartner.
            implementation
            have not
            impacted the
            system.
 Baseline   Major changes    Programmes and projects affecting       Harmony Delivery Lifecycle   Preventative       Manual        Partial
            since            the Horizon system are controlled and   document
            implementation   governed using an established change
            have not         methodology.
            impacted the
            system.

Baseline    Major changes    Independent Assurance report over       Wipro performance testing    Preventative       Manual        Significant
            since            testing procedures has been obtained,   report.
            implementation
            have not
            impacted the
            system.




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                      POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                   POL00107160




    IT Provision Assurance

                              i'   r       r_ - . -@_ ..                                                   -®




                                                                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                            A




                                                                                                       s
     Provision   IT supporting             Management have                 ISMF Minutes              Preventative               Manual             Partial
                 processes are well        established forums to           FJS Security Report
                 controlled,               oversee the performance of
                                           third party IT providers.


     Provision IT supporting               POL has documented end          POL End User              Preventative               Manual             Partial
               processes are well          user control considerations     Considerations
               controlled,                 to supplement third party       Document
                                           service provider controls
                                           assurance reports
     Provision IT supporting               Third party assurance           ISAE3402 Report           Preventative               Manual             Significant
               processes are well          reports are in place to         PCIDSS Report
               controlled,                 ensure the overall control of
                                           the IT environment,
                                           including: ISAE 3402 reports,
                                           PCIDSS compliance report
                                           and IS027001 certified
                                           accreditation.




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                       44
          ■      ■   ■    ■        ■   ■   ■    ■      ■   ■    ■     ■    ■    ■     ■      ■   ■    M         Iw   aA ■   ■     ■      ■   ■   M ■       ■   ■




                                                                                                                                                                       ■




                                                                                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                                                                                                   r
r




     r
                                                                                                                                          POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                       POL00107160
                                                                                                                      ■ in a 'm ■ ■ w ■ w I
!Usage Assurance


                                                                                                                               ®   6




 Usage       Counter transactions     Only baskets that balance to   Horizon Online Data     Preventative       Automated    Partial
             are recorded             £0 can be accepted by the      Integrity POL
             completely, accurately   central database (double       document.
             and on a timely basis    entry concept exists).
             centrally.

 Usage       Counter transactions     Digital Signature is applied   Horizon Online Data     Preventative       Automated    Partial
             are recorded             to each transaction basket     Integrity POL
             completely, accurately   at the point of counter        document,
             and on a timely basis    inception to prevent
             centrally.               downstream tampering.

 Usage       Counter transactions     Transactional                  Verbal confirmation     Detective          Automated    Partial
             are recorded             Acknowledgement and            from Rod Ismay and
             completely, accurately   manual review process.         Jane Smith in Finance
             and on a timely basis                                   Shared Services.
             centrally.

 Usage       Counter transactions     Sequential numbering is        Horizon Online Data     Preventative       Automated    Partial
             are recorded -           applied to each counter        Integrity_ POL
             completely, accurately   basket prior to digital        document.
             and on a timely basis    signature application to
             centrally.               provide a 'baked in'                                                  .
                                      sequence check.




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                                                                                              POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                          POL00107160




                            p             Po           q                        b                              W   8                 P           P


                                                                                                                                                                 W    P

                                                                                                                                 1           P

                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                       W                 P




     Usage       Counter transactions     Oracle commit and roll-back          Horizon Online Data       Preventative           Automated                       Partial
                 are recorded             process is atomic (i.e. either       Integrity_ POL
                 completely, accurately   a complete transaction is            document.
                 and on a timely basis    posted or nothing is
                 centrally.               posted).

     Usage       Counter transactions   A fall back mobile link is in          Horizon Online Data       Preventative           Automated                       Partial
                 are recorded           place to ensure that if                Integrity_ POL
                 completely, accurately transactions are still                 document.
                 and on a timely basis  processed in timely
                                                           a




                 centrally.             manner
    Usage        Counter transactions   A private cryptographic key            Horizon Online Data       Preventative           Automated                       Partial
                 are recorded           is securely established for            Integrity_ POL
                 completely, accurately each transmitted basket.               document.
                 and on a timely basis
                 centrally.
     Usage       Directly posted        Formalised change control              Email communication       Preventative           Manual                          Partial
                 transactions, such as  approval and monitoring                from John Simpkins
                 "Balancing             process over the usage of              dated 15/05/2014,
                 Transactions", are     Balancing Transactions                 articulating control
                 visible and approved,                                         design around this
                                                                               process.

     Usage       Directly posted          An audit trail log is in place       Email communication       Detective              Manual                          Partial
                 transactions, such as    to monitor the use of                from John Simpkins
                 "Balancing               balance transactions. The            dated 15/05/2014,
                 Transactions", are       log is monitored by an               articulating control
                 visible and approved,    independent department               design around this
                                          that does not have access to         process.
                                          the function.

    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                46
                                                                                    0■                                     W   i■■                   N■                              0




                                                                                                                                                                           r■
                                                                                                                                                          w■■
                                                                                                     r




                                                                                                         w■■
                                                               s■■




                                                                           n




                                                                                             r
                             w




                                                   ■
.




             •




                       w
    ®■
                                                                                                                                                 POL00107160
                                                                                                                                             POLOO107160




                                                                                                                                    ~    a

                                                                                                            t        G       - 4


                                                                                               0   61           It       b




 Usage      Branch Ledger            JSNs are processed into the     Technical Design        Preventative   IT Dependent Manual    Partial
            transactions are         audit store and reviewed        Document for Audit
            recorded accurately in   when users access audit         Extract Process -
            the Audit Store.         store information. The Audit    DESAPPHLD0029.
                                     Store will automatically
                                     detect non-sequential files
                                     that are then processed by
                                     the Tivoli monitoring tool
                                     and investigated where
                                     appropriate.
 Usage      Branch Ledger            Digital seals are in place to   Technical Design        Preventative   Automated              Partial
            transactions are         ensure that files are not       Document for Audit
            recorded accurately in   amended following load to       Extract Process -
            the Audit Store.         the Audit Store                 DESAPPHLD0029
 Usage      Branch Ledger            The digital seal applied to     Security Architecture   Preventative   Automated              Partial
            transactions are         the batched digital             Document
            recorded accurately in   signatures ensures that any     Network Architecture
            the Audit Store.         amendments to data leaves       Document
                                     a traceable audit trail         Cryptography
                                                                     Architecture
                                                                     Document




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                47
                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00107160




     A                A                                                          i                     ®       ®   8                R               R                •   I

                                                                                                                                                                                     R       R


                                                                                                       ^                                        8                i


                                                                                                           R   i                            i           i




Usage            Branch Ledger                JSNs are processed into the    BRDB Technical                                        Automated                                     Partial
                 transactions are             audit store and reviewed       Design Document
                 recorded accurately in       when users access audit        Audit Technical Design
                 the Audit Store.             store information. The Audit   Document
                                              Store will automatically
                                              detect non-sequential files
                                              that are then processed by
                                              the Tivoli monitoring tool
                                              and investigated where
                                              appropriate.

Usage            Branch Ledger                Formalised change control      Email communication      Preventative                 Manual                                        Partial
                 transactions are             approval and monitoring        from John Simpkins
                 recorded accurately in       process over the usage of      dated 15/05/2014,
                 the Audit Store.             Balancing Transactions         and articulating
                                                                             control design around
                                                                             this process.
Usage            Branch Ledger                Audit trail monitoring the     Email communication      Preventative                 Manual                                        Partial
                 transactions are             usage of balance               from John Simpkins
                 recorded accurately in       transactions                   dated 15/05/2014
                 the Audit Store.

 Usage           Information from the         Logical access controls in     Audit Store              Preventative                 Automated                                     Partial
                 Audit Store retains          place over user                Procedures
                 original integrity,          management to ensure that
                                              only appropriate staff have
                                              access to extract
                                              information from the audit
                                              store


DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         48
                                                                       0     ■        ■               0        0       ■                                             ■       ■   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                              ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ■
                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                        ■




                                                                                                                                                            !N
                                                                                                                           a




                                                                                                                               ■
                                                                                                ■
                                                                                           a
                                                                 ■
                  ■




                          ■




                              ■




                                  ■




                                          ■




                                                 ■




                                                      ■




                                                            r
 ®




             a
         a
                                                                                                                                                                 POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                          POL00107160
                                                            a      -a      a     ■    ....               ■   N   W 0-■■                 M W




                                                                                                                                                      w




                                                                                                                                                           w■■
                      4•             .    a                                                                           e       •   e e             e

              e                                                                                                                           e   •

                                                                                                                  A       A

                                                                                               A   e              N




 Usage      Information from the   Hardware controls are in             Audit Store          Preventative         Automated             Partial
            Audit Store retains    place to prevent the                 Procedures
            original integrity,    modification of data in the
                                   Audit Store



 Usage      information from the   JSNs are processed into the      Audit Store              Detective            Automated             Partial
            Audit Store retains    audit store and reviewed         Procedures
            original integrity,    when users access audit
                                   store information. Audit
                                   store will automatically
                                   detect non-sequential files
                                   that are then processed by
                                   the Tivoli monitoring tool
                                   and investigated where
                                   appropriate.
 Usage      Information from the   The digital seal applied to      Audit Store              Detective            Automated             Partial
            Audit Store retains    the batch on data transfer is    Procedures
            original integrity,    checked back to the initial
                                   seal to ensure that hash
                                   value has not been altered.

Usage       Information from the   The integrity of the digital     Audit Store              Detective            Automated             Partial
            Audit Store retains    signature is checked for all     Procedures
            original integrity,    baskets used in the extracts.




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                                                           POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                        POL001 07160




      Usage      Information from the      Exceptions identified in        Audit Store               Detective          Automated             Partial
                 Audit Store retains       integrity checks on digital     Procedures
                 original integrity,       seals or signatures or in the
                                           sequence check are formally
                                           raised and handled as part
                                           of day-to-day IT operational
                                           processes within the Tivoli
                                           Monitoring tool.
      Usage      The system used by        3 way match between             Data Flow Diagram                            IT Dependent Manual   Partial
                 the Finance teams for     Branch Database,                provided by Finance
                 control contains all      Transaction file and POLSAP     (Jane Smith)
                 records                   load file
      Usage      Data posted from          Amendments posted               Transactional             Preventative       Automated             Partial
                 other systems and         centrally via transactional     Corrections
                 teams is visible to and   corrections must be             Procedural Evidence
                 accepted by sub post-     approved by sub-Post
                 masters                   Masters must be approved
                                           before they can be applied
                                           to the Branch Database
     Usage       Data posted from          Amendments posted               Branch Database           Preventative       Automated             Partial
                 other systems and         centrally via transactional     Procedures
                 teams is visible to and   acknowledgements must be
                 accepted by sub post-     approved by sub-Post
                 masters                   Masters must be approved
                                           before they can be applied
                                           to the Branch Database




     DRAFT FINDINGS
     STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
1                                                                                                                                                          50
Lu   r                                     ■ ■ ■ s ■ ■_M M ■                             ■       N   ■    E      ■   n ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ N o u ■ ■
                                                                                                                                                                              POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                           POLOO107160




                   8    W                    W   ®                    W                         8    W      W                   W       W       44                     W

               W                                                                                                                                              W    W

                                                                                                '                                   W       W




 Usage      Data posted from           For any outstanding (non-     Rod Isrnay               Preventative                    Manual                         Partial
            other systems and         accepted) Transaction
            teams is visible to and   Acknowledgement or
            accepted by sub post-     Transaction Corrections at
            masters                   month end, a formal
                                      resolution process exists
                                      which enables non-accepted
                                      items to be identified, held
                                      in suspense and actively
                                      investigated to the point of
                                      resolution with the Sub-
                                      postmaster. Business as
                                      usual resolution activities
                                      can be taken to conclude
                                      outstanding items and have
                                      them
                                       _._._.. cleared down.       i                 _...._
                            —                                                                     -....-.....-.....-...------------...____________           _________
 Usage      Data posted from          Sub-postmasters have           Branch Database          Preventative                             IT Dependent Manual   Partial
            other systems and         access to view all             Procedures
            teams is visible to and   transactional records
            accepted by sub post-     underpinning their current
            masters                   accounting period's ledgers.
                                      This information is used to
                                      support their daily branch
                                      cash declarations and
                                      reconciliation, their weekly
                                      balance of cash and stock
                                      reconciliation, and their
                                      monthly trading period roll
                                      over activities.


DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.




                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                 POL00107160
                                                                                                                                              POL00107160




   Usage     Data posted from          All processes create an         Branch Database         Preventative   IT Dependent Manual   Partial
             other systems and         identifiable transaction in     Procedures
             teams is visible to and   Horizon, with an audit trail
             accepted by sub post-     to the originator in the
             masters                   Finance Services team. This                                                                              !{
                                       transaction ID is protected
                                       by the JSN, digital signature
                                       and digital seal features.

   Usage      DBAs or others           Sub post-master must            Branch Database         Preventative   IT Dependent Manual   Partial
              granted DBA access       functionally approve the        Procedures
              have not modified        Transactional
              Branch Database data.    Acknowledgement file
                                       produced by the POLSAP
                                       system before items can be
                                       processed through to the
                                       branch database.
   Usage      DBAs or others           Formalised change control       Email communication     Preventative   Manual                Partial
              granted DBA access       approval and monitoring         from John Simpkins
              have not modified        process over the usage of       dated 15/05/2014,
              Branch Database data.    Balancing Transactions          and articulating
                                                                       control design around
                                                                       this process.,
   Usage      DBAs or others           Audit trail monitoring the      Email communication     Preventative   Manual                Partial
              granted DBA access       usage of balance                from John Simpkins
              have not modified        transactions                    dated 15/05/2014
              Branch Database data.




  DRAFT FINDINGS
  STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                     52
rr >! r    ®■ r ■ r r ■ .                            r     w ~lln lit ■ r            r~ ■ ■ ■ wti ■ Nr ~l ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ r r
                                                                                                                                                                                    POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                POL00107160
                                                        1plll        M             1M1 M   W■■                 M   M        M           M               W   M       M       M   M   M®      I




                                                                                                                                            r
 A




                  e




                       e




                           -




                                              a




                                                                         a




                                                                                            a




                                                                                                a




                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                           c




                                                                                                                        ®




                                                                                                                                    a




                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                    ,




                                                                                                                                                                        a
              a




                                                                                                                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                a
 Usage      DBAs or other's          Hardware controls are in        Audit Store           Preventative                Automated                            Partial
            granted DBA access       place to prevent the            Procedures
            have not modified        modification of data in the
            Branch Database data.    audit store

 Usage      DBAs or others           Database access privileges      ISAE3402              Preventative                Automated                            Partial
            granted DBA access       that would enable a person
            have not modified        to delete a digitally signed
            Branch Database data.    basket are restricted to
                                     authorised administrators at
                                     Fujitsu.
Usage       DBAs or others           Database access privileges      ISAE3402              Preventative                Automated                            Partial
            granted DBA access       that would enable a person
            have not modified        to create or amend a basket
            Branch Database data.    and re-sign it with a 'fake'
                                     key, detectable if
                                     appropriately checked, are
                                     restricted to authorised
                                     administrators at Fujitsu.
Usage       Counter transactions     TWS scheduler and               ISAE3402              Detective                   Automated                            Significant
            are recorded             monitoring processes are
            completely, accurately   defined and formalised. Any
            and on a timely basis    issues or errors are reported
            centrally?               and responded to by Fujitsu
                                     as part of day-to-day IT
                                     Operational activities.




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                    53
                                                                                                                                                                               POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                          POL00107160




                      •




                                                                                                                                                          •




                                                                                                                                                                  •
     Usage       Counter transactions         Logical security access            Security Architecture   Preventative           Automated               signil:ic:ant
                 are recorded                 controls in place to               Document reference -
                 completely, accurately       minimise the risk of               ARCSECARC0003
                 and on a timely basis        inappropriate access to the        section 6.2 and
                 centrally                    counter software within            ISAE3402, PCIDSS and
                                              branch.                            ISO27001 reports as
                                                                                 well.

     Usage       Branch Ledger                Logical security access            ISAE3402 report.        Preventative           Automated               Significant
                 transactions are             controls are in place in
                 recorded accurately in       relation to the Branch
                 the Audit Store              Database and audit store to
                                              ensure that only
                                              appropriate staff members
                                              have access. Key
                                              transactions and tables are
                                              monitored and activity is
                                              verified by an independent
                                              third party.
    Usage        Branch Ledger                Database access privileges         ISAE3402                Preventative           Automated               Partial
                 transactions are             that would enable a person
                 recorded accurately in       to delete Audit Store data
                 the Audit Store              are restricted to authorised
                                              administrators at Fujitsu.




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                               54




                                                                                                                                                                           ■




                                                                                                                                                                                w




                                                                                                                                                                                    ■
                                                                                                                                            ■




                                                                                                                                                .




                                                                                                                                                    ■




                                                                                                                                                              ■




                                                                                                                                                                      ■
                                                                                                                                 s




                                                                                                                                      ®
                                                                                                                        ■




                                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                                                    ■
                                                                             n




                                                                                            ■




                                                                                                ■




                                                                                                    ■




                                                                                                         ■
                                                                 m




                                                                       a
                                                 n




                                                            ■
                  o




                              r
             w




                          r




                                          a
w




         ■
     ■
               POL00107160
            POLOO107160




    ,   D
r




                55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL00107160




Appen.dix : Inventory of                                                                   I)ocumentati.on




The following documentation was reviewed during the course of our review:

                                                                                                                                                                            ®.

  1                   Horizon Core Audit Process (Powerpoint)                                                                                                                             Other sources of comfort
-- ------                                  ---------------
  2                   Fact file (updated with SS comments)                                                                                                                                Other sources of comfort
                                                              ---------                                                                       ------------
 3                    ISAE3402 Report over Fujitsu managed service on Horizon                                                                                                             Assurance
                                                                        --------------------------                                                    --------------------------------- ---
 4                    Centrally Generated Transactions document                                                                                                                           Other sources of comfort
                    ------------------                                                                                                                 ---------------- -------
 5                    POL Summary of Horizon Anomalies Referred to in Second Sight Report                                                                                                 Assurance
 6                    Report on Local Suspense (14 Branch) Issue                                                                                                                          Other sources of comfort
 7                    Report on Receipts Payments (62 Branch) Issue                                                                                                                       Other sources of comfort
 8                    Spot Review Bible                                                                                                                                                   Other sources of comfort
 9 ---~               Horizon Data Integrity Document                                                                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
                                                                                -------------                                                         ------------------------------- -----
 10                   Horizon Data Integrity Document                                                                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
 11               Fujitsu ISO27001. Certificate                                                                                                           Assurance
                                                                                                        ------------                                                                     -----------------------
 12               IS027001 Statement of Applicability produced by Fujitsu                                                                                 Assurance
                                                                       --------------------                                   ---------------------------
 13               PCI DSS Attestation of Compliance                                                                                                       Assurance
 14               PCI DSS Report by Bureau Veritas                                                                                                        Assurance
 15               ISMF Minutes for three months                                                                                                           Other sources of comfort
 16               Fujitsu Security Reports for three months                                                                                               Other sources of comfort
 17             — Fujitsu Information Security Management System (ISMS) Scope                                        — —                                  Other sources of comfort
      ----------                                     -._ -
 18               Horizon Solution Architecture Outline                                                                                                   Other sources of comfort
                          -------------------------                                    —                                           _ ---------------
 19               Post Office to Driving & Vehicle Licensing Agency Automated Payments Client File Interface document                                     Other sources of comfort
 20               DVLA Internal Web Service High Level Design document                                                                                    Other sources of comfort
 21               Security All Risk Extract                                                                                                               Other sources of comfort
                                                                 --------------                                          -----------------
 22               Migration Overview Document for Horizon system                                                                                          Other sources of comfort
                                                                                            ---------------                                                  ------------------------------
 23               Horizon Technical Security Architecture                                                                                                 Other sources of comfort
DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL, SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        56
                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                 POLOO107160




24               Solution Architecture Document                                                                                                  Other sources of comfort
"5
                 Batch Processing Overview Document                                                                                              Other sources of comfort
2i               EMC Centera Acceptance Test Report - IAACR003                                                                             —     Other sources of comfort
27               Centera Accepting Testing Specification - IAACS002                                                                              Other sources of comfort
28               Application Interface Design - DELLD026                                                                                         Other sources of comfort
29               Audit Server Specification Design -TDDES071                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
30               Configuration Design - TDMAN006                                                                                                 Other sources of comfort
 31                        Configuration Design - TDMAN009                                                                                         Other sources of comfort
32                         Centera star OS upgrade to version 2.4 design proposal                                                                  Other sources of comfort
----                                                                                                                                       ------- -------
33 ------------------------Centera star OS upgrade to version 2.4 design proposal Amendment -CP4021                                                Other sources of comfort
                                _._                                                                            _...___ .._..._               _
34                _        Centera star OS upgrade to version 2.4 design proposal Amendment -CP3241                                                Other sources of comfort
35                         Exception and Event Guide - TDMAN007                          _                              --                         Other sources of comfort
36                         Functional Separation - CRFSP006                                                                                      Other sources of comfort
-------------                                                                                                                    -------------
37                         High Level Design - SDHLD001                                                                                          Other sources of comfort
38                         Audit Data Retrieval - SDHLD002                                                                                       Other sources of comfort
39                         Centera Migration HLD -TDION039                                                                                       Other sources of comfort
40                         Centera - High Level Test Plans - VIHTP014                                                                            Other sources of comfort
41                         Horizon System Audit Manual - IAMAN005                                                                                Other sources of comfort
42                         Low Level Design Document                                                                                             Other sources of comfort
        ---------------- ------                                                                                                  -----------
43                         Centera Operational Procedures - TDMAN008                                                                             Other sources of comfort
44                         Centera - Performance Test Specification - TDLLT008                                                                   Other sources of comfort
45               Centera Support Guide - TDMAN017                                                                                                Other sources of comfort
46               Centera Support Guide - TDMAN018                                                                                                Other sources of comfort
47               Centera Test Report - VITRP029                                                                                                  Other sources of comfort
48                   Centera User Guide - TDMAN005                                                                                                 Other sources of comfort
              ---- ----- ----                                                                                        -----------------------------                        ----
49                   Data Strategy Foundation - 04 - 6149 Data Strategy Foundation - Client File Transfer- PODG Closure v2 0                       Other sources of comfort
                                              ----------------------------------------------------------------
50                   Data Strategy Foundation - CFD New Requirements v1.11                                                                         Other sources of comfort
51                   Data Strategy Foundation - Data Strategy Foundation Test Strategy V10                                                         Other sources of comfort
52                   Data Strategy Foundation - Migration Strategy CFD v0.4                                                                        Other sources of comfort
53                   Data Strategy Foundation - POL.TSTREP0010 - CFD FEE Test Report vO 1                                                          Other sources of comfort


                          M          r*
                                                                                                                                                                                    WA
                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00107160




 Ma               6aa                                                                                                                ~e

        6 "


 b                Data Strategy Foundation - Revised business case CFD 2411. :110                                                    Other sources of comfort
 55               Horizon Technical Network Architecture - ARCNETARC0001                                                             Other sources of comfort
 56               Horizon Crypto Services High Level Design -DESSECHLD0002                                                           Other sources of comfort
 57               E2E data flows                                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
_ 58              idocs involving settlement                                                                                         Other sources of comfort
 59               Process Management Systems Diagram (Version 14 - 24.10.2011)                                                       Other sources of comfort
 60                AR1.1..005 - Horizon controls                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
               — ------------------------                                           ---------------------------         ----------
 61                AR12.050 -- Horizon follow up                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
 62                                AR12.050a -Follow-up Horizon May2013                                                              Other sources of comfort
       ------------------------- ---- —                                                     _     —
 63                                 Horizon Counter Application High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0047                                    Other sources of comfort
                                                                                 ----------   --                                                       ----
 64                                COMPONENT TEST PLAN FOR Horizon COUNTER INFRASTRUCTURE: SERVICE AND PROCESS CONTROL               Other sources of comfort
 65                                 Horizon Operational and Support Services Requirements                                            Other sources of comfort
 66                                ACCEPTANCE REPORT FOR DESIGN WALKTHROUGH EVENT DW03 - SECURITY                                    Other sources of comfort
 67               Draft Deloitte Phase 2 Instructions (RDW 07 05 14)2                                                                Other sources of comfort
 68               Phase 2 - Areas of Focus diagram (DRAFT v1)                                                                        Other sources of comfort
 69               Project Zebra - Phase 2 Potential Next Steps v3                                                                    Other sources of comfort
 70               REQAPPAIS1392v3.2.PayStation.ETL                                                                                   Other sources of comfort
 71               REQAPPAIS1391v2.1.PoGo.ETL.                                                                                        Other sources of comfort
                                                   ------------------------------                                                    --------------------------------------------
 72               Acceptance Report 20070917BL01.13WIP                                                                               Other sources of comfort
 73               All Streams Plan vsn 0.98                                                                                          Other sources of comfort
 74               BC PLA 001 v 0.3                                                                                                   Other sources of comfort
 75               BCO20 I-ING PD Potential Risks and Issues Register v1.0                                                            Other sources of comfort
 76               Change Management Assessment Template                                                                              Other sources of comfort
 77               DES SEC HLD 0010 v 1.0                                                                                             Other sources of comfort
 78               Engagement Meeting Log Notes v1..2                                                                                 Other sources of comfort
 79               Gartner Report Findings 1.1 with Appendix                                                                          Assurance
 80               HARMONY Full Guide 1.1a                                                                                            Other sources of comfort
                          ---------------------------------------                                      --------------
 81               HARMONY Full Guide 1.1a                                                                                            Other sources of comfort
 82               HNG Benefits Tracking in confidence May 08 final                                                                   Other sources of comfort
 83               HNG Board Report 080408                                                                                            Other sources of comfort

DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                        58
                                                                                                                                                                           POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                        POLOO107160




             HNG PID v1.3                                                                                                  Other sources of comfort
 85          HNG Reqts Team Meeting 050606                                                                                 Other sources of comfort
 86          HNG Risk and Issues 070424LY                                                                                  Other sources of comfort
 87          Horizon Testing Strategy HXTSR001                                                                             Other sources of comfort
 88          In Touch report for HNG 080418a                                                                               Other sources of comfort
 89          In Touch Report for HNG 081205                                                                                Other sources of comfort
 90          POL HNG IMP 002 v 1.0                                                                                         Other sources of comfort
                                                  ----------------------
 91          POL HNG REQ 014                                                                                               Other sources of comfort
 92          QRH031. HNG Reqts PD v0.1f                                                                                    Other sources of comfort
             ACCEPTANCE REPORT FOR Horizon ACCEPTANCE GATEWAY 1 & 2 - REQ GEN ACS 0001 v0.2                                Other sources of comfort
---93
  94                                                                                                                                           ----•-----------------
             Horizon GENERIC ACCEPTANCE PROCESS -REQGENPR00735                                                             Other sources of comfort
 95          Stakeholder Engagement Log_091218                                                                             Other sources of comfort
 96          Test Report for the Integrity Testing of Horizon Data-centre Disaster Recovery — Week Commencing 1st
             September 2008 - SVMSDMREP0005                                                               Other sources of comfort
                                                                                                                              ---------------
97           Wipro - Horizon : Performance Test Audit Post Office Limited ( POL)                          Assurance
98           DVLA Internal Web Service High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0012                                  Other sources of comfort
99           Audit Data Retrieval High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0029                                       Other sources of comfort
             — — — -- ---                                                                        -------- --------------
100          Audit Data Collection & Storage High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0030                            Other sources of comfort
101          Horizon Counter Application High• Level Design - DESAPPHLD0047                               Other sources of comfort
102          COMPONENT TEST PLAN FOR Horizon COUNTER INFRASTRUCTURE: SERVICE AND PROCESS CONTROL-DEV
             CN'I' CTP 0068 v 2.1                                                                         Other sources of comfort
103          DVLA AP Client File AIS                                                                                               Other sources of comfort
104          Product Branch Accounting - Issuing Process for Transaction corrections v0.1                                          Other sources of comfort
                   ---------------------------                                                               -------------------- --------
105          Audit Data Collection and Storage High Level Design                                                                   Other sources of comfort_
106          Data Flow - Transaction Processing for client file delivery                                                   Other sources of comfort
107          Data Flow - NBSC Miskey Process - Network Banking                                                             Other sources of comfort




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL. PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                           59
                                                                                                                                                               POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                          POL001 07160




    With the prior permission of POL, the following individuals were interviewed or consulted during the course of our review:


    L     TIii,ii            .. i     1t Ii
     Dave King               Senior Technical Security Assurance Manager                POL
     Julie George            Head of Information Security and Assurance Group           POL
    Rod Williams             Litigation Lawyer                                          POL
    James Davidson           Fujitsu Primary Point of Contact                           Fujitsu
     Pete Newsome            Quality responsibility                                     Fujitsu
     Will Russell            Regional Network Manager NT -South                         POL
     Phil Norton             Horizon Requirements responsibility                        Atos
     James Brett             Senior Test Manager— Post Office Account                   Atos
     Bill Membery            Requirements/Testing responsibility on Horizon             Fujitsu
     Gareth Jenkins          Distinguished Engineer                                     Fujitsu
     Neil Crowther           Senior Business Analyst                                    POL
     Matthew Lenton          Document Management responsibility                         Fujitsu
     Rod Ismay               Head of Finance Service Centre                             POL
     Jane Smith              AP Enquiry Team Leader, Finance Service Centre             POL
     Dave King               Senior Technical Security Assurance Manager                POL




    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                          t                                M                                                 M®       M




                                                                                                                                                  m




                                                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                             n




                                                                                                                   o■




                                                                                                                                 m




                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                    m




                                                                                                  n




                                                                                                      m■
                                         r.




                                                      m




                                                              r




                                                                   m!




                                                                              iii
u




                       n.®
     ®!




                  ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00107160
s   w   w        w          w w w w w w w w n                                                                            w   ■~    w          w         w          w         w w w                           w          w          w         w   w   w w w w w w w




         Deloitte.                                                                                                                 Deloitte.
                                                                                                 r ILK"#rwrrl                     We understood thou toy work being undertaken by us In nann4noe with this e,r11011emer,t Inter is
                                                                                                                                  beingundrnakeninrelationtoonoin Itigattonondtor potential futmo idgaticn, and heaveIstiubct
                                                                                                           at.,                   to k- l pnfeuiaullnivilcgr
                                                                                                 1' wit'
                                                                                                                                  In additwa, Liss smaller is s:tict!y o ott,lenlal. stave A permN3ed under Seetwn 4 of o:r tcma of
         SIr Chits Au nrd                                                                                                         beeriness. no oafwntttbn reining to this ossntett odour monk far It wilt be 4octu eel to any l`.id party
         ISvst MGM LW
                                                                                                                                  wklatn mutual wr,`.:ea content
         140 b:J Short
         Leado,                                                                                                                   You have advised us that all corrospondence and all preplrakoy papers (or any report we nnyc' 1 males
         I CI S' NQ
                                                                                                                                  am lolly privtkgcd, as (icy awn bciag prepared in relation to orreott' lit,guJon and linked to doe
                                                                                                                                  provision ofle at odekc Duakleoftiw 6nyrbcmcm Tea^n,aother De:aitm Parttim and csr iaysrs
                                                                                                                                  ovccscary (neon to deliver our work, we will thcre;arc takeaeasonabtr skill and cats W k!cnuly papers,
         9s' Apet 2014                                                                                                            nrctnorattda. cortctpondooce and otter maieiata prepared by us its being "t.cgally Privilcgal and
                                                                                                                                  Conftdeminl'forbear m ulvalent wording) odd that they ore circulated throuti Ro610 Withams, Your
                                                                                                                                  Lltlgsllon Luwycr.
         ikon Sun
                                                                                                                                  2       Our Srrvlm and ralwaslbllltlts
         STRICTLY PitWATG AND CONFIDL'NTLSI.
         PRIVILFDPI/ IN Cfy.'1'ffSll°I.4T0H OF l.WO TH!N                                                                          (a) Our ErgagemenlTrusa
         We ore pkaaod to set out for your sysprovoi tie arrantmrn4 under wSteh ore psr>;nrae to moot Post                        It Is our Intention that Oatr_S Jantea will be the Partner responsible to You for Ilse Stokes deseniest
         Office Ltd ("POL" or ")'aol. We ta..'.ctstand Iha You ere respatd:cg to allentioer that the                              in this Inter, unless othonv8e seed whit You (ants agreement nut to be unrcasarahty wtilhhe)d or
         "Hoban HiCi-X" IT sya cr•.t, used to record tmmactiom In Post Office btanchcs. is Jc(auve End'ur                         delayed). David Nolen, uric Scevko Lino Ladkr wait overall neapors.'h.tay for the xrvtctis we punlde
         that the peecesses cmocluted mi it rem taadcq;ru:o (the "Altp:bna").                                                     to You, until pion be aysdabde as requkod.
         In litter to respond better to the Alkgatioons, You require mrvkce from us, as outlined In pnmgmpt                       Chris Under, a Director within our Oesrrrance oral Contort, teon, will lend tSe dchwry of nor
         2(b) below These arme2emeota snorer out In 11,19 hotter mgrtber with the enclosed Terms cmusiuczv                        Sri-vices to You, to ether wvtth Mack Wcotbrosk aid Minima Iksoonly, bath Senior htaargers. They
         and appendices.                                                                                                          will establish direct working rclatiauhipe with the appropriate peop!o working oil the Client Twin
                                                                                                                                  Gareth, Chris, Mark and Charlotte will be supported by I., Scampion, Partner, who has particular
         So Itot too live shin to usin Vol elTtosvely, plonso metro that You have eomldcmd fully all ofIlia                       eapetlence Ili petfanning north andpreparteg reports under simdsr ebcumstarices, and other tnnnirmn
         tens, rill cotwli!ioos set out or this bill" and Its anc'.amms amt that You ore mhtiied that the mope of                 of our tram nu required.
         our Sorices dewobrd (r!ov is suffwrcot for You needs.
                                                                                                                                  Wo undcrutood that You do not miuira any of our hoot tube ovar4hle to act as a named expert
               Smpe and objroti                                                                                                   witness. Should this be required. we would Went to .gme a acpararo ergagernent Idler for those
                                                                                                                                  Sav'Mes wed (I:.vembtes
         In order to respond bitter In the Alleatmns (w'.`uch have been, and wi:l in r.i Lkcldwod cerrtnue to
         be, edvaxeJ In the courts), You want to de-ae-a'rnte Cat the Iloritoo iISO.X systrtt is robust and                       Ttsgnher they mrnPrisotlte "Eutno crest Testa'
         srtsen:a wok lntcgnty, wrlttn an appropriato corm.,) fnntcwak In response to this,. You hurt closer
         been nulled with en commiasroned is number of inexperakm ashmncc micws into cotton mho tmg                               her the purpose, of thin cnpgcmest, we ors adimd asst the clsert learn of VOL wtl consist of Listcy
         to I toriron I NO•X's apemting nviroiunert nod prouowmo y integrity                                                      Sowell, Chief infaravion Disco, Chris Au;ard, General Counsel. De,uda Crowe, I'mgmmme
                                                                                                                                  Director, Julie George, Head of Infonaiion Security (depmtsins for Lesley Sewcll if absent), turd
         The ptnposc of seek1ng input from Detoi::e LLP (UK) ("llela is"t is to provide. bnsod upon the                           Rodde Williams, Post Office Ltd Ltfiption La ycr, Thu c:iart trot,, will report on this engagemit to
         Infonnshon mode available to its by Yon, nn todependcstty produced summary of the avaratscc and                          Paula Vcnnalh, Chkf [xewdre. We note (tat we mill be Advised of ally future changes to [lie chcnt
         other work utderiakcn, lice your ornrmt Jay Ilor,000i I1i40.X rye:em. he psoonlutksn to ouJ                              team.
         d,xraskri w,:h the I'OL Ilenrd ("Part I work")
                                                                                                                                  Togci!tcrthcy conptiae tiro "Client Team",
         We trnJemimisl Ihot Ilse irpet pmvidod by Cl l:;tte will reform Your dcciaors mtrhng to potenlri
         ems of additoteal work Cat You rally:dcose to rotnmission to respoetd bettor to the Ailed::lees. and                     (b) Service,
         (-atcos ray be wooled in the dchvcry of on radjeloral wok ("Pan 2 work") sound either aCJwagc
         O:Jcr oracpara:e Lunarmeat                                                                                               Port I ofourhervkcs wi:l pmvk:o the (a1how1np:
         You haw o:ked its to proud. he Srnkee nun out. In Sation 2 be:ov And to prrpam the report                                    o    Obtain an undaaandtng of the AIc oi,cns; the key risks in and ir,:emnl consols over the
         dercr,hcd is Section 1(d).(L',e "Purpme")                                                                                         Itotbon IlNG•X preocssltrgetwiuumtrcm relevant to rho lalepi:y of proceosing; the mcaores
                                                                                                                                           in plow to nenonl and preserve the integrity of systcns Audit imils and other background
                                                                                                                                           msttnr that we rosy morn rnmcosary to eeetplete, our I)chwrmSlo.


                                                                                                 rrs,ww.+„e,...wssr,aa                                                                                                      Pay S c/ld



    DRAFT FINDINGS
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POL00107160




       Deloitte.                                                                                                           Deloitte.
          • Obtain an nndcrsticdiag of the key d,fTones between the current Horizon IING-X                                         Tesany of rospoesics to thanuttc eanxms ra ned by other independent reviews
            processing environment, and the system which this replaced (Irate-lo referred to as rho"le~cy
            I lorizen system").                                                                                            n e scope of our crvk cs acid say deliwrab!es will be Ihtilted soieiy to the Services avid Detivenbks
                                                                                                                           set out in this Contract. We wilt mice no teprticototioos in respect of and will not Consider any other
          •    Review. u:idcrstand cod corsokda;e the enreo:pcndma invGhzatioiu, zfi:r,.nev vetivilies and                 aspect.
               eemedintion seders whic.'t You or third ponies have undertaken (see Appendix I for he
               "Sources oft rmstlon known to be wi:htn scope an th& stage) focoss:ng on three primary                      Our wank will be perfasnod thmu;h a curve inatlon of desk based itupeclien of docu:nananon,
               areas:                                                                                                      corroborative engnley and throuri Idol petty provided evk!ence orcoclaet. as arced bctvast You
                                                                                                                           and us.
                       o Work that has been psefo sad to assure the desist and opeolkn of key control
                         eutvttics that created cad preserve the trIe osty of pttscc:si:tg ocroe the Iloricon              (c) Oar rsspoasibililka
                         VING•X enwMnmMt (Lie Audit SCeNy,
                                                                                                                           in performing the Services, we well be re^}Kra.bic fur
                       o Work Cat has been pnforried to sower the daunt anti opcntion of key corarol
                         activities [Fat created and preserve ilia ntegniy of Interfsccs with Cie DYIA thud                    •   uukrttking the precoiuresastxcessxryloprodxoourielivttabiee.rod
                         party systcm end Cs. llorizanlLXG•Xcnvtranment; .
                                                                                                                               •   conlmtieg the factual accuracy ofour report with You.
                       o ltvestirtitons and iretloon that have been taken In responses to the thematic fmdnys of
                         Second Slpfd, as outined in Your supplied deeunent "IOL Stt._tm ray of Seccod Sil{ht              You agree rata! other than a set Out in the Services section above, we will not audit or otherwise tat or
                         anomalies" (sec Appends 1).                                                                       verify the infonnotieei S1ven to us in dta Course, of the Services. in particular, cabin odicrvwo
                                                                                                                           Instructed by You to do so, wo will not perform or rc•peufornt arty itsnetance work that Itas tested and
          •        Hold ihseuaiotu with rdevsot n linen of Your atoll nod other key stakehoklets as prc•                   Cantered on the designs, impkmentatton and operational clfitcdvetxss of any iatenial controls over
                   agreed wit's You, to deliver the work o:iltned above;                                                   ilia Iloricon processtng environment.

          •        Prepare the t)ehvesablc outlined in section 2(d) be!ovv,                                                Our wprk will be (ruled by the date and the informstlou wadable. Whilst we will report out fitxitnks
                                                                                                                           in eceordntee with Its. agreed scope of work having canaiderend die ir.farmation provided to its in the
           a       Attend twicis weekly meertnit or conference calls Willi Your Client Teen, to exptuln our                course of carrying Oct Clio Services, add.ttooal infemtatton that You may regard as relevant stay exist
                   approach, status ofw ark and thecontmentary Within our DvLvtrabk, nod                                   that is not provided to (and thcrofaro not Considered by) us. Aceonhngty, our Dclhonbie(a) And our
                                                                                                                           work should not be baked upon as bctog contpehetulve In such respects. Wo accept no ruoponsibil;ly
           • Carry out say other work required by You which it mrsormbiy incidental to the above.                          for astteri not coveted by or osnhtcd front our lklwenble(s) due to the specific nom ro of our work
                                                                                                                           lrstrttcticas from You.
       You do not require bcloi a to comment on or test the quality of the assurenco work performed, nor
       opine on its adequacy, suffekacy or conclusla s, or the Inttr rRy of the Horizon I lK0•X processing                 In particulu, we nctuVtat. In cettt'n reipeels, we will be [Chant on the Intopity of lime people wltont
       cavirotsyeni (nor the kt xy Hennas system),                                                                         we Interview, and Cwt our ahiloy to everoborate and test what we hive tiers told rosy be limited by die
                                                                                                                           avai!abk htWrnwtion.
       As enbsortent reqatrereents we discussed, clarified and creed tint!ux, we will asC.tne the edtlitoatal
       scope and timetate for such work via the CY.sn, Order process as set out In Appendix 2. Any Part 2                  We shall discuss with You any ditfkultks we encotcroer with eorepkting our work should any
       work Yost regairc is to perf am Will bo err eed ender these Change Order pnxeues. tins may irciudc,                 problems arise.
       but will rant be hrixtl to:
                                                                                                                           You acknow.cdro that You are responsible far atihlishing end matn:air.!ng an effxirvc Menial
          •        Testin,p on data held wfthte the system audit tootls, to resets (far etample) conclusions               control system that rcv!uccs the ltkciihood that error or irrcaa!arittos will occur and amnia
                   previously drown by Fe~itsu i:to the extent of kiawn tkftiiettcien;                                     undc:cctcd; however. it does not claninawc that poniWay. Not.'tiagtzourwvteki saran:resdiscerrors
                                                                                                                           or lrmaulasttks will net occur, tier Is it dash bed to detect any such errors or Irrc etarities shcuid they
          •        Ace ss;rnt and pro(.:rg of system call train, to look for dare t miles of tnd trends in                 occur.
                   unusual behaviours to the sys:caa transactional core-,
                                                                                                                           The scope of our Services and our saponsibiltties will sot involve us in performing the work
           • Lrquiry delta rest tcCtira of tin° natmOS and extent ofunit, systers and user occeptuttec t,-esiag of         necessity far do pugsosu of peoviding. ncinitcr shalt we provide, any assurance on the rcl:abLty,
             the Horizon IINO•X processing environment, during, its tepicrxr:at:on;                                        proper compilation or clerical accuracy of any p:an. budget. pro cettoa or forecast ("prospective
                                                                                                                           financial Infarrnation') not the ressonable"t t of ilia endertyieg atstr.ipitotns. Since any prnspoetrvc
           • Mora dotkd eonsidenttion as to any aspects of the to::mil control environmem which                            financial iuforrtttlon relates lot's. future, it rsy be alfcctcd by unWrraero ncnta Actual rcsu!u ate
             o}xrax over the e.Yrtxt Ilorizo s IlNG•X processing envtrormcr.t which ware not to plower                     likely to be dtffcratt from those prejcctcd because events end cbrcura;aaecs frequently do not occur as
             aporntirg over the kg"ey Horizon lyst:m.                                                                      cspccted.aial those thlTrrcnces may be rtnterial.

           •       Hndmiasd Can Carom and extent or intcrficvs with oltncr thud patty sysVins and test die
                   operating integrity ofdstallows to end fruit content of biome aystoru, and

                                                                                                   P,;,el oflit                                                                                                          'age a ofis




 DRAFT FINDINGS
 STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        62
® ® N          .           S        M ®                 ®         W IM                      Mr r                ® MM   N      ® r                 ®        ®         MM ®                W         ®        MM        ® ■                ■   E   MM ■    ■   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00107160




      Deloitte•                                                                                                   Deloitte.
      (d) Fonirat nul one       11scllcWiitr Ud;vcrabka                                                               •   Matters for Coosideraticn • en esscsso:cnt of Your Aiuranco trip in the eoatcxt of Your
                                                                                                                          objoctitrs and slgriilcaat rtrtterawe have observed during our work that we tecuntnctat You
      'fire fonaa and timing of the reports ((he "1klivcmlkt~') !tined by cs will ho agreed wuti You. The                 consider further.
      coo:eat atsacb ikhvcrabes is expectid to be an caec itvc summary and a written report, as fo.lows:
                                                                                                                  Any Delivesnbin should not be copied, mfdrrd to or quoted In any other party. except In he ««hest of
      Ctccu aro Scnrrtaty                                                                                         Your defence oldie Alkgasiors, at be «soil for any cleat perposo. We dew Your attention to clzuso 5
                                                                                                                  of the enclosed Terra of tl:uinoss that sets out the cotnd,tens under which rho fkhverab!cs wt:i be
          •   A sutntn•.ary of our cl cctkcs, atpreesch. wmk perfaenwel and obtm.rions, se.tah!e for Bound        provided to You.
              presentation and dtscussiat in their ice ttnrg an Ilie 30 Apu120(4 Inetingany key oirytandie
              po;_1ts, it epp!xabte, and suSjcet to the aocucuey of our assumplains and he full roan of           In the escort that You wish to sturu our MI;vembte with third parties, we may consent to such a course
              Your rrspons.tcblicv, below).                                                                       sub cur to us receiv103'hold harmless' cndertakirg (or their equivalent). These praceniurts notify
                                                                                                                  Them tier:
      Wrttcn Repon:
                                                                                                                      •      the disclosure to thorn will not create any duty, hsbttrty or roaporsrlaltty whatsoever to
          •   Introduction-racon1mUn,gtbeconicxtofotunppoictntentantidieScopeorwatkperfurmed.                                there in relation to our fyeliuomble or any of its mincer,;

          •   Our Approach -o itlntirr the pr cederes we have rxoptcil its the delivery el Oar work, thosu            •      the lkliverabio was not prepared fartiteir Site orwith the:r coeds or htteresta in mind. and
              documonis revkwed and ilia Irsiividrats we Savo intcniewed;
                                                                                                                      •      they should keep our Dclivemb!e eoeidentut and not copy or c!ralate ot:r Delivcnbk, or
          •   l.'nxmu nd:ng the ilonfon it\G-X the arising Laviwnreert - hosed on the documentation                          any cxtracla of L'em. to any ehtrd panty Wtttsout our express wr:t:en permission.
              provided to an, provide an evronictr.
                o Rebut} to the Technical process!.:; core rormcr t - enwsa;,ed to be a description of            We understand that You arc unlikely to matte any public annmamneonts which wtt d refer to Cur
                    teelicical milltn of lie Ilctriroa il\G•X system, consisting of, where information Is         work. If this sittusion ellanges however, You ogre. that You will not make any such public
                   p,ovidrd to rs                                                                                 aanounccatcrtl(s) on This inciter steer!:: to fktoitte or air work in any woy without provld:n= prior
                     • key statistics rciidng to tic proccssi-g environrwrt and its range of fnxttona (as         mntficauon of the wording of any public nnnotme ate.^,t to its and without our prior wnucn consent to
                         st:pintail by Fu !tart), mclatlias the dcsigs nod olt<intron of the dtta iecgnty         such wWniin,, such content will entire withheld uroeascetshly.
                         protocols (the Audit 51oro);
                     • key m01 era reacting to its rctwink nru':Ireelure, intcmnl mod ritnur..t irt?edaccs,       3       Ctknt Rerposnibilltles sad Assumpiloaa
                         soi1ivure compononite, hordwaro coo nestle,
                     • key rtutrcn relating to its history, inciu ding Ate umi::g or its implementation, the      (a) Client Reaponaihililles
                         nature of Govoming responsibilities over this pro,,cct and tiro key cnhancctnents
                         that l laizan 11NG-X delivered tea pawl to the legacy l loeinon system; and              in oat notion with the provision of the Services, we refer You to cluuso 3 of the cilcloaal Tempts of
                     • key responiibiitt.a relating to the etamerx operation cf the liorizon IING-X               Business These emRrrt Your resporsibilay far the provision of Information mid dmeision•msking in
                         processing oaviro:tmcnt, including etcage control, tatmty r. anai raent system           connection with the Services we nee to provide. In addttioa, our debvery of the Services is dependent
                         oper:.l.ons (tnetadiag error haadlnrn lrioceelu:cs, fo!Iasvmp n:id tt'.o!:itson), end•   upon Your completion ofilia fal;owine
                         titer seppori read systan recovery. and assonutec tcipoetwbilitks over these key
                         controls.                                                                                •   You acknowledge acid agree that our pcifomtuirco of the Services is dependent on the timely and
                o Relatln3 to the User environment - cavisagcd to be a dcucrnptiac or the cue,,              -a       effective ccntpleiien or Your owns aeiivities std rrponsihditres in ear_neetion worth ttits
                   envinormcnt of the Iloitzon IiXG•X system, tonsuring of. where Lnforratlars Is                     cr:gag,CacM, as well as tirne;y decisions and approvers by You,
                   provided to us
                     + a description oldie types of riots rn the system and lira pSysicat envlron:menu In         •   You agree to making available to us all Information You deem relevant to thin rcvrctw,
                         which Hadaon 11NG.X (s ncccuible,
                     • the types of uorsacdona processed by die system tad. nt a reasonable level, how            •   You aggro to providttu timely access to relevant personnel in order for us to obtain avflldcut
                         the :nlegrity of these transactions is veriticd and preserved;                               Information to Inform our usderstsndin t aaci report,
                     • has more titan daily, weekly, monthly. quartcsly and nncuai recoacihstron
                         processes epeano and bow variances arrdfoe once« era handled.                            •    Intent we urn otherwise insuucted, You ■g:eo to ctrryisg out all contnet with third parties;
                     • the swum of key wwkarcunds and cCior ad hoc proceucs that sec conunoady
                         adapted by asers. aid                                                                    •   You ignite in provkLoip a nonttnated point of costttict force ihrcugliout ttre work
                     • a sirnirary ofilia ea:egutks oldie alleged defecu in l larima IING•X
                                                                                                                  •   You agree to provide a roots for our team and scam stomre faci!itin for pepen ink. if required.
          •   An Atstuxxe hlap • ahow;ng these sources of Yatr eut:ronce which You have ss'rcd with                   nt 148 Old Slorct. .oOdon, and
              us and Lien «scat of key risk re1xtrn3 to the klegeity of praesairg tIui these %"a dessgfad to
              risotto,                                                                                            •   Yotr nree to assess the Ikltverabte we provide to You, to dctorntre the most appropetuincoures
                                                                                                                      of action for You.


                                                                                                Fa,,iSnf18                                                                                                   fcxedrf(8




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL00107160




  •    Deloitte.                                                                                                    Deloitte.
      You ocknowlxge and ngiec that our perfotniance of the Services is dcpendrn on IN timely and                  4     OurCkarxea
      cffxttvo com,!ctici of Your own activttia and rcspo nibilsitcs in connection with this merit,




                                                                                                     c:jr
      as well asdrelyde isbnssadapprovalsby You                                                                    We will base our elearges upon the actual lime and nowiuh incurred, phis out-of pocket capenscs and




                                                              .
                                                                                                                   app!iceblo value added has. The billing ra:cs wo wit apply witch titan of previers speeislrst advisory
      The responsib:htlea set Ott above Anil those conta:ac In close 3 of the Terms of Rftnlroess am               work wiit:h we barn performed for You la 2013.
      taether referred to In this Conlraet as the "Client X"possIbilitles".
                                                                                                                   We estimate that the Pats i work will lake 15 days of senior time to deliver To provide some ccnalnty
      (b)     Aasueplions                                                                                          over our Coos, we w,Il cap our total fee for Part I work at £30,000 (pins VAT ail cue of pocket
                                                                                                                   espouses). Chirac, for work Jesse sitter tt Clus^.ge Order will be based on the rate card below (in
       iie Services, Chaq,-e (as sit nut In Section 4 below) and tie stable am boned upon the following            addition to this fee cats foe the Part I woork), unless otlienvisa aprced.
      asscrrpinoes, reprtsertmiomi and lnformntion supp!rodby You ("Assrmptluns").

      •     )!Militant 1INO X is also knows As IlJri:an Ocino In Your orfanlvti n. We wilt srfe to the                                              Cradle              AdvhcrLltate(hr
            prose s.rg crrwrertnr..t As Marra I(NG•X LSmngiwen out work. 'fine system which liaise                                                  Pattxr                  £610
            lING.X replaced will be refcrsed to as'tlse kFncy lio n systees".                                                                      Diroctar                 £$40
      •     Only main relaterg to the Horizon IING'X ptoccsnlr.a mvia rrncirt will be eonsldered in our                                          Secerbtca er               £430
            renew Wu will not consider any Inf es:ution relating to the kgaey lforiran synwn, with the                                             lNarar^er                £400
            exception eC that necesvy fix us to abtabn an undcrstaodirg of key ouhancemenls that the                                            Scoorcoesult nt             £310
            IWuon I INO.X dolrvemd when it was impkrner.!cd.                                                                                      Cersu:mnt                    Liss
            flelolne will not provide a           or any cthcroplsion at any paint throughout he work.                                              Aral                       £145
      •
                                          legal




      •     Tier sufficient lnfrxrm:tot is available on a timely basis rcguaiing the scope of Services and         If during the course of our work, or Change Order there.miler a need for asclllasy speeialir serviecs
            lkLvcrahlcs for its to he able to easy on our work;                                                    not specified in this Contract Is identified, ogreettunl in their use aid related charcs will be obtined
                                                                                                                   before any experdirato Is Incurred.
      •     That all pertinent infrrmation rcicting to the nstcro of the Allcgstions against You raw been
            provided to os such that tic non fully mince of the debil of the All atloni;                           5     Terms of Uasiacai and Liability Provisions

                                                                                                                   The enclosed Temts of Business form as Emetral part oftho i 1ortraet between us and Your atrcnuon is
      •     Unko o ?etwisu lrnrrntc sl. that DOIObt1 staff will hove no dorm consul with any third parks
            other tins a :scd Fujitsu corcacts that You provide to us;                                             drawn to lion. You spree that for the purpose of elsure 6 of these Tema of Ausiness, our aggrevic
                                                                                                                   liability arlsing (tolls or fn any way In connection with tfte Services shall not vxcecd 4750,000
      • The l:nl,vlduals we may recd to in•.-rvlasv will be avaiLbk to w for sufficient Limo for us to                   Yarlatbas
        perform our work dstlsg the period of war assessment and third piutia can be cebaetcd on it                6
        I:rocly basis by You to request further lefomsaton should this be mquitcd;                                 IC You or we wash to request or recommend any additlees, rsodcfeatlon or other eh ango to the Services
            Dolours will not nenfy or test any lsfamtation provided directly by You, or indirectly by third        or pertbnnsnce required teacher this C«ursel, wt each Agree to fellmv the chargo control pioceddes
      •
                                                                                                                   deterilsed ht Appendix 2.
            parties vin You;

      •     Deloietc will adopt A tires I:uiiied clTroacb to ow work operating to key mdlesrono dates
            dependent on the accuracy of our assumptions and the fulfi!mmt of Your mpcnstbtlitics Above;
            and

      •     fkotno will not review sly eoriracttul provisions In place between You and third parties.

      (c)     Christ earthen

      We undersloadl that Rodrie Williams, LitdSalion Lawyer, will be Your nominated pent of contact nrd
      11551 requcsls for InfumtNon and docurtxrtation sSouW be copied to itrlind:r Cruise.




                                                                                                    Paste a r/ra                                                                                             PPOir/ra




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POL00107160




       Deloitte.                                                                                               Deloitte.
      Aeknowledlentmn and neeeptouce                                                                                                                                                               APPENDIX z
      We opprrelate the epportunRy to be of service to You arid look torar:ud to workbag with You on this     f ncnct?ntry r LertmR DA'I.'k:17 9 AI'411, 2014
      a alpo Wren You r,n be unaurcd that It Will rmcivc our close ancntion                                   SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     if. Favia cons:dored tyro pmits;ott of this Conimne You conclude Itint they ate rcneoneb,c in the        For Pats I work, we will one the following sources of iafarrtuduts which favc been pmvided by You
     coatrxt of all the fx:ors Riming to our propoted n,"po:ntrncrt and You wish to ce age us on Omar
     terms, p',ease let w lure Your written areerne:t In tfksc arsor'r'nents by slaru:g and rctt:miag In to       1.      "Iloruoet Core Aud;t Process" whkh outhecs how ilerizcn ltti'G•X has been dvsi oed to
     the enclosed copy of t.Ns lector                                                                                     opcnto,
                                                                                                                  2.      "Dealt Fact(te" wblob deals with tow POI, team I i riaon H):0-X in cite bunch netwxk,
                                                                                                                  3.      "Dcscrlption of FuJasu's Sys;cm of IT lcfmstructu.-c Services supportirg Post 010cc
     Yours (a:thfc:ly                                                                                                     Lim:lcd's POI.SAP and LINO-X a,plicoticns" which outlines the envlron:nent In tee iirJr
                                                                                                                         Ilorum otcuetcs;
                  GRO                                                                                             4.     'Table of Cto deficiency therics" whfcl otidines arena that underlen sores of the allogwtune
                                                                                                                          that Horizon HNC.X Is deficient;
                                                                                                                  S.       "POL Stare-nary of Second Sig.1t nnomol:es" whfeh It en tatenul POI. sumaury of the
                                                                                                                          arwinatos w,thin Horizon lil(I.X referring to pen's 6.4 to 610 of Second Sighu's July
     DeWitt LLP                                                                                                           2013 Report,
                                                                                                                  6.     Fujitae's response en die "Local Suspcnac" f 14 Branch anomaly;
                                                                                                                  7.     Fujitsu's response on Ito "Receipts Payments"/62 Branch anomaly;
     Post Office Lld agrees to the:eppotalatcat of fleloltle I.1.P on and xutjat to the terms of the              8.      The "Spot Review Hibto", which con!aIns lien ter "Spot Revkws" son to POL and POL's
     Contract art cut tat"_A._._._._._._.-."._,.._._._... ._._._. ._._._._._._._._._._._._._._                           responsce (cf pars 2.1 of Second Sight's July 2013 Report),


                                         GRO
                                                                                                                  9.     Fujitsu's "Hoelz n Data In;e;ptity" doevmcnt, which provides it tesha'acal description of the
                                                                                                                          mcaxrre'u bolt tf:o horizon lING-X to expire into lstefirlty, iocl:dnrg a descripwen of
                                                                                                                         several foilare aceaonos, and tkxriptsons as to bow drone recasurcs ops;y in ace case;
     Signed:
                                                                                                                  t0,     Fujitsu's "Horizon Online Data integrity for Pest Officc Ltd" daetet ncrt. enhech provides a
                                                                                                                         tecbulrol description of tine cxascres that arc bwic into ltorizan H.*IG•X to ensure data
                                                             ~e                                                          integrity end descriptions as to how those mcar ren apply in circle exe;
     Duly a_tlrorrnd for and     -tuif of Pont Offrec Ls                                                          I t.   Current Fujitsu POA 15027001 ecnil'ratien;
                                   J '.                                                                           12.    TheaswcLncdpu;.:suPOAISMSSta: rhntofApptcabiltty;
     Pnn:nfNatac.
                                                                                                                  13.    lieu Post Office Homan PCI DSS ccrt.ficatc;
     pus:tier_                    ~+f'` h < ✓-~-             C Ci"         S-'°1~'                                14.
                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                         The Post OWTico Itorizcc PCI DSS signed AOC,
                                                                                                                         The Post O03co Ilonzeu PCI 055 ROC;
                                                                                                                  16.    Tfie Last 3 published Past Office 1SMFminutcer Wide fujisa; trued
     Die.                         G_.l    f'(_        WJt.                                                        17.    The lam 3 Fujitsti Security Opt Reports
     Ruclwures                                                                                                Additional doctcrcnta nnay be provided by You at pout of our cugagemenc. The full lut of tnfeentauon
     Appendix I - 5aaccs of Information
     Appendix 2 -Clnuage Control Preccelruea                                                                  aourees will be disclotcd in ourL3chvcrable,
     Appendix 3- Tenpla[e Clangs Order
     Appendix 4 • I)elonc LIP Terms of Bttsittest, Corsuhiny and Advisory Sarixu




                                                                                             /'rye f r~r)d                                                                                            Past 10if(s




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00107160




                  Deloitte.                                                                                                                    Deloitte.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        APPENDIX 3
                                                                                                         APPENDIX 2
              F.t.GACV,l%Mvr Ls:rn:n DATED 9 A1IRIL2014
              CHANGE CONTROL PROCEDURES                                                                                                    ENGAGItvitctt7 Lt:rrttt; DATED 9 APRII.2014
                                                                                                                                           CtsANGEOttti *NUntUOR

                                                                                                                                           Data
              t    teat any tiryte enlace peaty wishes to request or recommend any sdtlitlon, Iuotlifecation or oilier
                   ctongc to the Services or perfommnee required wader the Canaries (a "Change"). Cie party
                   prolmmF tine Chmage wi.t submit n written re,o of for the Chongo In "Ctunzc Regent') to the                             <Client Nance and Addras>
                   other pony

              2    All Ctm-rte Requea;s will require the au:horn:..on in writiig by the named person who has                               For the attention of c r
                   signed the Erp-emcnt Letter for and on brhntf of the Client. In the can of ttsirEa Request
                   indented by the CNcntor the D rte dtrnt acreko pannerns speeiliwl in the t.egaicmcrt l.crer                             Derr Sara
                   in the cuc of Gunge It watt lain.od by tktoitte.
                                                                                                                                           This CPano Order (incl:ariing any appendices, izheitalee, aster ansetcttetts), records agreed charges to the
              3    lh:o:tIe will irvcutir:.e the Iatpl cohorts fee the Certaaet of Itnpktrxatirg each Chance
                                                                                                                                           Contract between Delob_e LLP ("Delatan" or "we") and Cat awed a >, as amended by prior netced Cltuac
                   Regiicst, unit prepareatsd submit to the Clicet a prrgosed ChanoeOrt;er, in the fame atlaclird as                       Ottkr(a) or amendmens thereto This CltanVe Onkr consti:utce the esatiro utu:erstandin0 and ofrcesarnt
                   Append: ix 7, in empeci of such pWnen Request. If in a t citya judgcrtacnt, the lime to cvaleale
                   and reopened to me or more Change Requcant, because of their magnitudes c ,ipteraity or                                 between the Client and Deio;nc with respect to the ehangcs sat out In this document, satwiscda all prove prat
                   frequency, troy result in a delay In Ilia Services, lint puny will netily the other petty. The                          and written conlmutatcalions with respect to such changes (includrtp, but not limited to Choopo Ragacss), and
                   poetics will Ilion need to agree an nap opriate coarse of action.                                                       may only be emended in nKllhip. signed by nutaorsed repecsantatives ofbeth portico.
                                                                                                                                           The ncntion(s) of the Frgagement Letter set forth below (and any curlier Char c Orders) or amerid:acets
              4    The Client well notify Detain In writing of its decision as to whether or not It whtias to
                   ir..p`er went Vie proposed Ckango as sitar as teatanably M. etkabto but Ii any event no nice thin                       thereto) isloru hereby ascended. eftcctiw as of(offcctive dxo of chanycs). by die following taut
                   5 days (or such oilier period o teed by the parties) alter receipt of the Cho Order aubmined
                                                                                                                                           I      Scope and objectives
                                                                                                ua




                   by Delui", Should the parties wrs,'t to proceed wi:S the proptaaed Change. the Clrao a Dedar
                   shall be sipped by the Hamad person who has st;ned the Ln1::a$emrat Letter for and on behalf of
                   the Cleat and the clem tervfeo panties, or otter aaaheOlsed tepreucntntiws (such sipted                                 2      Onr Servkes and rrspaulbililirs
                   document bei refesreet tons a "Ckaage Order.
                                  w




              5    Nc.ihcr party is obliged to proceed witti any proposal Chan c (and the Mated cbanml) and no                                    Client Reapoasibilitles mind Assamplbna
                   Change (nod reta ed changes) will be effective rail enforceable aga'est a potty, rake and until a                       3
                   Chan a Omer for flint Change Is ai8ned on behalf of both parties. Until the Chanty Omer tot
                   arty proposed Cfane is signed. Dclohto wil I eoertinae to perforrn and be paid for the Services as
                   itthe Change heal Itot been psoposeil.                                                                                  4      OarChargcs

              6    Dcioitte Will be entitled w cluuee for all ecwsorsbie coon and espouses lrac neii In connection
                                                                                                                                           5      Coaaegricntlnl changes to the Contract
                   with inresttriting the irapitcotinn of a Change Itcgrat. whccia er not a Change               Is
                                                                                                                   Order




                   slbacd in reepeet afsaclt Chaa:e Request.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 12.1Is
                                                                                                           Pair it r/18




     DRAFT FINDINGS
     STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL, SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         66
■I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ■
                                                                                                                                                  ■




                                                                                                                                                                      ■




                                                                                                                                                                             ■




                                                                                                                                                                                      ■




                                                                                                                                                                                               ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ■
                                                                                                                                       ■




                                                                                                                                                           ■
                                                                                        ■




                                                                                                               ■




                                                                                                                           m




                                                                                                                               ■




                                                                                                                                   ■
     ■




          ■




                     ■




                                        ■




                                                  ■




                                                           ■




                                                                     ■




                                                                               ■




                                                                                                     ■
                              ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00107160




                                                                                                                                                           r•      ~         xS         w                                z_:.
                                                                                                                                       ..       Q.         ,~--    ':3       ~          '~     "' ~                ~   6 is +',j•
                                                                                                                                                                   G                                                         ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k




                                                                                                                                                                   is                                                   L    F     Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q     !t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L     Q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            58

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v     ~




                  iI£e'r xIy~al, r:                               Es 3fi                            ^        Ai^:               v                                        `fir ~_ _
                                                                                                                                                  : ;;4g
                                                  q                ;                                                                  -E
                                                                                                                  ~~E~                                            ER g


                                                                  IIiIit'?1h:n
                                                      .                                                 S ;~


             #a                                                                                         E    c is'         gtIE             _                                       &3I               !!                                rw;


                                                                  flhi!Illi t1:
                                                                                                                                                  I-              $
                      $         ~ as Er£                                                                    jF             E


                 sl;y$"                      I                                                               ;
                           ig€               ¢                    R R              *            ~~i!j
                                                                                                   I         r                        aI                                 y                             r               onrt
                     9 ggg E,~
                  a                                                                             }                                                                             S 'y




                                                                       £      v                                                                                                                        +~
     try                        e                                                      #        irtn   Rp t., f il                          c                                                                          4 J
                                                                                                  ° s~ ~ r 27
     r
     i
                      t
                      a
                          yy
                               73 'Y® F.3
                               s~.    ~`4
                                             %`
                                    E egg g gagd
                                                      s
                                                      x
                                                              z        '~
                                                                            °r

                                                                            _g s
                                                                                           1"   It~d1    '~
                                                                                                                   'S
                                                                                                              ~t A SS
                                                                                                                                "~          €$
                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                     ~3
                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                   ;,~
                                                                                                                                                                     rS
                                                                                                                                                                                    T                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sf+9

     3                                                             t                                                                            `'I°                                c
                      i                                                            'i a¢ ys                  rag a         ~^
                                                                                                                                                                      ~~ly
                                                                                                                                                                                             #         ^                    -
     R       Sa
                                g                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                x x               a X 211
                                                                                                                    ['~     e z

             I                                            p                   a E s E ~V                     y      i¢
                                                                                                                    Mj.     (   i      R          te `-           p h i a~ g~'               s ff
         8
                      4 f r,
                      ~Hg                8—
                                                                       µ :C                                         y■
                                                                                                                       y
                                                                                                                 ~~Ax$^T         e
                                                                                                                                .te   vT          ffi~ S          aw FrG
                                                                                                                                                                                    4
         -3           a n                y                         M                       efi              U T                                                               999                9e                               s+"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7




                                                                                                                                                                   3         - 1




C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00107160




                                                                !•
                                                                              _6                        z.                               -`          b£a                      L
                                                                         °
                                                                                                                                                     x
                               3                                    '~ ~ 'R!E$$+~3
                  a ~~_
                                        '~ A~~~       g~ ~
              r                k            e~         R !             s~      €_                                                                    l
                                                                                              I1        i                                           Es `
                                                                                                                !flIIB


                               '
                  . r                                                                                                                                            R                                 $        R


                          -    u-                                                              ,.
                       3 &                     ;      a .~                            x        aRr              3T


                          aF                   x ==                  ~        €gar = - c                                     .                                                    g
              y~~'~L~g~P~~                   ~~ > ~x~ ■        r+~a a^,°~s ~,~y^ =~            6 ~          ~        ~
                                   3x                                    7                                                       M             x
                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                2' R s         xa       k11                           ~                       Tiat            z                        sTs~

                                               ! `s                                                >a

                              Hi                                                      q
               2 R ;°1 a                                                                                                                                                                                psi
                       9"                    ;~  a               llrfR                            i ~ t Ys                                                  s7~T ° R~`!
              .vs~c~3 r`                     z 1~R              `ixr$Aa                        s,3R   2 $                        s~ lass                    aasR. .av sR                                7`ss




                                                                         g3-12 '    RI1                              9r    *®                                Y 1           "s ue R t'(a
                                                                                 t                                                                                 s
                  xam>
                       d, n                 a . 2r
                                             f a                r         a 2      s F"2x3c                          Re s
                                                                                                                                                           kx x i    _4zg̀ °
                  :~                                           Ax        ':1n aa;fi                                   R   s                                                             fD
                     } !                       k B                       ga ~;                                              "                                d es z n k€ITT
                                                                             7


®                 ug                   3Qy i~rti;r              R!        j    °-,i   ~s            r                            $w           RJ~               e x$p   F~                ~             d   g



                                                                    a & -2I E .4                                         Y           -
                                    gk~                        F                                                                     s                      ~        `ys:
                  €'gym
                   a               Ei4"                           a
                                                   z~~         3'R       z 1 , ~d                                                a c "                                   a        !           a             s
                                                                                                   ~~




■
                                                        T1F                                                                      r
                                                                         ~€ a s                    s D 6 9,E
                                                                                                          7g                             R €                                 —a               u r rl
                ^              ~YpAn~                    1                  su                                                                           p~ Sgt                       i         gis
              fg                                                         ~F                                                                                              `$
                                                   ~c
                                                                                               :5$eS                             °                                                            -
                                                         z x        S.Fr    °d   c~                   to                                      ck         r tt a ,r
                                                                                                                                                                r ~a t                            11.
                                                                    `. q ~ ~- a q_tr           -''4r~                                                      '"T_    Rz ~                       } a iK

                                                                                      y                                                                                                       pY



                  g       44       E                                                      ,
                                                     Ta '     x                       R             s           ~                              R         •6              sa ~s;                   9 ~R
         :i   TE               c £Z                  k F R Ri                             F
                                                                                      -

                       °3 f:xsrs r                   I..x axTl~ak              tis    sk            $RE-                 E                     A           e r           s s#                      R
I

p

■
    00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POLOO107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00107160




         i • ,',~             1 444
          li.Px Pry 490104 .44434<4.401 ,x174** 14104'¢11,101
                                                          4     of       uvwgtha '.' All ea: C.4irKx,F+.l lc,cl L,kr NI ta,.,141E+1
                                                                                                                                                     Deoitte,
                                                                                                                                               044,4**. 040 ,14 404.         „)   M hat 4913 41, 49.4 90314       1'w*r K.1*x4r
          !l'ffi4'➢dravy at04. 0:.4.44[ pc>.r 44 4>1k'. 5* 040 cx         4(alwa.r n tF t.4(9414.H Lentz, rx k,s 40.7 M .road Il rtc                                                                              93 ~Nee_"~xr d r YnD k G.1k 9.1 0449 090414 a 42ar43 r
          0x4.0 a/n[y`neti r 491W' 0.10 91004 90 140                     Yenta.we L-        m.k.,:x.w.. td."         1Y.aaay..*4 we                                                                                          411    0l'4W141 4010 k1,9* N .,\wlt..eKa.
                                                                         112 M 7.•, 134+4 14.441 Yr1 *0110149 Cry M14.4N N 411:/ a 4.l         1nd .41.11.. 'Sp4a.t                                               41440a. *.a" >40340401
 1>24     0,104>401 1141104 at M4*m. 4*40         lkl 0 -ct              44..440                                                               zk 34.8.3.9011* C.4.ra( 444140:449 94* msagN.h arau
          Utl (144 alPg .MM (1044.0. 0         .,034, 4.41r 440aM
          449 0(903.14 b Y. *94, 00 0x14 49 4+R03 4010.494>03                    A 9 4.440 4twa4r 444 x41 x 4 1104 Gm ant an.ap4
                                                                                                                                                    4 440.31 e. a'>4,  W 4041'} 1C 9     904,1 tx 4.49.4<4.03,9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  64.4.404 fax anJ Jr,w1rN..
                                                                                                                                               404.1144* 31 4.7 90.4411140043
                                                                                                                                                                          043 N *C4.' 1.4<, .t 1031 40131a49
          l.4a 41744 4•a7 loon to. 1 .44 a/w11xF9'?x 03.441.49.40        .1Nr 44474y414Jk!1r.*14440 p44404WK4t.,4044 w                         (9494<4®94>4174.4109.4x.®.ay,; 1'. pa0441a 414           .x.       41 1140RraMWvWa 4. a4. 9.49LcN4*11N.rutl 4W
          01.4444 M*L I-"          44311419. "Ywrtk'^,r A kt             4,aaw 0344.0, '. 4.. Sa.4a . 94 0404 40414.44. 7049, x49 .U.          4 , 4: 9144*. 4440107..                                                 0.4,440 ,a ) a .a4 ,0490,x. 40143 .W at 494 10144<4
          ..4.0404003.04 GSMN 1iv fl y* .t1100314,. 0443                 ,.a.rbk 404 o.,   r    Ax ant 7wpk ..tax03 '1®410. ...044 a a                                                                            O.kO) ar aw.aa4 47 L.Ga4 Sx ..t qM 9.44314 •9 La4104. 4044
          b. 9.44443 45120040.10141! x.40 ..4Ka<:.4'.4[':09 r 4910.         1 444 .,r.. or1...0x0 ,.,.8 (,,,:t.., 44.Ia:M 4+41,4                                                                                  Wt..4`.t2bxw.04.40+4 N44w14«w N4..h rY41.444 040491
          Pxp444* Gr. w, .1 m 4440x.4 x'402.4 haw,                       141410 W a41.Y1pWl nntcx4 phaaac+q)Srop W *aY.,wrB 6.:048441                                                                             rao k ,.nara.lot, A. C 44.49 0494 ot. 044**444. 11.310444
          4/45(07•,L1441,2e49baxanJMy44N'44,                             .-M90:44°1**. (a 441xU4x1c>•.++t+a:.xken                                                                                                 4(9 MWa,*1 W x404a41xFu1,14'a a4ldi      i,,ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i    R314 al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ait04a0l414114
111       403..144040 NnWWM+bale tl40at44 001:'14 '14!,1, , (10          74 L.,.nrl'.*,.9*11b4k 14. 7a,a;aax4(ala>1, 9. I
          )41141%N 111 tlY .40.... 4.2 M.. 1111 1>I04/ 10 414            .4,0.1>, ow 1')494 .axo11y IS 0,40, *91 * 7.01 Wrla 4
          I9.r6,..m,t.a744ppWn.r4b949r. am.a4a 144 pfa                   .ro4001414T„ 4914.1 '44,1* 111004 40w141* 4,.   14.
                                                                                                                        44 4.4(403314
          M10wfx.rY 1001                                9 rI110'< ,
                                     4.4"74(4 MI 401.ISi9                03144999,4>14.9(34<4974 9. qtr* 441.* Na.0, k44 M 404.^119.1
             an4* Ill., 1a14. ,law. <a 4:91. . ad. t144 01' 4405                      041411414.. 4.19.040303,49rsYKI.994101IlRof
          a„11wv'lav,wrl M 1440 b 0.x46 R n a. 3049.01           C,.     30.4490 9,90 640« Saw
          1'TM'J 9.n 01 2. 4449401x4 a a < 404 ry.,znmcd I. Nro
          P4x*5*Wrr n,,,rr..rnmy 4444                                    1$ 100 on] i,4 nrflW b>tdrr.4 K! e#wgw »1wnd a '. Al Jt4
                                                                         111®fn 41Ita01ta414vYKS 14 a, Po44x
42 1      1e 410 4s.e1 S.A.41 .4 4 10444 4 3104,    474(404
          01142. 9.4 lac11*z..41494* 19.1940, 1407l041 as                Il     lU1.99INA11144
          .044.4. tae ., x... n 4..x.;.49 1.0..144.4.4* 4       04044.
                                                                                1194 491'1 -1 k014.1 ISk [04043 01044 .40.44 r f.0
          9.x31 <1444. 11) 1x0 at 914. 01441 bee-                        II
          K17o41.4q W ...-           d as *4, 1011 of *44.14499.1 904    1444 (*4(54<15441...... l 4 x161401.9 4041047 (9Ro'1',4.49
          G%A 1.1> 09*1.4 a4. •xtXll a,a,to.* W 11..?1xxN                atla I     11a,Ad of k, 30.:94x0 44 14411017. 1L4W 01 W .4447
          9..1 41*11ke41..9,W, pa1114Y. 41.04'+444. 44014041 31            11,1444 4444 Ca4141 w, ary law a. 10447<0.1<1.1100419.. 3149.
          mx,4<ntt4110414.1100311 I>QY-1e,.4.1e1>44 79.11(7              41141
          x14 AI. try.4/a,                  ee 3aw4 of IMtF. W Al
          103<11.410 4,0<sl. W ,1LN
                                 ),;`J K,
                                       IX` Nn•S 11x44 LMI IhS 1'4:44;    12     9)0044 811 K81dtt .1100 90^7 91149 0104 1 11140141 M.h
          1.4.4,.. xa,I4 N 414r1YN 1>..,Rad                                    n, M . px>♦rwbxll 403P:9., 0109.41 OK:w 11149 , 2. .11<.,
                                                                         p10k iSl0I 44,04..49040.4,7 10.1.4 14.11.440<99,40>4,44.4(9 <ii
&] 41$Aa1,KK.N.Ow, al a.fr,*,tl y4*y a 1911 700*449k                     31401140 r4Yik., 44141! 40J9W 110 C.rx.K! 4119914 pa4:Y 0,
0.40339.t 4(a. (74 ,10. P4119 WH'10,1 190 (44 *17 LMn1119444947          w,Aa. a1.t 11141HI147.4.5.4<444311103 004040414 p44.44111,L
1007 axSor (9444. *110944 47 1111 4 ttl OIAw 7x1001 ,a. It               at y 0.444144101 4<44441401444 4141.44x40.100.404 11*444 a
4w:a03,:14 a4( 91k:..il,44. N wra44.                                     poo0.441 014/034.49.0% *44;4 0,1411 krwra3Y. a 14044400
                                                                         n 114 00,4..0 12
♦ a 04041,9 M C`w 7*.,., .5,:1 cce:.d, r0xul (N 94444 a
*tor 10414 4x.414 xt x0)(41413 say 9041101.31 talW4trar hw4 a            1.7 4404409014* of ®4 (rain .10011 4144 1 .4444(7. 4, W
 ,°19 (x401410 101104oMa4 4l019 1414404 w.a0>wl4d.                       441, racy, 4.4.04. 4,7..1 Rea a.s7 r Mrxrall0r, r,t 1901:4,04001
                                                                          1411.40 11401141V.I*4. N 44x1404410
43 LAR.0 oat (a,.a17 a A. c9.4R.7 141< 434111*1444
A.:16ACY&Xt  4014., 4034:04Qp 4at01o4* 0(9094(040 10 1 e.09              7     (.I:N4I31OI,)49444L` IIV 11/717494
84..1.a.0x1b, WK 904 aS my oS 14. 90*4 04* 634.90., 9,49 x ,a 1
.FNa14'Y W 1143 44*1* Cva 40110 Canes 441..1[ 41 L.K.                    0,.d41,(9314901
,49a1, 0., 44'x1 W t. 4441,449 4H avd:0eaant 1414*4*1 *9r4.047           99 :1 4 4( y caw 74.14.5114141040399104<)3115419.14<
9,c74la 10100        4Mw14a(4144903<x} 11001.x401,444194148              40(40404. a (4(4.., 44„41144x4 4.4.4 *441170(1 <64W 44.1<31
N 94.040904 0 '0.110`0') *11.11,44'y 407 431) ply 4. 4'44 •'A9           1*44a.411a1:491011..03 <141441491114114,(a4.41111 9,u116a4
r1%*(44 31.,o,ca1. n:`.. A. Ca1.41.e'3to.x n. 494! Clam 4                4, 40144 '. 34* 111,4 ,.0014Iw4> N 6.4440 44310>1044.4104
!401FJstl x;40 .4 a114..441N a4 aeLCr=n:cs                               .14103.. 441.4 4944 04111 (Ia401 7914940.4511>4.504 • 03.039444444,
                                                                         490010 4914 N 4.049* M (49.1>404(11>0.4. 474 ( Y M,(449 (114491,
It     41741.,10wa.a41..914474040.14.,1110,40+31031144                   114144 M 14,110
1144 C.a4*4l   { 4444.41>. Nlr (NnC4a111d aaawa(4tw4
N444e                                                                    91 101 all ..4.4.10401.444.44 7,4/A.. A[ *494 W .4414
                                                                         -x.0, 7.04 4, 04944149410310.((744x01 *a.*n                   44
        24491.9411+                                                      4.0}.43.x1WA., 1,43. 4747445 (14.14] x14.4       4.14$I1l414  4f
                                                                         14 ax.Sad.Wer 01.4.4.9,14>44444441<014 aa, t as r QA lC11'W
  I    #,a.49210300. 4a,0wa40 40(1<4 at C,4 44r10 x.41)                   l 10>174417.4,T4/'70:090791 M 41, 4.1.445 31 194 I('.AI'W TI
4. km. V09.75*411 a4.40r. 043 x, .b40143tt of I94'141.414.               9.44444(10491444710.414>41(3.4 ro ,4wN17404'.,1,'1.017,04. 14109
1014-aevcac,. s.1 at....,, 9414 ,ga, ,4.k Dart -4.4.1 9447               I, 190404      P4w'.III A114aT1k*a,o4. N:M, 049x.4.4C419
4)0_t701 Wl 1[10,(11`74     f`4:a w: hen 0:0408003. 019. W               10.9
,41.614.. a, a. r 14 Lve4.... a..,   4 . 1 k . 404
*4:4:440 M I% 1 044 a 440 I1M x41 Mal *(1.7 444.lod I.                   44t5*lay4> '01144401,
..*.4 151 Sma1. 044,9 *44(1,40.4*,         44. ( 40INMt 017              91 W9.410(at 134axxx1J1k114.444Jhk440144.0, rY
41>. b 4444 0040 101064.. 44.14.2.19 0.1a IM *( 111 (9.9"4.x407          409114 311*14 4140349 M 4 3 N 44,4<1>1144.0% 410 C4*10.
44.1.`... rc14a4v' 4090 14.. 100 9* .md 4. aY 4,pa,7 .af                 911114741 I99ath 11* 40.4.'.,       7414x0440.6111104W4(r
u.4.1,.ady a orwd4 .a,1 .490. 1000 w 114. 4>9(4404,                      03034044441 t(03.014<3041.4014.10404449444314. 447ner4a 440,
<*941.e703 aetx:/ 149140001140.x40444104 /441(;4*la                      7,90[ 4. 49.4a15r.44xxa.44414 (1.44.4a;r, 4x.1:400.. 310 4
            4: .4.16 04 ax 049 .r.a al 4.4 5.4,04 404 4.444.             W 91190 14.9 M .4*1a n. 05.4 4449541* I) 70944'4w44 4. 4*     1
.47.9.10,1 410/ 014 3014 IN ,44a.414, .494. n 2. ,W. n                   Aia..449 {417x40
                                                                                        1    9.40, 4104 (,073!3 4914.404.11 04411 41 t
. a.8,,ax9.910ww1l•,Na..l(0444n                                          04744*4 440414.     1 4> . xlara..014 r r 044 t4, Co*. 0.
                                                                         f=,4x. 144140.4119040, 4141.      00411 IIN ,x 014 •.40441 Yy
71 10x741xxx1.0.9K 41           *5,414. Qr3Nra .14 4,                    r .449. p*44n x0411 43 440 .11 .44 4x03.43449 4444
44449 4414 44044,.410 M 41. 4.009 404414,3, al.s 4..141 N 0,y


                                                                                                                        P:ry 874.41.9                                                                                                                      f'1710 48 (411
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POL00107160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00107160




 Appendix 5: Change Order 01


                                                                                     Deloitte.                                                                                                         Deloitte.
      F'.No•,ArV611 n'f Lt n'EN DATKI) 09 APA1L 2014                                                                /rvmtdnn Arrrr 2r
      CIIANCE ORpt:R NUAIRSIt 01 (VE1lSION 2)
                                                                                                                    Dnlohtlo will review further docutncntntion to6tiag to the specific design ksurea of the processing
      06 t4sy 2014                                                                                                  envinenencnt which are aiserled to be in pier: to tatderpin two key ob ecllvcs.

     htrClrisAevd                                                                                                       I. Rhat sub•post masters have toll ovwenhrp and vixibitky ofald words In thek Rranclt ledem
     Ibsl OCec lid
      143 oldstted                                                                                                      2 That she hoard, kdgerrccolds are kept by the systemwkh heeegrkyand fe't add trait.
      Landon
      ECI V 91IQ                                                                                                    Dclodte will produce a achcduk of these specific design features, identified only t1uou0Jr tksktop
                                                                                                                    rodent of docontentation provided by Post Oleo, and urn this to aness whether the existence otthe
                                                                                                                    specific tfesign reamto las been tested anV'or noire,!. Delohtt, will comment en the 2 point above in
      fa tie attention ofCItM Au)nrd
                                                                                                                    Il ls context.

      L'~F3tl+                                                                                                      Dcloiuo will not comment on the quality of docnncntallon and will not perfonn any lmpletttcnlelion
                                                                                                                    or operating effectiveness testing.
     'lds Change Order (inetuding any appea lcei, schedukt, atdlor anachmems), records ogrced ehargcs
     to the Cot..ract between Deloitte Ll.d' C'Dcloiue" or' w and Into OWK* Ltd ("MN." or "Yorf) dated              Debdtids work, still based on desktop review pmecdure, will site Include:
     09 Apnl, 2014, As ainc drd by prior agreed Clerge Ordcr(t) or nnicldmetn thereto, hilt Change
     Order tonttkutes the entne unknlanding and ngrcctnatk bowecn the Client and Dabble with respect                    • Cotmbort[on with an oplcoprwie 1);bkte speck rat to rotate etc Atoll Store's tunper proof
     to the ttong ycs Oct out in this tbxornerg, supersedes all prix nil and wwitten mmuuaicottons wish                   tnoehanlsms.
     rcnlsect to tech damgcs (inel eluig. but lot limktnl to Change Rnpsctta), and may only be sainted In               • Undef,t nding key Itittuorio changes In order to assess If key everts which could late impactrt
     txkiny, e;tned by nadorited represeninivn of hnth pa.ikv.                                                            the tonnel design fatimes above.
                                                                                                                        • Highlighting those tksica fakracs wdttnc tumor Implennenlalion or operating effeciivenns
     The xeetion(s) of tie Cngagenent Letter Let forth below, are Irxby atn I aietd, elfcodt'e as of 06 May                te•.tfng ahoold be eotnldered by trot, to provide funkier asstaanee totht Ovard.
     2014, by to rolbtvng Icon
                                                                                                                    ❑ebille toil hnegmto n deacrlpfron of our apptu ich. findings and reeomntetdnliom (coin this wotk
     I     1'no)re1 xeopo mail nbjr elirtn                                                                          Into our del,erable.

     Your pmjeet scope and objtetises remain as previously deanibed within our engagesttent kutr l ied              In addition to the obove areas of addklonal service, Daiitic will support the delivery of onguing
     09 Apr12014.                                                                                                   project update meetings with 601 atakcltuklcrs prepena a lfarad U x'a:a doeunaM (marked an Ural))
                                                                                                                    oxatc,oseofnurworkonlIto Ttk'stoy 13a Mop 2014 adtrlday 16 Mny2014.
     2    One tcrvlees and rrxpomi'uitillrx
                                                                                                                    4    Oar Chartres
     Our services within 2(b) of our cvi6r,l deed 09 April 2014 will be amended In Ieels,!; the Itvn
     fofowh g extension areatr                                                                                      Our dote ehergeo for this adJkional wotk will be ckuocr on a t:bto and asterisk based. in hoe with
                                                                                                                    The rote card flown in ouroriginsl fngngcntonl triter.
     Cerrn.4.n 4rot It
                                                                                                                    5    Cvastyuanllni change to the Contmtt
     Deakte will wMinacio review furiherstpphed dotuntenlaton reI.ting to the 2010 impkrnertl.tiurt of
     IINO.X and other key pre oci doeutnentolion supplied by POL, In oiler to cotnrpare the nature and              i'.necpt os exptesnly nodlfted Iterehn. All other terms and conditions of tle Contract remain unehangtid.
     exlcnr of pre)cct govtrranee and documentation with the Debbie mnhrodoloL7.'the asnesotem will
     Inelutk n review ofdtncumtnts drat outline If and how tmntanlional branch dntrfbws mat Audit Store             tektite indicate your agwlnenl to Ito teems of Lilo Change Onlcr by algniag rid ttturning m fkkrkle
     festuresofthc synerowere impacted by the impieencntntion..                                                     the enclosed copy ofthit Change Order.

     In addition Deloitto will ascot docsteentntion relating to signsnffof business eoquiremcnls as well an
     the pmject'x Iestklg Dmtoi,ks and testirts auuraniu pmvhion
     Doloitte will ituefate a deterndon of our approach, Radieps and reconnmldations gum this work
     lotto oar de.nembte.



     02.b4.LLa                                                                                                      otkawatta




 DRAFT FINDINGS
 STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
® ® ® ® M ® ® IN                                                     e          ■          M .                r   M ■           ■        ■           M ■                  ■          ■           r         ■          ■         ■   ■   ■   ■   M ■   ® ■    0   M
                                                                                                                               POLOO107160
                                                                                                                            POL00107160
R   ■I   a      a r               ~a =•                          m 0   0   m 0   0   r   m r ■ m m M   0   w m ■ ■~ ■ 0■■    w a ■

                                                                            Deloftte

         'GRO
             Gnreth Jnnlcs
             Pinner
             Deioitte LLP

             Agrocd by Past Or                     O         R   O



             Vor rind on behalf of Poxt t)Ilice I.i titcd:

             PrintcdMtme;           C4cR11s
                                             ..

                                    SSiSSS
                                                  y ry
             bate:                                       il'7




             OD ctoUP
    STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                71
                                                                                                                        POLOO107160
                                                                                                                      POLOO107160




Statement of Responsibility

We take responsibility for this report which is prepared on the basis of the limitations set out below. The matters
raised in this report are only those which came to our attention during the course of our work and are not
necessarily a comprehensive statement of all the weaknesses that may exist or all improvements that might be
made. Any recommendations made for improvements should be assessed by you for their full impact before they
are implemented.


Deloitte LLP
London
May 20x4
In this document references to Deloitte are references to Deloitte LLP. Deloitte LLP is the United Kingdom
member firm of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited ("DTTL"), a UK private company limited by guarantee, whose
member firms are legally separate and independent entities. Please see www.deloitte.co.uktabout for a detailed
description of the legal structure of DTTL and its member firms.


O 2014 Deloitte LLP. All rights reserved.


Deloitte LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number 00303675
and its registered office at 2 New Street Square, London EC4A 3BZ, United Kingdom.


STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
