                                                                 POL00038853
                                                               POL00038853




                           CONFIDENTIAL




                                                   r
                                                       s l




    •              •"


1       Overview


                   Head of                  Head of Security
                   Security                 Operations
                   Operations

                   0.2                    129th August 2013




                   Annually or
                   major change




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                       1
                                                                     POL00038853
                                                                   POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL




                                                            Page

       Case Progression Flow Chart                            3
1      Glossary of Terms                                      4
2      Purpose and Statement                                  5
3      Background                                             5
4      Scope                                                  5
5      Key Activities                                         6
5.1    Case Raised                                            6
5.2    Event Log                                              8
5.3    Supervision of Investigation                           8
5.4    Investigation                                          8
5.5    Enquiry Type                                          10
5.6    Interview Framework and Timescales                    10
5.7    Evidence                                              11
5.8    Background Checks                                     12
5.9    Planned Order Risk Assessment                         15
5.10   Interview                                             15
5.11   Searches                                              17
5.12   Notebook                                              18
5.13   Post Interview                                        18
5.14   Interview Notes                                       19
5.15   Statements                                            19
5.16   Business Failings                                     20
5.17   File Construction                                     20
5.18   File Submission                                       21
5.19   Summons                                               23
5.20   Committal                                             24
5.21   Case Closed                                           25
6      Conclusion                                            25
7      Compliance                                            26




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                           2
                                       POL00038853
                                     POL00038853



                 CONFIDENTIAL

                                     POST




                          YES




Further
                                NO




Further                         NO




Further Action
                                                              POL00038853
                                                            POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL




   Glossary of Terms

 AEI      Application Enrolment Identity
 AS       Arrest Summons
 ATM      Automated Teller Machine
 CCTV     Close Circuit Television
 DPA      Designated Prosecution Authority
 DVLA     Department of Vehicle Licencing
 DWP      Department of Working Pensions
 ECF      Event Capture Form
 FES      Financial Evaluation Summary
 FI       Financial Investigator
 HP       Hewlett Packard
 H&S      Health and Safety
 HSH      Horizon System Helpdesk
 NBSC     Network Business Support Centre
 NFSP     National Federation of Sub Postmasters
 NBA      Non Police Authority
 PACE     Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
 PAH      Primary Account Holder
 PEACE    Planning, Engage and Explain, Account,
          Challenge, Evaluation
 PNC      Police National Computer
 POCA     Post Office Card Account
 POL      Post Office LTD
 POLCT    Post Office Legal and Compliance Team
 PORA     Planned Operation Risk Assessment
 Seccps   Security Operations
 SPMR     Sub Postmaster
 TO       Transaction Correction




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL




2.1 This document been prepared as part of the case file
    review and is intended to support Security Managers
    from the commencement through to the conclusion of the
    investigation. Incorporated within this document is
    policy, comprehensive guidance of the process along
    with key points to consider at various stages of the
    investigation.

2.2 Properly conducted investigations form a key part in
    our strategy in protecting assets and reducing loss. If
    poorly managed, an investigation can lead to increased
    risk of future loss and significant damage to the
    corporate brand. In commencing any investigation we
    need to consider the impact in terms of the protection
    of business assets and limiting potential liabilities
    weighing against the reputation of the organisation or
    damage to the brand should the investigation fail.

2.3 With the stakes so high, the department must be seen,
    internally as well as externally to be acting fairly,
    appropriately and within the law. The investigation
    needs to be properly conducted to establish evidence
    that will support a successful criminal prosecution.




3.1 Post Office Security is almost unique in that unlike
    other commercial organisations we are a non-police
    prosecuting agency and are therefore subjected to the
    Codes of Practice and statutory requirements of the
    Police and Criminal Evidence Act.


3.2 There is another anomaly that sets us aside from other
    commercial investigators. Of our 11,800 branches, only
    370 are currently staffed by employees of the Post
    Office. In the majority of cases branches are either
    Franchisees or Agents who receive remuneration. As
    neither is deemed to be employees of the Post Office,
    the usual practices and procedures of an employer
    employee investigation do not apply.

4   Scope


4.1 The scope includes the operational conduct of criminal
    investigations  as  directed  by  current  prosecution
    policy, and extends to include any other investigative

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      5
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                        CONFIDENTIAL


    support as required by other internal stakeholders
    within Post Office Ltd and law enforcement.




5.1 Prior to commencing an investigation the Security
    Manager will have to consider

   •  The seriousness of the allegation
   •  The level of criminality
   •  Any contractual, compliance or regulatory concerns
   •  The potential to damage the reputation of the Post
      Office
    • The expectations of key stakeholders




5.2.1 Cases   are raised from    various   sources, in   each
      instance the information is passed to the relevant
      operational  Team   Leader   who   will   evaluate  the
      allegation and decide whether or not a case should be
      raised.

5.2.2A shortage at audit will result in the completion of
     an Event Capture Form (ECF) report by the lead
     auditor. The ECF report is then emailed through to the
     Post Office Security Casework Team. On receipt of the
     ECF (where a suspension has taken place), this is
     passed onto the relevant Team Leader who will make the
     decision whether to raise a case or not. If this is an
     immediate open enquiry the case will be raised before
     the ECF is received.

5.2.3A11 losses where a suspension has taken place are
     raised this way, although the loss is not always due
     to criminal activity. The Team Leader should review
     the circumstances surrounding the audit shortage and
     assess whether an investigation is the most suitable
     course of action.

5.2.4The  following   are   examples   of   types   of   audit
     shortages.

    • Cash Shortage at Audit No Explanation
    • Cash Shortage at Audit Comments made at audit
    • Cash Shortage - member of staff (Not the SPMR)
       suspected of criminality
    • Cash Shortage - Loss hidden Transfers
    • Cash Shortage - Loss hidden Remittances
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         n.
                                                                        POL00038853
                                                                      POL00038853



                           CONFIDENTIAL


    •   Cash Shortage - Loss hidden Giro Suppression
    •   Personal Cheque in Drawer
    •   Cash Shortage in ATM
    •   Cash Shortage in Lottery

5.2.5Post Office Card Account (POCA) cases; On occasion,
     the Hewlett Packard (HP) Call Centre is contacted by
     customers who claim they are victims of fraud.      The
     Post Office Card Account Primary Account Holder (PAH)
     may identify persons who they suspect have defrauded
     them and on occasions they are staff or Agents of the
     Post Office. The PAH allegation will be received
     through the HP Call Centre who, working on behalf of
     Post Office Ltd, manage the day-to-day POCA service.
     HP operators are requested to record as much detail as
     possible and report the allegation to Post Office Ltd
     Security, Details of the complaint will be passed onto
     the Team Leader. On receipt, the Team Leader should
     make an assessment on the validity of the claim.
     Should they find no reasonable grounds to support the
     claim they should return it to the Admin and Support
     Team within 5 working days with 'NO CONCERN' annotated
     in the Security Comment box. In the event the case is
     worthy of further investigation they are to request a
     case number and pass to their Team for investigation.

5.2.6Cases can be raised in relation to a specific client;
     these can come from various sources such as direct
     from the client via the Commercial Security Team, a
     complaint from   a   customer  or  analysis from   the
     Grapevine Team. In each case the request is emailed to
     the Team Leader to review the details and assess
     whether an investigation should take place. Post
     Office Ltd has a massive client base; the following
     are sources from where cases are usually raised.

    •   DVLA
    •   Royal Mail
    •   DWP
    •   Government Services
    •   AEI Machine

5.2.7Cases also   can be    raised   from   various other   sources
     including.

    •   Crown Office Issues / Loss
    •   Suspicious Transactions
    •   Remuneration
    •   Contracts Manager
    •   Police Request

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                              7
                                                                    POL00038853
                                                                  POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


5.2.8These types of enquiries are sent to the relevant Team
     Leader who will make the decision whether to raise a
     case or not. The Team Leader informs the Casework Team
     via email that a case is to be raised and which
     Security Manager has been nominated to deal with the
     case.

5.2.9The Casework team then complete the new case raised
     document and email this to the security manager along
     with  any ECF or audit reports which       they  have
     received.

5.2.10    The stakeholder Notification forms part of the
     New Case Raised Document. Within this document details
     of all stakeholders are listed.

5.2.11    Once a case has been raised the Stakeholder
     notification should be emailed to all stakeholders,
     casework team and Team Leader as soon as possible. The
     Security Manager should ensure that as much detailed
     information   is    included   on    the   stakeholder
     notification.

5.2.12    Communication   with   the   commercial  team      is
     essential.  It   is  important   to   ensure that      all
     stakeholder updates throughout the investigation       are
     copied to the commercial security team.

5.2.13     A copy of the stakeholder notification should be
     printed; this is associated in Appendix C of the case
     file.

5.3 Event Log

5.3.lAll activities undertaken during an investigation
     should be recorded on the event log; this should also
     include reasons for any delay in the progression of a
     case.

5.3.2The event log should be printed out and submitted with
     the green jacket. This should be updated and a new
     event log entry inserted at each        stage  of the
     investigation.




5.4.1The decided course of action needs to be proportionate
     and necessary. It may, if the circumstances warrant be
     more appropriate to consider other actions that could
     be done that don't necessarily lead to a criminal
     investigation.  Examples  include   pursuing  a  civil
     enquiry for breach of contract, civil debt recovery,

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                          8
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                          CONFIDENTIAL


        training   review   refresher,   briefers,  additional
        auditing, a caution, warning letter and or NFSP
        engagement. Some of these possible outcomes may not be
        obviously apparent until the subject is interviewed,
        although they should be built into the process at this
        early stage. Close communication and co-operation with
        key stakeholders is essential to ensure that a proper
        and considered course of action is taken.

5.4.2Proper consistent supervision is vital to ensure that
     cases are thoroughly investigated and submitted in a
     timely manner. Team leaders with the support of the
     Financial Investigators need to quality assure the
     investigation making sure prior to initial submission
     that all available evidence has been gathered.

5.4.3From the point the case is first raised Team Leaders
     should give due consideration to the merits of a
     criminal investigation.

    iiii ITTThsi

5.5.1-t is important to consider the aims, objectives and
     scope of the investigation. Not all Post Office
     investigations are criminal; the Security Manager may
     be called upon to investigate employees under the
     grievance and disciplinary procedure. It is important
     to determine what type of investigation is required,
     what time frames are in place, available resources and
     what other issues may affect the conduct of the
     investigation. An example may be a flag case with
     potential to damage the reputation of the business
     where senior stakeholders have an on-going interest in
     the progress of the investigation.

5.5.2When a case is raised the Security Manager needs to
     prepare an investigation plan which will outline the
     terms of reference in the way the investigation will
     be conducted. Points to consider include:

    •    Risk assessment
    •    Duty of care
    •    The source of the investigation
    •    Statutory, regulatory or compliance considerations
    •    Impact on the organisation
    •    Media
    •    Timeframes
    •    Immediate open enquiry

5.5.3In all cases stakeholder engagement is essential,
     updates to stakeholders should be sent on a regular

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


     basis  especially   at  relevant  milestones  such  as
     interview, file submission and summons served. For
     high profile cases such as crown office losses updates
     should be    more frequent and include     key senior
     stakeholders in the relevant directorate.

5.5.4For cases raised due to audit shortage, communication
     with the auditor on the day of the loss or as soon
     after the case is raised is essential to gain an
     understanding of the loss and to ensure they will send
     all audit documentation (original documentation) to
     the Security Manager.

5.5.5In all cases where a loss has been identified and a
     SPMR has been suspended a case conference should be
     arranged with the contracts manager at the earliest
     opportunity. This is essential and allows for an
     exchange   of   information   and   understanding of
     expectations and direction the contract manager is
     planning in relation to the conduct. The contract
     process can be found in Appendix A.

5.5.6There may be occasions where criminality is suspected
     that a request is made directly to a contract manager
     to   consider    suspending    the   SPMR.  In   these
     circumstances the Security Manager must provide a
     detailed    explanation    outlining    the  rationale
     supporting the request. A record must be kept of this
     decision which may at some future stage have to be
     justified in court proceedings.

5.5.7The Security Manager has been tasked to prove or
     dispel the allegation. In criminal cases where the
     burden of proof is beyond all reasonable doubt, it is
     necessary to draw on all available evidence which is
     likely  to   substantiate  the allegation.  In  cases
     concerning the Horizon system, it is important to
     establish the level of training the subject received,
     when this was received and action the subject took to
     remedy any identified faults. A key point to cover
     template has been produced to ensure that Security
     Managers establish these facts during the interview
     process. As part of the evidence gathering process,
     the    Security Manager can collect evidence from
     various sources including:

    • Statements from witnesses [current, previous members
      of staff]
    • Expert witnesses
    • Post Office accounting and HR databases
    • Contract Advisor database
    • CCTV

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      10
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                        CONFIDENTIAL


    • Banking records
    • Telephone records
    • Interviews with suspects
    • Alarm Data

5.5.8It   is   vital  that  all   available   witnesses  are
     interviewed. If there is a good reason for not doing
     so   this   must  be  recorded   in  the   progress  of
     investigation log.

5.5.9The Security Manager must not overlook the fact that a
     fair investigation is there to establish the truth as
     well  as   substantiate  the  allegation,  so   it  is
     important that any evidence uncovered that may support
     the subject's position is also recovered. It is
     important to document every action, decision and
     reason for decisions being made during the course of
     the investigation.

5.6 Enquiry Type

5.6.11mmediate Open Enquiry. Where immediate response is
     appropriate and few pre-interview enquiries are needed
     or practicable.

5.6.2Major Enquiry >£15,000 (or major customer / client /
     reputation impact) where immediate response is not
     possible due to the requirement to perform pre-
     interview enquiries / analysis.

5.6.3Standard Enquiry. All other enquiries not included in
     the above - where immediate response is not possible
     due  to   the  requirement to  perform  pre-interview
     enquiries.

5.6.4Liaison.   Any   case  where   liaison  with  another
     investigative body conducting enquiries into criminal_
     activity at Post Office Ltd branches.




:5.7.IAil significant steps in the investigation including
      any lengthy delays in concluding the enquiry need to
      be recorded. The progress of investigation document
      will eventually form part of the unused material and
      should be produced with the file. The details of
      investigation need to be sufficiently informative
      although  an  element of objectivity   needs  to  be
      applied.

5.7.2Significant points can become critical should the
     enquiry    concern   non   availability   of   witnesses,
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         11
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                        CONFIDENTIAL


     external stakeholders or any other influential factors
     which may force undue delay.

5.7.3A culture needs to be embedded where Security Managers
     are aware and fully understand the importance of
     providing a comprehensive chronological account of an
     investigation, not merely to avoid undue criticism,
     but also where there could be an issue with the case
     at some later stage which may undermine the likelihood
     of successful prosecution.

5.7.4 Interview Date. Person concerned should be contacted
      and  Interview  should  be   arranged  without  delay.
      Timescales will depend on preparatory work that needs
      to take place prior to this. Good Evidence Takes Time.
      In complex cases there may be a need to conduct a
      preliminary [holding] interview with a more detailed
      interview taking place when further enquiries have
      been completed.

5.7.5lmmediate   Open   Enquiry.  Interview   on  day   of
     notification (where possible) minimum within 48 hours
     and case submitted to normal report timescales (12
     days).

5.7.6Major Enquiry. Case to be at "person          concerned"
     interviewed within 1 month of case raised.

5.7.7Standard Enquiry. Case to be at "person concerned"
     interviewed and submitted / closure stage within 2
     months of raise. Should enquiries indicate increased
     loss or impact, status must be amended to Major
     Enquiry immediately.

5.7.8Liaison. Regular contact should be maintained with the
     authority (Police, Royal Mail, DWP) dealing with the
     case.

5.7.9After the first month the Security Manager should
     discuss the case with their Team Leader and a way
     forward agreed, this will ensure that the liaison case
     is progressed.

5.8 Evidence

5.8.lGood communication with the audit team is crucial to
     ensure   evidential   resilience   in  relation   to  the
     continuity of exhibits. Every effort must be made to
     ensure   that   the   person   finding   is   the  person
     exhibiting and original documents that will form the
     evidential basis of the case are retained until
     collection. The continuity will be stronger if the
     documents seized are secured and handed over against a
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         12
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                       CONFIDENTIAL


     signature. In circumstances where the only viable way
     is to send the documents through the post they should
     be sent by the Auditor to the named Security Manager
     by Special Delivery.

5.8.2Auditors   are  to   be   encouraged  to  record   any
     significant comment made in the course of the audit
     either unsolicited or in response to a reasonable
     question to complete the audit such as "I have checked
     the money in the safe and there appears to be a
     shortage, is there any money stored elsewhere that
     needs to be checked?" . In the case of the unsolicited
     comment, the auditor should record this i.e. "I know
     you will find a shortage, I borrowed the money".
     However any further question such as "why" would
     constitute an interview and the Auditor must refrain
     from asking such questions.

5.8.3In such cases, the Auditor should inform the subject
     that their comment will be recorded but any further
     questions concerning the comment may be conducted
     under caution by a Security Manager where the subject
     has been accorded their rights. This should not
     distract from the role of the auditor and questions
     around should still be asked to verify financial
     assets due to Post Office Ltd.

5.8.4In cases where the subject wishes to make comment, the
     Auditor again should record the initial comment,
     advise the subject as above and if they continue, note
     in the record, that the person concerned was advised
     that they would have the opportunity to be interviewed
     by a Security Manager under caution at a later stage.
     THEN  CONTINUE   TO  RECORD  THE  COMMENT.  Again  any
     questions even for clarification from the auditor
     would constitute an interview and could/would render
     the evidence inadmissible so the Auditor must refrain
     from asking such questions.




5.9.lLocal Management Checks
     Contact with the contract manager is essential; they
     can provide the Security Manager with a background on
     the individual along with providing all information
     relating to the branch from their database.

5.9.2Training Records. A request for the branch training
     history should be made to the Network Support Admin
     Team email address. This will detail what training was
     received for the SPMR when he was appointed to the
     branch, it will also show any intervention training
     requested or delivered for the branch. It is the
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      13
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


     SPMR's responsibility to train his staff, no records
     for training (apart from compliance training) is kept
     for SPMR assistants.

5.9.3Post Office Ltd Human Resources Printout. The Sub
     Postmaster Printout or employee printout should be
     obtained for all cases by emailing Human Recourses
     using the HR Assistant Checks email address. This
     document can provide the following information -

    • The subject's personal details, such as NI number,
      home address, bank account(s), next of kin
    • Date the SPMR was appointed
    • Claims data (i.e. holiday pay) & dates the SPMR was
      on holiday.
    • The full SPMR file can be requested by emailing
      `Contract Admin Team'

5.9.4P356 Assistant List. The P356 Assistant list should be
     requested at the same time as the HR Printout from the
     HR Assistants Check email address. This report can
     provide the following information



    • Name, date of birth and NI number
    • Persons registered to access Horizon (users), at that
      Post Office
    • The Horizon user's identities for each assistant
    • Whether the assistant is a permanently employed or
      temporary/holiday relief.
    • Date the person was activated to use Horizon and the
      date users were     removed from the Horizon system

5.9.5SPMR Remuneration. The remuneration from a particular
     branch can be obtained via an e-mail to HR Agent
     Remuneration.

5.9.6Police National Computer (PNC). Post Office Ltd PNC
     checks can be made for intelligence gathering purposes
     in respect of individuals and vehicles suspected or
     known to be involved in crime against the Post Office
     Ltd. Examples of authorised use are as follows:

    • To assist authorised personnel with intelligence
      gathering around individuals suspected/ known to be
      involved in committing criminal offences
    • For operational Health & Safety considerations and
      evaluations prior to the engagement with the person
      concerned as part of the operational risk assessment



R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      14
                                                                     POL00038853
                                                                   POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


    • To obtain previous conviction details of defendants
      and witnesses for cases being prosecuted by Post
      Office Ltd
    • To establish intelligence with regards to vehicles
      and occupants suspected to be involved in criminal
      activity against the Post Office
    • To  identify   the  registered   keeper  of  vehicles
      connected to the address of a suspect/known offender
      involved in criminal offences against the Post Office
      Ltd

    Do not conduct checks for the following reasons:

    • Unsubstantiated allegations about an individual
    • "Fishing   trips",   for  example   blanket   checking
      vehicles or persons such as all vehicles in a staff
      car park in an effort to identify a suspect's vehicle
    • To identify ownership of a vehicle in accordance with
      Proceeds of Crime Act

5.9.7Equifax: Security Managers can rely       on   Equifax   to
     provide the following information:

    • Personal details
    • Addresses
    • Court and Insolvency Information, (i.e. county court
      judgments)
    • Alert Indicators (Office of Foreign Assets Control)
    • Alias and all names used
    • Associates
    • Electoral data confirmation
    • Credit transactional activity, including the client
      and transactional history
    • Record of searches done by Equifax clients, (i.e.
      banks and retailers)
    • Property valuation
    • Additional addresses-linked addresses
    • Directors data
    • Commercial searches, (i.e. valuable data relating to
      the subject's business)

5.9.8Land Registry. Security Managers have access to the
     Land Registries in England and Wales, Scotland and
     Northern Ireland. Most searches take between a few
     minutes to a few days, depending on the registry.
     Obtaining the subject's full address is important.
     Land Registry can provide the following type of
     information/data:

    • The owner(s), type of ownership & address
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                           15
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


    • The value of property
    • An extract of the official Title Deed
    • Copy of the Title Register, Title Plan
    • Registered Old Deeds, including historical      editions
      of the register and title plan
    • Any  charge   on  the   property,  and the      relevant
      financial institution (mortgage.)

5.9.9Network Business Support Centre (NBSC) Call Logs. NBSC
     call logs can be obtained by emailing the Branch and
     IT System Team at Dearne House. These logs will detail
     all calls made by a branch into the NBSC. These logs
     can be very useful where a SPMR or employee claim that
     they have reported the loss or incident.

5.9.10    Credence; is a tool used to analyse detailed
     transactional data from a particular branch. This is
     useful to prove details of particular transactions or
     events. Only data, up to 90 days, can be extracted and
     analysed by Post Office Ltd Security. An application
     to Fujitsu will turn the MI data into data/documentary
     evidence  for   use  in  the  criminal   courts. Older
     historic data can also be obtained. Fujitsu will only
     provide   a   witness   statement   relating   to  the
     authenticity of the data only, not the specific
     transactions relating to your enquiry.

5.9.11    ONCH. The Cash Management team can provide Over
     Night Cash Holdings (ONCH) data for a specific branch.
     This data gives in depth cash analysis for a branch
     including what denomination of notes a branch has
     declared on a given date along with cash remittances
     in and out. A request for this data can be made to the
     Retail Cash Management Team who will highlight any
     concerns they might have with the branch. The same
     information can be requested for Foreign Currency
     holdings.

5.9.12    Full Rota Check. A 'full rota check' allows for a
     full data search for a specific branch relating to
     transaction issues. This can include any transaction
     corrections (TC's) scratch card, remittances, stock
     adjustments and other specific office's products. This
     check can be arranged via Post Office Ltd Security
     Grapevine   strand,   Analyst  &   Support   team   in
     Chesterfield.

5.9.13    Alarm data. Obtaining alarm data from ROMEO can
     be a useful tool in determining access to the Post
     Office secure area and safes. Data around perimeter
     and safe set / unset times can be interrogated to
     assist in the investigation.

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         16
                                                                     POL00038853
                                                                   POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL




3.10.1    The PORA process is mandatory in any Post Office
     led   investigation   which   may involve    a  planned
     interview under caution or premises search. A PORA is
     required    for   each    subject  involved    in   the
     investigation,   In    order   to  manage   the   risks
     effectively Security Managers should conduct any risk
     related intelligence checks and/or enquiries that they
     feel are necessary as part of the PORA process.     The
     following checks are available and thought to be the
     most relevant to Post Office Security cases:

    • Local Management check: This may also identify other
      information   such    as    health    issues,    including
      suspected   drug   or    alcohol    habits,   or   outside
      interest's e.g. domestic circumstances which           may
      impact on H&S
    • PNC Individual checks: This may identify "warning"
      indicators or previous convictions of both suspects
      and others at the address.         It may also identify
      other information which impacts on H&S such as any
      history regarding the certification (or refusal) of
      firearms or orders recalling persons to hospital
    • Full Equifax check: This check can be used to
      identify current occupants at an address to be
      searched or visited. A "Full Investigation" Equifax
      check should be undertaken
    • PNC Vehicle check: This can reveal registered keepers
      of vehicles at a specific address
    • Land Registry checks: These will identify the owner
      of property
    • Local Police Intelligence check: May identify risks
      regarding the suspect or other incidents or persons
      at the address(es) and the geographical area(s) to be
      visited.  It may also identify other law enforcement
      interest

5.10.2    Risk Score. Where any risk is assessed as High, a
     Senior Security Manager should be consulted and the
     assistance   of   the   Police    sought   before  any
     investigation activities which bring Security Managers
     into contact with the subject are commenced.

5.10.3    Where the Planned Operation is assessed as Low or
     Medium risk, line manager's authority must be obtained
     before any Security Manager activities which bring
     Security Managers into contact with the subject are
     commenced.


R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                           17
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                        CONFIDENTIAL


5.11 Interview

5.11.1    Where the rights of a lawyer to be present are
     offered to the subject who wants their own solicitor
     and they are not available, consider your position in
     terms of recovering evidence and not compromising the
     investigation. In this instance inform the subject
     that as their lawyer cannot attend within a reasonable
     time, arrange for the subject to be arrested and
     booked in   at the local police      station  where  a
     solicitor  from   the  nominated  list   or  the  duty
     solicitor can be offered.

5.11.2    Reasonable time may differ depending on the
     circumstances  and  any action    taken  needs  to  be
     justified  and  documented.  It   is  likely that an
     explanation for this course of action will be required
     at court.   A rule of thumb is what the average lay
     person may consider reasonable given all the facts. It
     is important to note that the need to gather evidence
     and investigate the case in a timely manner is not
     unduly compromised.

5.11.3    Arrest by the police may be justified on the
     basis that there are reasonable grounds to suspect an
     offence has been committed and there are reasonable
     grounds for believing that the arrest is necessary.
     The   statutory   criteria   for   what  may  constitute
     necessity are set out     in  para 2.9 of Code G PACE.
     Inviting the subject to the police station to obtain
     legal representation may not be effective as the
     person concerned is at liberty to leave at any time.
     The Security Manager should direct the investigation
     appropriately to remain in control of the evidential
     process   without   jeopardising   the  subject's  legal
     rights. Code G of PACE is laid out at Appendix B.

5.11.4     Consider maximising the opportunity to capture
     evidence at the earliest stage, i.e. where there is a
     significant comment. In more complex cases where a
     more in depth interview is required hold a preliminary
     interview, cover off the significant comment and hold
     a second interview at a later stage when more evidence
     is gathered. Think of the Golden Hour of capturing the
     evidence. Always follow the PEACE model [Planning,
     Engage    and   Explain,   Account,    clarification  and
     challenge,     Closure,   Evaluation].      Consider  the
     ingredients of the offence; dishonestly appropriates
     property belonging to another with the intention of
     permanently depriving the other of it. Ensure that
     these are established during the interview. Deep dive
     into areas where defences are likely. These can be
     countered by careful planning and skilful questioning.
R. King                                      AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         18
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


     A comprehensive guide to interviewing using the PEACE
     model can be found at Appendix C.

5.11.5    One on one interviewing should be considered on a
     case by case basis. There is no reason why in a
     straight forward investigation where there have been
     admissions and risk is considered low, that a one on
     one tape recorded interview should not be considered.
     This will free up resources and should be encouraged
     wherever possible. Clearly in more complex cases,
     where there is a need to pre prepare and the nature of
     the investigation may benefit from an interviewer with
     greater subject knowledge, then the interview must be
     conducted by two persons. Similarly for training and
     development purposes.

5.11.6    Should the recent Second Sight review be brought
     up by a subject or his representative during a PACE
     interview the Security Manager should state: 'I will
     listen to any personal concerns or issues that you may
     have had with the Horizon system during the course of
     this interview

5.11.7    The following three areas need to be covered in
     as much detail as possible at an appropriate point
     during all PACE interviews, regardless of whether
     Horizon is mentioned or not.    Where the case clearly
     has no link with Horizon (e.g. theft of mail) then you
     must gain authorisation from your line manager to
     proceed outside of this process.

    Training
      •How long have they worked at the Post Office?
      •Had they any previous PO experience?
      •How long did their initial training last? (Please
       see guidance below and get as much detail as
       possible)
      •What did it cover? (I.e. transactions, balancing,
       ATM, lottery etc.)
      •Did they request any follow up training? (If so who
       with?)
      •Was there a period when the accounts balanced?   If
       so, then why did things run smoothly then?

    Support
      •Who did they tell that they were having problems?
      •Why didn't they request any help?
      •What support are they aware of (i.e. NBSC, HSH, area
       managers)
      •Have they contacted the NBSC for support before?


R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      19
                                                                    POL00038853
                                                                  POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


    Horizon
      •Have they contacted the HSH before?
      •If they believed that there was a fault with Horizon
       then who did they report it to and when? If they
       didn't report it then why not?

5.11.8    NBSC call logs should be requested for all cases.
     As should HSH call logs.

5.11.9    Training   records for   all   new   cases        are
     automatically sent by casework team.    For info       the
     current standard is:

    •   SPMR receives 6-8 days of classroom training (this
        depends on the products that their office transacts)
    •   SPMR receives 6 days of onsite training and support
        including at least one balance
    •   SPMR receives an announced visit after one month to
        provide   support,    go   through   the    compliance
        requirements and for a cash check to be completed
    •   SPMR receives an announced visit after 3 months for
        further support, compliance questions and a cash
        check
    •   SPMR receives an unannounced visit after 6 months for
        further support, compliance questions and a Financial
        Assurance audit

5.12 Searches
5.12.1    In all cases a search of vehicle and premises
     should  be   considered.  Searches  are   conducted by
     consent and should be conducted in the spirit of PACE
     where reasonable grounds to suspect there is evidence
     on the premises that relates to the offence.

5.12.2    If the subject refuses to consent to a voluntary
     search the Security Managers line manager should be
     contacted and if required further advice and guidance
     sought from the criminal law team.

5.12.3    If the subject refuses to consent to a voluntary
     search and there are reasonable grounds to suspect
     that evidence relating to the offence may be found,
     then contact police with a view to arrest the subject.
     A search can then be conducted by police following
     arrest. The Security Manager should agree this course
     of action with their line manager and advice sought
     from the criminal law team.




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                          20
                                                                  POL00038853
                                                                POL00038853



                          CONFIDENTIAL


5.13.1    Notebooks are an essential element in a Security
     Managers  toolkit.     They are   the   recognised and
     preferred way of recording evidence that is not
     recorded elsewhere in a more formal document. They are
     numbered individually and are issued to all Security
     Managers performing investigation duties.

5.13.2    Due to the nature of the information recorded in
     a notebook it can be produced, if required by the
     Security Manager, in a Court of Law.  It is essential
     that all notebooks be completed with a degree of
     uniform professionalism.

5.13.3    General rules

    • Make all entries in chronological order
    • All entries must be made in ink (black preferably)
    • Any errors must be crossed out with a single line, so
      that  the   original entry    can   be   seen  and then
      initialled
    • Do not remove any pages, they are all numbered
      sequentially
    • Do not make additional entries between the ruled
      lines. If it is of paramount importance that, if you
      make an additional entry, make it at the end of your
      existing   entry   explaining   why    it   is   not in
      chronological order
    • A single line should be scored through any blank
      spaces or lines
    • All entries should be signed, timed and dated
    • All notes made on informal pieces of paper such as
      newspapers, should be transferred to the notebook as
      soon as practicable. The entry should include why it
      was not practical to enter the note directly into the
      notebook.     The Security Manager must retain the
      original note




5.14.1    48 Hour Offender Report: To be emailed to Team
     Leader, Casework Team, Financial Investigator (if
     appointed) Primary Stakeholder within 48 Hours of the
     interview.

5.14.2    FES Report: Financial Evaluation Sheet to be
     emailed to Financial Investigator within 48 hours of
     the interview.

5.14.3    Write the Case Summary Report: This is to be
     written using example report and guidelines that can
     be found on the Secops sharepoint site. The case

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                        21
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                          CONFIDENTIAL


        summary should be a succinct chronological account of
        the investigation highlighting key facts. The rule of
        thumb is to produce an account which the reader can
        quickly digest to get a general overview of the
        allegation. Key witnesses and a brief outline of what
        they say can be included as well as a synopsis of what
        was said during interview. The statements, interview
        record and exhibit list can be examined should the
        reader require further information.

5.14.4    Write Discipline Report. The discipline report to
     be written using example report and guidelines which
     can also be found on the sharepoint site.

5.15 Interview Notes

5.15.1    In the majority of cases at initial submission,
     the Notes of interview need to be a brief account of
     the interview and any significant comment. It is
     therefore good practice to write down a note of the
     interview and generally what was said on completion.

5.15.2    An   example  note  could   be:  throughout  the
     interview the subject stated that he had borrowed the
     money to make up a shortfall and when challenged over
     this accepted that it was wrong / dishonest to take
     the money.

5.15.3    No comment interviews should not be transcribed.
     Unless there is a very good reason for a full
     transcript, in the majority of cases for the initial
     submission a note of interview will suffice.

5.15.4    Where   the  prosecuting lawyers  request a
     transcript as part of the advice process or for
     preparation for committal proceedings it will be
     completed by the typist, checked and sent by the
     Security Manager.

5.15.5     Where   appropriate   to  transcribe   the   Audio
     recording of an interview the request should be sent
     to   the    typist.  An   email  should   be   sent   to
     cathphilbin@aol.com. The email should also be copied
     to the FI at Chesterfield to ensure return of the CD.




5.16.1    In   all   instances the  following         standard
     statements should be taken and submitted        with the
     green jacket.

    •    First Officer Statement
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         22
                                                                   POL00038853
                                                                 POL00038853



                        CONFIDENTIAL


    • Second officer Statement
    • Horizon System Statement
    • SPMR Contract Statement
    • Lead Auditor Statement

5.16.2    In   the   course   of   an   investigation   other
     statements may need to be acquired, these could be
     statements to describe a particular process such as
     how to carry out a particular transaction. If the Post
     Office Legal and Compliance Team (POLCT) consider that
     such   a  statement   is   required   to  progress   the
     prosecution they will send an advice requesting this
     further information.

5.16.3    Where statements can be taken over the telephone
     this should be done to save time, resources and it
     must   be  encouraged.   Statement   taking  over the
     telephone is a modern and accepted practice.

5.16.4    Rather than a hand written Section 9 statement,
     there is no reason why a draft statement cannot be
     prepared in note form. The statement can then be typed
     up subsequently, with any changes, clarification or
     ambiguity amended. It is vital that the original notes
     are retained. On typing up the statement it can be
     sent to the recipient for checking and amending. Once
     agreed, the statement must be signed and sent back to
     the Security Manager.
                 •




   7.1    If business failings or procedural weaknesses are
     identified this should be completed on the relevant
     tab of the new case raised form and emailed to all
     stakeholders  including   Commercial  Security.   This
     should be printed off and associated in appendix C of
     the file.




5.18.1    A Green Jacket should be constructed as per the
     following guidelines.

5.18.2     Case files will include a schedule of unused non-
     sensitive    material  and   unused  sensitive   material
     [Public    Interest   Immunity,   Legal   Privilege   and
     documents that may highlight the methods used for
     investigation] The Appendix "C" in the case file will
     be retained by the Security Manager as oppose to
     submitted with the file. Where solicitors may wish to
     examine any unused material it should be requested and
     sent by the Security Manager.
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                         23
                                                                          POL00038853
                                                                        POL00038853



                             CONFIDENTIAL




5.18.3       The body of the file.

    •    Case Raised Front Sheet
    • Event Log [added to           as   the   case   progresses   to
      conclusion]
    • File Contents Index
    •    Case File summary; numbered paragraph.
    •    Index of Statements (Actual Statements in Appendix A)
    •    Interview Summary
    •    Index to Exhibits
    •    Unused Material list [This negates the need to submit
         Appendix C and fill the file with emails. The unused
         material list can be added to as the case progresses]

5.18.4    As a general rule Appendix; A = Witness Statement
     B = Evidence C = Other material

5.18.5       Appendix A

    •    Typed Witness Statements
    •    Summons Documents

5.18.6       Appendix B

    •    POL001
    • Evidence
    • Notebook Entry
    •    Search Documents
    •    Working Tapes
    •    PNC check results (include no trace replies)

5.18.7    Appendix C (Appendix C should be            collated, but
     NOT be submitted with the file when              sent to Post
     Office Legal an Compliance Team)

    •    Stakeholder Notification
    •    HR Printout
    •    Assistant List
    •    Interview Letter
    •    POLOC3
    •    Business Failings
    •    Discipline Report
    •    Antecedents
    •    NPA01




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                                24
                                                                            POL00038853
                                                                          POL00038853



                           CONFIDENTIAL


5.19.1    Cases for Advice. In some instances where the
     Security Manager is unsure on the strength of the
     evidence the case can be submitted to the POLCT for
     advice. The POLCT will apply the evidential test and
     will advise on the next course of action such as
     further statements or case to be closed.

5.19.2    On completion of the file, it will be submitted
     to the Team Leader for checking, signing off and
     forwarded  to   the  POLCT  via  registration.  Should
     further investigation be deemed necessary at this
     stage, the file will be returned to the Security
     Manager. Where a request is made from POLCT for
     further enquiries, the team leader will be copied into
     the relevant email. It is imperative that the progress
     of enquiry document is comprehensively kept up to date
     and copies of any generated emails saved. These can be
     inserted into    the file   in  appendix  C when   the
     enquiries are complete.

5.19.3    Should advice be sought from Cartwright King
     solicitors, the Team Leader and POLCT will be copied
     into any requests for further evidence. The details of
     investigation log must be maintained and copies of
     emails retained. On completion of the enquiry, the
     green docket case file will be sent to the Security
     Manager for copies of any emails to be inserted along
     with the progress of investigation log prior to final
     submission to Head of Security via the Team Leader.

5.19.4    Each    case   file   should    the    follow    the   stated
     process:

5.19.5    Security Manager > Team Leader > Post Office
     Legal and Compliance Team > Cartwright King > Head Of
     Security > Team Leader > Security Manager

5.19.6                   Security Manager > Team Leader

         Once the file is ready for submission the Security
         Manager should send the green jacket to their Team
         Leader for review. The Team Leader should sense check
         the case file and ensure it is evidentially robust
         and properly constructed. The Security Manager should
         send electronic copies of the case summary report,
         audio transcripts and discipline report to Post
         Office Security.

5.19.7               Team    Leader   >   Post    Office    Legal   and
     Compliance Team

         The Team Leader will then forward the file to the
         POLCT. The file will be reviewed by the POLCT and a
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                                  25
                                                                     POL00038853
                                                                   POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


      decision made whether further progression be made
      with the case. If the decision is No Further Action
      the file is returned to casework at that point. If
      the POLCT decides that further enquiries are required
      this will be forwarded to the Security Manager
      including Casework and the Team Leader.

5.19.8                 Post   Office    Legal   and   Compliance
     Team > Cartwright King

      If the decision is to proceed with the prosecution
      case the file is the forwarded to Cartwright King for
      advice on charges. (In some instances POLCT will put
      charges together).

5.19.9                 Cartwright King > Post Office Legal
     and Compliance Team

      Cartwright King will prepare advice and charges for
      the case (or advise no further action). If further
      enquiries are required they will contact the Security
      Manager direct, copying in the team leader and send
      an advice detailing the further enquiries. The advice
      along with charges and case file is then sent back to
      casework.

5.19.10   Post Office Legal and Compliance Team > Head Of
     Security

      The  file   is   then   forwarded to  the   designated
      prosecution authority (DPA) for authority to proceed.
      The DPA will review the case file and decide whether
      to proceed with the advice from the POLCT and
      Cartwright King or whether to take a different course
      of action.    The   authority  to proceed   (or other
      instruction) will be inserted into the case file.

5.19.11   Head Of Security > Team Leader

     The file is the forwarded back to the casework team.

5.19.12   Team Leader > Security Manager.

    The file is returned with advice and charges submitted
    in the case file for the Security Manager to proceed.




5.20.1    If advice from Cartwright King or the POLCT is to
     prosecute and the Head of Security has given authority
     to proceed, then the Security Manager needs to obtain
     a summons.

R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                           26
                                                                          POL00038853
                                                                        POL00038853



                            CONFIDENTIAL


5.20.2    The Security Manager will make contact with the
     relevant Magistrates' Court to set a date for the
     suspect's first appearance at court.   Summonses are
     also applied for. Upon receipt of the summonses the
     Security Manager will serve the summonses by way of
     posting them to the Person Concerned using the Royal
     Mail Special Delivery service.

5.20.3    Set a Court Date

    • Contact the Magistrates court where the offence took
      place and confirm that court deals with the matter
      and the address where the summons are to be sent for
      signature
    • Contact listings and inform them you are a private
      prosecution - (certain courts have set days for non-
      police prosecutions)
    • Obtain a date normally six weeks from date of request
      but no more than 8 weeks

5.20.4    Acquiring Arrest Summons (AS) Number

    • Update the front of the NPA01 with the date of the
      court hearing and the details of the court
    • Complete the offence and the method used in offence
      section on the front of the NPA01
    • Email the updated NPA01 to the casework team. The
      casework team will apply to the relevant police force
      for an AS Number which is required for the court to
      sign the summons. The AS number will be emailed back
      to the Security Manager within a few days of the
      submission of the NPA01 (different police forces work
      to different timescales to times will vary)




5.20.5    Applying for the summons.

    • Prepare three copies of the summons
    • Prepare one information sheet
    • Send to the court for signature with covering letter
      - all three copies of the summons should be signed
      and returned
    • Court will retain the information sheet
    • Inform the agents Solicitors appointed by POLCT of
      the time and date of the court appearance

5.20.6    On receipt of the summons

    • Take a    photocopy    of   the   defendant's   copy   of   the
      summons
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                                27
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


    • Send the original copy of the defendants summons
      together with a POL044 (Charge or summons notice) and
      a copy of the means form
    • Summons can be either served personally or via Royal
      Mail Special Delivery to the person concerned

5.20.7    Once conformation has been obtained that the
     summons has been received POLCT and Cartwright King
     must   be   informed. The   back  of  the  defendants
     photocopied   summons should   be endorsed  with  the
     following:

     I certify that today, (date), I personally served a
     copy of the summons upon (Name), the defendant named
     overleaf.
    Or
    I certify that a copy of the summons overleaf has been
    served upon   (Name), the defendant named overleaf. The
    summons was sent via Royal Mail Special Delivery
    (number) and was delivered (date and time).

5.20.8    Prepare and send to POLCT a covering letter
     confirming the summons has been served, together with
     a copy of the POL033 and any TIC's by post. Update the
     front of the NPA form with the summons was applied for
     and the date the summons was served. Complete the
     offence and the method used in offence on the front of
     the NPA01.

5.20.9    Email Casework team and POLCT the confirmation of
     service letter together with the NPA01. If the case is
     a FI case then the FI should be copied into the email.

     Copies of the summons go in Appendix A of the file.




    • Committal Checklist
    • POL006B Self Disclosure
    • POL006c Schedule of non-sensitive unused material
    • Sensitive Material
    • Continued Disclosure Report
    • Witness List
    • Witness Address
    • Witness Non Availability
    • List Of Exhibits
    • Memo to POLCT

     A     i




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      28
                                                                  POL00038853
                                                                POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


5.22.1    On completion of the investigation, it is vital
     that a review of the root cause of the investigation
     is undertaken by the Security Manager. It is important
     to ascertain whether any system processes, integrity
     of the financial commercial product, technical issues,
     training delivered or procedures may have provided an
     opportunity to commit the offence. Equally important,
     the vulnerability of the product or process in its
     current form and likelihood of similar offences being
     committed in the future needs to be considered. A
     comprehensive  report   outlining  the  cause  of the
     offence will be submitted to Commercial Security at
     the conclusion of each investigation.

5.22.2    As part of the Post Office retention policy, case
     files must be archived and retained for at least 7
     years.

5.22.3    Case closed Notification.

    • In all cases where a decision is taken to close a
      case it must be authorised by the Security Managers
      Team Leader
    • The Case Closed notification should be completed and
      emailed to the Security Managers Team Leader, Post
      office   Security all   major  stakeholders and    the
      Commercial Security team
    • As much detail as possible should be included in the
      case closed notification explaining the decision for
      the course of action taken
    • In some instances a case will be closed with no green
      jacket, this could be a case where the matter was
      dealt   with   under  conduct   and   no   criminality
      identified. If there is no green jacket this should
      be highlighted on the case close notification and
      also annotated at the top of the email to Post office
      Security




6.1 One of the key programmes of the Security Operations
    strategic plan for 2013 has been the case file review.
    Separation   from   Royal   Mail  Group   has   presented
    opportunities to shed outmoded investigation practices
    and tailor processes that not only meet the current
    needs of the business, but challenges us as a team to
    work smarter, and deliver a professional, comprehensive
    and fair investigation in a timely manner. With the
    advent of the Second Sight interim report it is likely
    that scrutiny will continue to focus on the fairness,
    evidential   quality   and   professional   standard   of
    criminal    investigations.       Completion    of    the
R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                        29
                                                                POL00038853
                                                              POL00038853



                         CONFIDENTIAL


    investigation review, which serves as a guide to
    Security    Managers   in   the    conduct  of   their
    investigations is a timely document which embodies the
    ethos of Care, Challenge and Commit.
    •




        •




            .




7.1 Post   Office   Security  Operations    Management will
    regularly assess for compliance against this policy.
    Any violation of this policy will be investigated and
    if the cause is found to be due to wilful disregard or
    negligence, it will be treated as a disciplinary
    offence. All disciplinary proceedings are coordinated
    through the Human Resources Department.




R. King                                     AA Conduct of
Criminal Investigation Policy v2 300813 (3)
                                                                      30
