POL00117439
POL00117439

From:
Sent:
To:

Angela Van-Den-Boget
Bravatat

istine Harrisont.
_} Craig Perrinsf

? Dawn Bentyf

Jane Howell:
Bennett!
Jenkinsonf

Margo Hoge
pings
Mark Ellis

GRO ' Mark D Lawrence} GRO H
Mark S Wright!

Gleesoni
Melanie

Rod Ismayf~
Hancock

Hailstones_
POL00117439
POL00117439

Swabey

Sangheraf.__

Tracey J Cuttsf Tracy Marshalé GRO

Wayne Cowan} Wendy

Mahoney...
Ce: Mark R Davi Melanie

Corfield” GRO. Patrick Bourke GRO
Subject: FW: in the loop - a message from Mark Davies

All

Thanks for taking part in the conference call on Horizon this week. This note went out yesterday and I

wanted to make sure you had received it so am sending direct to you as well.

If you have any queries please don't hesitate to contact me.

Best wishes,
Mark
_ Mark Davies
Communications and Corporate Affairs Director
ist Floor
Finsbury Dials

20 Finsbury Street
London EC2Y 9AQ

GRO

From: Communications Team

Sent: 25 June 2015 14:00

To: Communications Team

Subject: in the loop - a message from Mark Davies

Hello

As | think most colleagues are aware, we are facing further media and
parliamentary scrutiny about the Horizon system and allegations about how
we have handled a small number of cases where losses have been identified
in branches.

Mark Davies
Communications &
Corporate Affairs Director

| wanted to update you with the latest picture and ask you to update your
teams.

BBC Panorama had been planning a programme for next Monday, 29 June.
Yesterday afternoon they contacted me to let me know they have postponed
that programme. They now expect it to air later, possibly on July 6. | will
keep you updated and we will continue to engage with the programme and
its questions.

What is still due to happen on Monday is a Parliamentary debate about the
issue. This has been called by Andrew Bridgen MP. It will take place late on
Monday evening. A Government minister, George Freeman MP, will respond
to the allegations we expect Mr Bridgen to make.

This could lead to media coverage in itself.

| have held teleconferences over the last couple of days to update colleagues
across the business on this new activity in relation to this issue. | am really
grateful to all who took part and asked questions. A key request was for a
short script for use in response to questions from customers, postmasters,
potential new operators, stakeholders and others.

The key points are below and | hope these are helpful. | wanted to reiterate
a point | made on the call: if any colleague has an) other question or point to

make please drop me a line at mark.r.davies@ .

In addition if any colleagues come across/or are contacted by postmasters
with specific questions about Horizon then they should be asked to ring
NBSC so that assistance can be offered.

The allegations being made are very serious and have the potential to
damage our business. | don't want anyone to feel unsighted on the key
issues or facts behind the allegations.

| would really welcome your help in ensuring that they are cascaded to
colleagues, particularly those who may get questions from customers or
postmasters (and potential new operators).

The key points to make are as follows:

e extremely serious, untrue allegations about the Post Office and the
Horizon system have continued to be repeated over the past few
years by a small number of mainly former postmasters.

e the clear evidence we have in these cases does not support the
allegations being made

® we committed to confidentiality to people who put grievances to us,
so we cannot share details about individual cases

© what we can say is that we do not prosecute people for making
innocent mistakes

POL00117439
POL00117439
POL00117439
POL00117439

e where missing cash has been dishonestly and systematically covered
up we take action, based on the facts and circumstances. This
happens rarely but when it does it is right we may take action as
custodians of customers’ money

e there is also no evidence that the Horizon system does not work as it
should. This is the finding of independent investigators. It has been
shown to be robust and effective in dealing with six million
transactions a day, with some 70,000 people using it, and it is
regularly audited

e if there were systemic problems with branch accounting, it is
reasonable to expect them to have been more widely experienced
across the Post Office network than the 136 individual complaints
spanning more than 10 years, during which there have been 500,000
Horizon users.

e During the past three years we have done everything and more than
we committed to do to investigate the concerns put forward about
our computer system. That was the right thing to do.

© We set up an independent inquiry, established a mediation scheme
and provided financial support for people to obtain independent,
professional advice.

e But no evidence has emerged to support the serious allegations
being made

| hope this is helpful. | stand ready with my team to support colleagues
further on any element related to this.

