                                                                                                                      POL00029750
                                                                                                                   POL00029750




                                                                             STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL




Draft fo►r discussion

23 May 2014




This report and the work connected therewith are subject to the Terms and Conditions of the engagement letter dated 09
April 2014 between Post Office Limited and Deloitte LLP, The report is produced for the General Counsel of Post Office Ltd,
solely for the use of Post Office Limited for the purpose of assessing assurance sources and the design of certain controls
relating to the Horizon system. Its contents should not be quoted or referred to in whole or in part without our prior written
consent, except as required by law. Deloitte LLP will accept no responsibility to any third party, as the report has not been
prepared, and is not intended for any other purpose


DRAFT: Version 16
SUBJECT TO LEGAL PPRIVILEGE
                                                                            POL00029750
                                                                          POL00029750




1    Executive Summary                                                3

2   Introduction                                                     7

3   Approach                                                         9

4    Understanding the Horizon Processing Environment                19

5   Assessment of Assurance Sources                                  25

6   Matters for Consideration                                        29

Appendix 1: IT Provision Assurance Source Mapping and Gap Analysis   35

Appendix 2: Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features                 38

Appendix 3: Inventory of Documentation Reviewed                      56

Appendix 4: Engagement Letter                                        61

Appendix 5: Change Order 01                                          70




                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                    POL00029750
                                                                                                                                 POL00029750




                                       i
Context
As outlined to us by the Post Office Limited ("POL") litigation team, " POL is responding to allegations from Sub-
postmasters that the "Horizon" IT system used to record transactions in POL branches is defective andthat the
processes associated with it are inadequate (e.g. that it may be the source and/or cause of branch losses). POL is
committed to ensuring and demonstrating that the current Horizon system is robust and operates with integrity,
within an appropriate control framework. "

POL is confident that Horizon and its associated control activities deliver a robust processing environment through
three mechanisms: POL have designed features direcly into Horizon to exert control; POL operates IT
management over Horizon; and POL have implemented controls into and around the business processes making
use of Horizon. Collectively these three approaches of inherent systems design, ongoing systems management
and business process control are designed to deliver a Horizon processing environment which operates with
integrity.

Since its implementation in branches, POL has commissioned or has received a number of pieces of work relating
to the Horizon processing environment, to provide comfort over its integrity. This work, referred to in our report as
the "Assurance Work", provides documented assertiors relating to aspects of the design and operation of the
Horizon processing environment. The Assurance Workincludes IT project documents; operational policiesand
procedures; internal and external investigations and reviews; independent audits; and emails confirming otherwise
verbal assertions.

Deloitte has been appointed to:
         consider whether this Assurance Work appropriately covers key risks relating to the integrity of the
         processing environment,
    • to extract from the Assurance Work an initial schedule of the Horizon Features,
    • to raise suggestions for potential improvements in the assurance provision.

1
    "Horizon Features" is a term we have introduced b represent those features of the Horizon processing environment, including IT management
    and business use controls, which provide that:
       •    movements in Branch ledgers have the full ownershp and visibility of sub-postmasters; and
       •    audit trails kept by the system are complete and a;curate.

Summary of Approach
We have structured our work around the
key control assertions shown in the
diagram (right), which has been agreed
with POL. We consider these to be key
matters that POL should control in order to
gain comfort over the integrity of
processing.

We have considered POL's three design
approaches when evaluating the
Assurance Work.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                              POL00029750
                                                                                                            POL00029750




A key element of the approach was to identify the Horizon Features. POL did not have an existing document that
could be described as representing the Horizon Features in a demonstrably complete way, therefore we have
drawn out an initial view of the Horizon Features from the underlying documentation and considered Assurance
Work relating to them (Appendix 2) for the purposes of this review.

As communicated to us by management, we have also consdered the following 5 key control objectives during our
activities to identify Horizon Features:

        Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactionsto be processed;
        Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
        copied to the Audit Store;
        Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and digitally sealed', to protect their
        integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
        Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
        and
        Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters ofall centrally generated transactions processed to their
        Branch ledgers.

These key control objectives are an important subset ofthe overall set of key control assertions highlighted in the
diagram above.

We have grouped the Assurance Work provided to us into three areas, corresponding to POL's three mechanises
of exerting control over the processing environment, as follows:

        System Baseline Assurance Work: This aims to provide comfort that the original Horizon implementation
        and other changes performed under formal projects were well governed (compared to Deloitte project
        management methodologies) and that detailed testing was performed against agreed business
        requirements. Such activity would verify that the system was, at that point in time, fit for purpose and
        implemented as intended. This assessment considers the point when the system and processes are
        created.

    •   IT Provision Assurance Work: This aims to provide comfort that the IT management activities required to
        run the Horizon system with integrity are designed and operating effectively. Such activity verifies that key
        day-to-day IT management activities (e.g. security, IT operations and system changes) are appropriately
        governed and controlled.

    •   System Usage Assurance Work: This assurance aims to provide comfort that the controls in and around
        the business processes which make use of the Horizon system are appropriately designed, in place and
        operating as intended.

Our work has been performed as a desktop review of documentation made available and has neither tested the
quality, completeness or accuracy of the Assurance Work provided to us or tested any controls relating to the
Horizon processing environment.

Summary of Observations
Substantial Horizon-related system documentation exists, comparable to that typically seen in organisations of a
similar scale where IT activities are outsourced and formal assurance activities are not mandated. Some
organisations are externally mandated to have a greater level of end-to-end, risk orientated documentation and
testing, e.g. in financial services. POL is not so mandated.

Based on our review of the available documentation, our key observations are

    •   The extensive Horizon system documentation is structured from a technical rather than a risk and controls
        perspective and provides an understanding of the Hoizon Features. POL should conduct a formal




                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                              POL00029750




       assessment to identify a complete set of Horizon Features that respond to POL's control objectives.

   •   The integrity of the Audit Store is designed to be preserved by a system of "digital seals" and "digital
       signatures". This feature underpins the ability to confirm the completeness and accuracy of data kept in the
       Audit Store, and that of subsequent reports generated from the Audit Store. These digital seals and digital
       signatures are both key components in the Horizon Featt.res which are both validated during the extraction
       process from the Audit Store.

       POL is relying on the Horizon Features being implemented and operating as described. Whilst our review
       focussed on the design of the Horizon Features, the Assurance Work we have assessed does not
       completely test these features for implementation and operating effectiveness. Only those Horizon
       Features relating to IT Provision have been validated and tested by independent third parties. In addition,
       during the course of our engagement, one of the Horizon Features has been discovered by POL to not be
       implemented as expected.

   •   Business use (process) documentation is not complete or up to date, by some years in cases. As part of
       completing or updating the documentation of Horizon Features, all relevant business uses should be
       identified and evaluated from a control objectives perspective to identify potential additional matters being
       relied upon.

   •   Pre 2010 Baseline Assurance Work could not be provicbd by POL. This Assurance Work is required to
       evaluate the comfort that the system was originally built and tested to specific business requirements. The
       implementation in 2010 of HNG-X is asserted by POL t have not significantly impacted the design of the
       Horizon Features.

   •   Governing controls over key, day-to-day IT management activities have been independently tested and
       opined by Ernst and Young (since 2012) to a recognisedassurance standard (ISAE3402).

   •   A number of third party systems are used by Horizon on a day-to-day operational basis. Documentation
       asserts that these interactions do not impact on the Horizon Features.

Scope Limitations

Our work has been subject to the following exclusions:

   •    Only matters relating to the Horizon Features within the Horizon processing environment have been
        considered during our review;

   •   We have not provided a legal or any other opinion as to the completeness and accuracy of processing of
       Horizon at any point throughout the work;

   •    We have not had direct contact with any third parties other than named contacts that you have provided to
        us (Appendix 3);

   •    We have not verified or tested any information provided directly by you, or directly or indirectly by third
        parties (the schedule of information received is in Appendix 3);

   •    We have not reviewed any contractual provisions in place between you and third parties;

   •   Our work was limited by significant gaps existing in the information available, relating to both the granularity
       of information and the existence of the Horizon Features over the entire timeline of operation of Horizon.
       The effect of which is that there are in gaps within what we are able to comment upon over this timeline.
                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                            POL00029750




       Our findings below are written in the context of the information available, which relates to the current
       system;

   •   An event occurred in 2010 which required the use of the exceptional Balancing Transaction process in
       Horizon to correct a Sub-postmasters position from a technical issue. Information has not been provided on
       the circumstances that lead to this system issue and how the issue was identified. It is assumed that verbal
       assertions received from Fujitsu that this was the only time this process has been used hold true;

   •   We have not tested any of the Horizon Features; and

   •   We have not validated or commented on the quality of the Assurance Work supplied to us.




Our work was also based on the following assumptions:

   •   The documents provided are a complete and accurate representation of the Horizon design. We therefore
       cannot comment as to whether the Horizon Features described below are complete nor whether other
       processes or mechanisms exist which would need consideration in the context of the Matters.

   •   All changes made after the initial implementation have been properly approved, tested and validated as not
       undermining the Horizon Features i.e. that the system's controls have retained their integrity throughout
       and thus the controls identified within the documentation have been consistent over the system's lifetime.

   •   The assertions received relating to the major upgrade of Horizon in 2010 not materially changing the
       design of the Horizon Features hold true.

   •   The cryptographic keys underpinning the digital signatures in Horizon have not been compromised.

   •   The mechanisms for issuing cryptographic keys for signirg baskets is secure and authenticates requests to
       prevent unauthorised provision of keys.

   •   Fraud or collusion to undermine or work around the Horizon Features has not occurred, in particular within
       database administrator and security teams in Fujitsu.

   •   Assertions made by POL and Fujitsu staff have been accepted as accurate without corroboration or
       verification.




                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                             POL00029750




2 Introduction

Introduction
The Horizon system has been used by POL since 1995. During this time it has processed many millions of
transactions across thousands of branches. Horizon is accrelited by Payment Card Industry Data Security
Standard (PCI DSS) and ISO27001. It is currently used by more than 68,000 users across 11,500 POL branches
and is administered by Fujitsu as part of a managed service agreement. It is a key operational system for POL and
integrity of processing on the system is crucial to the day-to-day operations of the business.

POL is responding to allegations that the Horizon processing environment, used to record transactions in POL
branches, is defective and/or that the processes associated with it are inadequate.

In order to respond better to the allegations (which have been, and will in all likelihood continue to be, advanced in
the Courts), POL management want to demonstrate that the Horizon processing environment is robust and
operates with integrity, within an appropriate control framework.

In particular, management at POL has highlighted two key statements they would like to assess their comfort over
in response to the allegations, being:

    1. That Sub-postmasters have full ownership and visibility of all records in their Branch ledger; and
    2. That the Branch ledger records are kept by the system with integrity and full audit trail.

These statements have then been further sub-divided into the following statements:

        Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactionsto be processed;
        Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
        copied to the Audit Store;
        Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and 'digitally sealed', to protect their
        integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
        Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
        and
        Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters ofall centrally generated transactions processed to their
        Branch ledgers.


POL management have previously either been provided with or commissioned work (including independent
assurance reviews) into matters relating to Horizon's operating environment and processing integrity. Documeits
outlined in Appendix 3 have been provided to us and considered as part of the planning and delivery of cur review.

Objectives and Activities Undertaken

The purpose of this report is to provide, based upcn the information made available to us by you, an independently
produced summary of the Assurance Work undertaken overyour current day Horizon processing environment and
make recommendations on further work that could be doneto enhance these assurance sources.

The work we have performed to produce this report has included:

    •   Obtaining an understanding of the Allegations; POLs key risks in and internal controls over the Horizon
        processing environment relevant to the integrity of processing; the measures in place to record and
        preserve the integrity of system audit trails and other background matters that we may deem necessary to
        complete our review;




                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                               POL00029750




    •   Obtaining an understanding of the key differences between the current Horizon processing environment,
        and the system which this replaced (here-to referred to as the "Legacy System");

    •   Reviewing, understanding and consolidating the Assurance Work (e.g.: investigations, assurance activities
        and remediation actions) which POL or third parties have undertaken;

    •   Holding discussions with relevant members of POL staff and other key stakeholders;

    •   Reviewing project documentation relating to the 2010 implementation of Horizon, in order to compare the
        nature and extent of project governance and documentaton with Deloitte's good practice project
        management methodology;

    •   Preparing an initial schedule of Horizon Features and assessing the level of comfort over these, provided
        by POL's Assurance Work (including the use of a specialid to assess the design of the Audit Store's
        tamper proof mechanisms); and

    •   Recommend further activities that management could undertake to improve the assurance provision.

Scope limitations and assumptions are outlined in the Executive Summary above.


Understanding of Historical Issues and Concerns
As an initial step, in building the requisite understanding required of the historical context leading to this review, we
have reviewed the documentation provided by POL in order to understand the history of issues and concerns \Ahich
have been raised in relation to the system.

From the documents provided, we have identified the following matters which have helped to provide us with a high
level understanding of the nature and extent of the potential concerns with the Horizon processing environment,
and thus focus our work in certain higher risk areas:

Branch 14 Issue - Involved a processing error where historic accounting entries in the 2010/11 financial year were
replicated in accounts for 2011/12 and 2012/13.

Branch 62 Issue - Involved a Receipts and Payments mismatch in Horizon when discrepancies were moved into
the local suspense account (this is an account which aggregates all discrepancies into a single gain or loss for a
branch trading period).

Falkirk Issue - The Falkirk Anomaly occurred when cash or stock was transferred between stock units.

Spot Review Bible — This outlines a sequence of matters raised during the work performed by Second Sight over
the allegations raised over the Horizon system, and summary commentary on 10 issues within.

Lepton Detailed Spot Review Information (included within Spot Check Bible) — Detailed documentation has
also been provided in relation to Spot Review 1. The issue raised was that a Sub-postmaster will not be notified
about automatic reversals of transactions when not corrected to the data centre

Reflecting on the nature and substance of these issues, and documentation relating to their follow-up and
resolution, we have understood the importance of the audit trail to provide evidence relating to disparities between
Sub-postmaster accounts of events and subsequent investigations, based on audit trail evidence, by POL/Fujitsu.

As a result of the above understanding, our work relating to IT Provision and System Usage Assurance Work paid
particular (but not exclusive) focus on Information System Operations (IT environment processing), and busness
processes controlling relevant key data flows (the key data flow for our assessment being that of the complete and
accurate transmission of data from the Counter system at the Branch to the Branch Database and subsequently
into the Audit Store).




                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                               POL00029750
                                                                                                            POL00029750




In the absence of POL's own holistic risk assessment relating to the Horizon processing environment, key to our
assessment of sources of assurance has been the formulation of an initial "risk universe", against which coverage
of the associated risks by the relevant sources of assurance can be assessed ('mapped").

We have considered this risk universe across three key aeas:

    1. Control objectives and risks relating to the 'System Baseline'.
    2. Control objectives and risks relating to 'IT Provision'.
    3. Control objectives and risks relating to 'System Usage'.

Risks relating to the System Baseline — these are risks that the original implementation project and other
changes performed under formal projects were not conducted in line with good project management practices, and
that detailed testing was not performed against agreed business requirements. These risks are governed and
controlled outside of day-to-day system operating procedures. Controls which mitigate these risks are often
referred to as "Project Controls" and "Inherent System Controls" (those designed and built into the IT system).

Risks relating to IT Provision — these are risks that the underlying IT activities, necessary to provide a system
that can run and be used with integrity, are not designed and operating effectively. Such risks relate to key day-to-
day IT management activities, relating to security, IT operations and system changes. Controls which mitigate
these risks are often referred to as "General Computer Controls". Our work focussed on assurance provided o✓er
Fujitsu's activities in these areas.

Risks over System Usage — these are risks that key features of Horizon and corresponding business use
activities (processes), aiming to prevent or detect matters that would impact the integrity of processing, are not
designed, in place or operating as intended. These are the more detailed risks in relation to particular aspects of
capturing and processing transactions across the Horizon processing environment. Controls which mitigate these
risks are often referred to as "End User Controls", "Application Embedded Controls" and "Process Controls'. Our
work focussed on the internal dataflows within Horizon (Counter to Branch Database to Audit Store for example)
and we also considered the relevance of interfaces witi other systems such as the DVLA.

In the context of these three areas of risk we have performed knowledge gathering activities in order to understand
the Horizon processing environment in sufficient detail to identify specific risk areas and those Horizon Features
identified to exert control over these risks.

1. Approach to Understanding of System Baseline Risks

In considering Baseline risks we have considered pastiterations and changes to the Horizon IT system, including:

    •   Any that lead to changes to the Audit Store;
    •   The Horizon Implementation Programme in 2010-2011;
    •   The Data Strategy Foundation project in 2012 and 2013 (which updated the dataflows into Horizon from
        certain third party transactional systems, including `Post and Go', and 'Paystation +'); and
    •   The original Horizon platform delivered in 1995.




                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                             POL00029750
                                                                                                          POL00029750




2. Approach to Understanding of iT Provision Risks

Our understanding of IT Provision risks has been formulated through our understanding of the system via
documentation review and verbal discussion with supporting POL and Fujitsu SMEs. Due to the nature of the
System Provisioning risk areas, the formulation of this understanding has been mainly through interviewwith
Fujitsu and POL security team members.

3. Approach to Understanding of System Usage Risks

Our understanding of System Usage risks has again been formulated through documentation review and verbal
discussion with supporting SME's to identify additional support areas. Due to the nature of the System Usage risk
areas, the formulation of this understanding has been mainly through interview with Fujitsu, POL Finance Shared
Services and POL Security team members.

4. Approach to Consideration of the Horizon Features

In the formulation of our risk universes across the three areas highlighted in 1 — 3 above we have considered the 5
key matters relevant to the Horizon Features as instructed by management:

        Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactionsto be processed;
        Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
        copied to the Audit Store;
        Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and `digitally sealed', to protect their
        integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
        Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
        and
        Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters ofall centrally generated transactions processed to their
        Branch ledgers.

5. Combining the Above

Following our assessment across these four areas, thediagram below (see overleaf) describes the key risks
identified within the Horizon processing environment. We have number coded the risks in the below with (1)
corresponding to Baseline Risks, (2) corresponding to IT Provision Risks, and (3) corresponding to System Usage
Risks.

This diagram thus represents the framework of key risks that need to be controlled by Horizon Features and
appropriately assured in order to provide the comfort required by POL management.
                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                                                          POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                        POL00029750




        Key assertions requiring assurance, to underpin confidence in processing integrity
                          'hat the system was fit for purpose and                                                            That assertions on
                          worked as intended when first out in.                                                               this diagram are

              cv iv.                  impacted the des n_features adversei                                                   That su ortin IT
                                                                                                                             processes are well
                       Today               That transactions from the Counter are 1                                              controlled-
                                         recorded completely, accurately and on a
                                                        time) basis.

                                                                    _ __                  That the Audit Store i
                                                              That directly posted         complete and accurate
                                                           Balancing Transactions"        record of Branch Ledger         reported from the
                                              \are             visible and approved.            transactions.             Audit Store retains
                                                                                                                                 _n tegriit
                                                                                                                           original


                                              Overnight                                ►
                                              mo      o♦                                                       teA    ►
                                                                                  ~m ~It


                                                              Branch Database               Centera Audit Server
                                              /                              g                                       That DBAs or others
                                                                              W                                      granted DBA access
                                                                                                                      have not modified
                                                                                                                      ranch Database nor
                           .-                                           \                                              Audit Store data.

                       o  That data posted from
                        other systems and teams                              Credence
                        is visible to and accepted                           (100 days)
                           by sub post-masters.


       LEGALLY PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL                                                                                        © Deloitte LLP 2014


It can be observed that the majority of the risks identified are System Usage risks, which is expected based on the
complexity of the IT processing landscape and the diversity and volume of transactions being handled.




   1                                         1                                               UL ij1
                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                    POL00029750
                                                                                                                  POL00029750




Sources of Assurance Work irelating to the Horizon Processing Environment

The diagram below summarises key examples of the Assurance Work reviewed and referred to as part of our
assessment.


                            END TO END Horizon PROCESSING ENVIRONMENT




                                                                Responsible for `Usage with`ihtegnty'AAppropfla
                                                                    deliveri of processes is ng the
                                                                and




When considering the sources of assurance over IT Provision Risks, System Usage Risks and System Baseline
Risks, a number of parties have been (and continue to be), involved in performing work over the Horizon
processing environment which contributes to the overall assurance management has over the correct operation cf
the system.

Assurance Work from the following organisations, in addition to information provided from POL, have been
identified and considered in our work:
•   Fujitsu, who designed, built and now operate Horizon;
•   Bureau Veritas, who perform ISO27001 certification over Fujitsu's networks, including that of Horizon;
•   Information Risk Management (IRM) who accredit Horizon to PCI DSS;
DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE ITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                             POL00029750




•   Ernst & Young, who produce an ISAE3402 service audibr report over the Horizon processing environment;
    and
    Internal audit, who perform risk based reviews within POL.

In considering the Assurance Work provided to us by management during the course of this engagement we have
considered whether they constitute assurance provided under an assurance engagement, as defined by IFAC, or
are sources of information that provide comfort in other ways. For the purposes of clarifying the Assurance Work,
we have assigned each document received to one of two classifications, defined as follows:

"Assurance" —The Assurance Work has been provided under an assuranceengagement by an independent third
party, suitably qualified in the subject matter constituting the focus of the engagement to provide a valid opinion.
Sources of such assurance include:

    •   Internal Audit functions;
    •   External Audit; and
    •   Other third party reviews, not involved in the original design nor day-to-day operation of the system
        containing (a) a formal opinion, such as those performed in line with recognised standards, such as
        ISAE3402 or (b) no formal opinion (i.e. a report based on evidence and facts without interpretation).

"Other Sources of Comfort"— The Assurance Work is either not produced by an independent party or by an
individual who is suitably qualified in assurance engagements, or both. Other sources of comfort include:

    •   IT Project Documentation;
    •   Operational Documentation, such as policies, procedures and process / system information produced by
        functional teams;
    •   Reviews or investigations performed by outsourcers (e.g. deep dives, diagnostics, spot reviews);
    •   Business peer group review teams and functions; and
    •   `Second line' compliance teams.

In Appendix 3 we have documented all the Assurance Wcrk we received and added our classification of those
sources by these two categories.

Summary of Work Performed

Based upon the concepts outlined above we have performed the desktop based work below (further detail of which
is outlined in our Engagement Letter shown in Appendix 4). We have not performed any testing to validate the
information provided to us as part of our work.

Step 1: Analysis and Review

    •   Activity 1. Documentation Review - We have reviewed a number of documents produced by several
        different organisations in order to understand key matters relating to the Horizon system and the
        Assurance Work available.

    •   Activity 2. Risk Universe Formulation -We have then, in the absence of a holistic risk assessment being
        performed by POL and thus for the purposes of our assessment, created a risk universe based on our
        experience of information processing systems encompassing the three primary risk areas previously
        identified IT Provision, System Usage and Baseline Risks. The five key matters for consideration outlined
        by management were also considered during this process

    •   Activity 3. Review of Assurance Work — The available documentation was reviewed in order to
        understand the Assurance Work available to POL, against each of the three identified risk areas.




                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                           POL00029750
                                                                                                        POL00029750




Step 2: Gap Analysis and Assessment

Based on the analysis in Step 1 we have produced:

    •   Activity 4. System Provisioning Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis - Considering key
        potential gaps or areas of ambiguity in the available assurance sources when considering the System
        Provisioning risk universe.

        Activity 5. System Usage and Baseline Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis — Assessing the
        documentation relating to System Usage Risks and then performed deep dives into the following areas of
        specific risk:

                Horizon interfaces (including DVLA);
            o




                Branch Database;
            o




                Audit Store;
            o




                Horizon Implementation Project;
            o




                Audit Store Changes; and
            o




                Data Strategy Foundation project.
            o




    •   Activity 6. Peer Comparison to Assurance Available to Similar Organisations — We have assessed
        the Assurance Work available to similar organisations over System Provisioning Risks (the area of risk
        where a benchmark is most valid due to the level of information available from POL) and assessed
        therefore whether POL has comparable levels of assurance.


Step 3: Reporting

The analysis and interpretation in Step 2 has allowed us to formulate:

        Activity 7. Produce an Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features, and Recommendations —
        Mapping control assertions, Horizon Features and Assurance Work and reporting on the level of comfort
        that we have assessed in each of these areas. Identification of the key considerations for management
        arising from our analysis and plan of action to respond to these recommendations.

A more detailed description of these activities performed follows.


Activity 1: Documentation Review
All of the documentation reviewed during the course of our review has been documented within Appendix 3. This
documentation can be divided into the following classifications:

    •   Technical documentation on the Operation of the Horizon System — Reviewed in order to gain a deeper
        understanding on how the Horizon system works, how com1ex it is, and where we should be focusing
        further efforts and analysis;
    •   Independent Third Party Assurance documentation — This documentation has been reviewed in order to
        understand the existing assurance sources relevant tothe environment;
    •   Documentation of Historical Issues and Allegations in relation to the Horizon System — This documentation
        has been reviewed in order to understand the background context and better position the IT Provision,
        System Usage and Baseline System risk work performed over the environment; and
    •   Service Provider Analysis and Response to Issues — This documentation has been reviewed to gain an
        understanding of the work performed by Fujitsu in investigating the issues raised, and how these will be
        responded to.




                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                              POL00029750
                                                                                                           POL00029750




A number of individuals from POL have been interviewed during the course of formulating this report to supplement
our understanding from the provided documentation.


Activity 2: Risk Universe Formulation
System Baseline Risk Universe

The original implementation of Horizon in 1995, together with subsequent changes (whether routine via change
management processes, or large complex change programme; such as the Horizon system implementation in
2010-11), represent events affecting Baseline System Risk.

To assess these risks we have understood the historyof the Horizon system and selected three areas for more
detailed investigation including:

    •   Horizon Implementation;
    •   Data Strategy Foundation project; and
    •   A sample of changes to the Audit Store (subsequentto determining that this key risk area for the system
        had been left largely untouched by the key implementation events highlighted in the previous two bullets).

For each of these change areas we have assessed the Assurance Work from a governance and control
perspective, and POL ability to take comfort that the Horizon system was fit for purpose at the time of the change
and operated in line with management intentions (through business requirements definitions and projecttesting
against these).

IT Provision Risk Universe

This risk universe was formulated from our prior experience of auditing and assuring information systems and
involved the identification of high level risks across three core areas:

    •   Information Security;
    •   Information System Operations; and
    •   Change Management.

Once the IT Provisioning risk universe had been formulated a mapping of control objectives within the Assurance
Work was performed in order to assess coverage.

The three sources of assurance included within this mapping were:

    •   ISAE3402 report on the Horizon managed service;
    •   PCI DSS compliance report on Horizon; and
    •   IS027001 Statement of Applicability.

System Usage Risk Universe

As POL has not conducted a holistic assessment of risk in this area, a full understanding and assessment of
assurance over the System Usage risk environment was nct available for our review.

Instead we focussed our assessment on two key areas of risk: those relating to the completeness and accuracy of
the Audit Store, the Branch Database and key system interfaces with a significant third party, such as the DVLA.
We sought to understand the Assurance Work that has been done against each of these areas.

This involved:

    •   Enquiry with relevant SMEs;
    •   Review of documentation;



                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                            POL00029750




    •   Formulation of a risk universe in these specific areas; and
    •   Understanding of existing assurance work over controlswhich mitigate these risks.

Horizon Features

Across each of the three risk universes we identified features within the processing environment that exert control
and provide that:

        Horizon only allows complete baskets of transactionsto be processed;
        Baskets being communicated between Branch and Data Centre are not subject to tampering before being
        copied to the Audit Store;
        Baskets of transactions recorded to the Audit Store are complete and `digitally sealed', to protect their
        integrity and make it evident if they have been tampered with;
        Horizon's Audit Store maintains and reports from a complete and unchanged record of all sealed baskets;
        and
        Horizon provides visibility to Sub-postmasters of all centrally generated transactions processed to their
        Branch ledgers.

We refer to these identified features as the "Horizon Features" and identification of these features in response to
the matters for consideration listed above was a core component of our work.


Activity 3: Review of Assurance Work
With the background context of the three risk universes outlined within the previous section, we reviewed the
available Assurance Work in order to assess the coverage and nature of the comfort provided by the work.

The documentation reviewed during this stage has been listed within Appendix 3, as are the names of individuals
consulted in relation to our work.


Activity 4: System Provision Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis
Once the System Provisioning risk universes had been formulated a mapping of control objectives within each of
the main assurance sources was performed in order toassess coverage. The three sources of assurance included
within this mapping were:

        ISAE3402 report on the Horizon managed service;
        PCI DSS compliance report on Horizon; and
        IS027001 Statement of Applicability.

The results of this mapping exercise are summarisedwithin Section 5 and reproduced, in detail, within Appendix 1

In parallel to this assurance exercise we have also summarised key matters relating to each assurance source.
This involved considering the context and focus of the relevant Assurance Work and comparing these to the
context and focus that would be required for coverage of the key risks (this was in recognition of the risk that some
of the documents could be used or applied out of context from their original purpose).


Activity 5: System Usage and Baseline Assurance Assessments and Gap Analysis
Following our understanding of the system and historical issues the following areas were singled out asrelevant for
deeper analysis, and this approach was agreed with POL management:

    1. Audit Store — The audit store has been used frequently in investigations by POL / Fujitsu and is used as
       supporting evidence during legal proceedings. Therefore its integrity is paramount to responding to these
       issues. However the audit store cannot be relied on in isolation, as its integrity is dependent upon the
       correct processing of transactions by the wider Horizon system (upstream events if processed incorrectly
       will be recorded incorrectly by the audit store).



                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                              POL00029750
                                                                                                          POL00029750




    2. Horizon interfaces (including DVLA) — Horizon is reliant on a significant number of batch processes and
       online services (including interfaces with third partysystems) in order to function correctly. These routines
       need to be functioning correctly and accurately for the tansactions processed by the system and ultimately
       recorded in the audit trail to be reflective of the underlying commercial realities and business transactims
       they pertain to represent.

    3. Branch Database — The Branch Database is a key staging post' for data being transacted on counters
       within individual branches prior to transmission onv%ards to the Audit Store. As data from branches in held
       within the messaging journal table on this system for up to a day before being processed into the audit
       store the security controls and processes protecting thb data whilst in temporary storage here are
       paramount.

    4. Horizon Implementation Project — This change represented the largest single change to the Horizon
       system since implementation, and also the change implemented prior to adoption of the current major
       release of the system, and so was considered of particular relevance to our overall understanding of
       Baseline System risk.

    5. Audit Store Changes — Our understanding of the HNG-X Implementation Project quickly highlighted that
       this project had very little impact on the Audit Store itself. As a result we performed procedures to
       understand some of the changes which had been made tothe Audit Store following its original
       implementation.

    6. Data Strategy Foundation Project— We determined during the course of our work that this was another
       key implementation project in the recent history of the Horizon system of particular relevance to a sub-
       group of the system interfaces on Horizon. This projectwas therefore also deemed key for our
       understanding of system Baseline risk.

For each of the areas outlined in 1 — 6 above an assessment was made of the coverage and nature of the
Assurance Work provided.

For areas 1 - 3 (System Usage Risks) the functionalityof the particular area was further understood and key
controls over the corresponding risks then sought.

For areas 4 -6 (System Baseline Risks) we adopted a different approach, whereby the typical good practise
documentation requirements and project governance mettods as stipulated by Prince 2' (amongst others) were
utilised as a baseline, and the approach to each of the sampled change initiatives assessed from the available
documentation. This work was conducted through a mixture of verbal discussion and the receipt of supporting
evidence where applicable.


Activity 6: Peeir Comparison to Assurance Available to Similar Organisations
As part of our analysis we have also assessed whetherthe IT Provision assurance POL has obtained is
proportionate to that provided to similar organisations.

We have also considered the best practice approach outlined by the COSO framework, as published by The
Committee of Sponsoring Organisations of the Treadway Commission, in formulating suggestions for potential
areas of improvement in the risk, control and assurance activities of POL.




                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                         POL00029750
                                                                                                       POL00029750




                          The COSO Cube: Presents a framework for best practice
                            approaches to risk, controls and assurance activities.




Activity 7: Produce an Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features and raise
Recommendations and Plan of Action
We have written up our assurance schedule, which mapsthe Assurance Work to specific controls relating the
Horizon Processing Environment, and commented on the level of comfort that the Assurance Work provides in
each area.

Our report also contains recommendations for management together with a suggested plan of action for
management consideration.




                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                            POL00029750




                     •




Overview of the Processing Environment
The Horizon IT system was designed specifically for POL, and therefore an understanding of its operations,
processing environment and configuration was required in order to fully quantify the risks applicable to the IT
components of the processing environment.

Horizon has been the main operational system of POL since 1995 and:
    • Has a user base of 68,000 users;
    • Terminals within 11,500 branches;
    • Processes an average of 6 million transactions a day; and
    • Interfaces with over 20 third party systems.

As highlighted in our Approach' section above, we have categorised the risks posed on the system into three
distinct areas (System Baseline Risk, IT Provision Risk and System Usage Risk), and the remainder of this section
outlines our understanding of the IT system that underpins these.


System Baseline Risk
Horizon (HNG-X) Project

The change to the HNG-X system in 2010 was governed using Royal Mail's "Harmony" project methodology (the
governing project standard at the time). The project saw the phased implementation over 18 months of the HNG-X
solution (also known as "Horizon On-Line"). Individud POL Branches were migrated from the Legacy System to the
new HNG-X system, one by one.

No historical data was migrated, although six months of data was maintained within the Legacy System. Our review
of Assurance Work shows that a number of key controls were operated over the project, which was managed by
Fujitsu on behalf of POL. These included:

    •   POL signing off acceptance criteria;
    •   A phased migration including a model office pilot; and
    •   Branch by branch reconciliation between opening balances on the new system and closing balances on the
        legacy system.

Wipro, an independent third party, were commissioned to provide a report on the performance testing strategy
including gap analysis and recommendations, and GartnEr provided an assessment of the overall system design
and strategy.

The benefits from the migration included the removal of transactional data being held at local branches levels and
this data instead being stored centrally within the data centres.

Data Strategy Foundation Project

The project focused on moving the Accounts Payable filefeed which was initially received into Credence via
Transaction Integrator to processing via Fujitsu Horizon systems (i.e. not the Counter). The goal of the project was




                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                            POL00029750




to provide a longer term system solution which would provide complete reconciliation, resilience and disaster
recovery capabilities, as well as reduce the risk of cient withdrawal.

The POL strategic requirements to expand its offerings to other platforms beyond Horizon introduced the
requirement for a data integrator function. Originally POL approached Fujitsu Services to supply this service as
plans to incorporate an integrator service within the Horizon architecture were considered to represent a clean
solution. However, Fujitsu Services were unable to respond within the desired timescales as it would havediverted
their resources from key Horizon on-line delivery milestones.

POL therefore investigated alternative options, finally selecting the use of IBM datastage as the Transaction
Integrator. This was delivered as part of the POLMI project. Fujitsu Services then submitted a high level design
proposal for the provision of a service for processing client transaction files which would provide end-to-end data
validation / reconciliation, with resilience and DR (the incumbent IBM datastage solution did not provide resilience,
DR or end to end reconciliation, presenting a threatto relationships and future contracts).

Assurance Work provided included

    •   Project overview document;
    •   Business Case;
    •   Weekly Project Meeting Committee Presentation;
    •   Business Requirements;
    •   Test Strategy;
    •   Test Sign off; and
    •   Test Report.

Audit Store Changes

In assessing change risks in relation to the Audit Store, documentation has asserted that the recent significant
changes above did not result in significant changes tothe operation of the day-to-day Counter transaction flows or
the operation of the Audit Store.

To assess Baseline risk for the Audit Store the original implementation documentation for the Audit Store was
requested. Due to the data retention policy this documentation could not be provided and so a review of Fujitsu
provided documentation over subsequent changes over a large period of the Audit Store's history was performed.

In producing the diagram on page 9, we have considered the key System Baseline Risks in the context of two
control assertions below, which became the overall focus of our work in this System Baseline area:

    •   The Horizon Features were fit for purpose and worked as intended when first implemented; and
    •   Major changes since implementation have not significantly impacted the Horizon Features.




                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                      POL00029750




iT Provision Risk
As part of our work, through review of documentation and discussions with subject matter experts in POL, we
familiarised ourselves with the topology and operaions of the Horizon IT system.

The systems documentation and understanding obtained (shown in summary in diagrams below) highlights the
complexity of the Horizon IT system and the level of data being transacted via batch and real-time data flow. This
volume and level of complexity in the data flows, including interactions with other systems, highlights the
importance of effective IT Provisioning controls to the integrity of the processing environment.


                                                            External RAC Messagebased Clients                    External Web Services
                             External
                                                                                                                                                     8T       Postcode
                             Systems              Vacaunk       AdL      CAPO        Streamline      ei ay                       DVLA,                        Myvrhere

                                                                                                /~                 Futare GWS
                                                                                                                    Services             NbneyGram        Neopvsl            „~,p'm
                                              r    CSM                                      /

                                .................... .....     . ......... ......... ~ ...................... ........ .......... ........ .................. ..... .....

                               Data                       u    risafion genre
                                                                         enre                   NeMurk           Web Services
                              Centre                                                       Per:cent
                                                    NBS       o DCS                                                GVVS       DVLA        MGR,        BEND :        BKAC

                                                                                                                                                            ?GDD            PCAI
                                                                                                                              APGP
                                                                                                                                                             Service Hub


                                                                                                                 Training Wee Service
                                                                                                                         OLCT
                                                                                                             (simulatesAPOP, BBND, BKAC,
                                                                                                             DCS, ETS, DVLA, MGRM, NBS,
                                                                                                                        PGDD)


                                                                                Branch Database

                                                                                g     I                                         f—
                                                                                      I                                         I         CSM




                                                                                        Branch Access Layer
                                                                            (Authentication, recovery and serviee -routing)




                                                                                    Routing & Lead Balancing (vIa CSM network)

                            ........................................................ .............................................................................................
                                .................................................................. ......................................................................

                                  Branch
                                  Estate
                                                                                                Counter;
                                                                                                                                                     vesa„e la~orzalr

Diagram provided by Post Office Limited



The Horizon IT system is built in line with key principles that all data is held centrally within the data centre with the
exception of some standing data which is held locally within the branch. This centralisation principle applies to all
`completed' transactional data (known as "baskets") andto the Audit Store.

To support this principle the network architecture of Horizon is formulated on:

      •    Data centre;
      •    WAN Services (connecting datacentres, POL central site and Fujitsu sites); and
      •    Branch Network.




                                                                                                                                                                                           21
                                                                                                                                                                          POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                        POL00029750




The diagram below provided by Fujitsu shows the high level IT system infrastructure:




                                  rClient Systems
                                                                          r J
                                                                       Post Office Systems
                                                                                                                    J
                                                                                                    Fujitsu Support Sites                    Test Sites

  -Normal data path
                                   Client WAN                         PO WAN                           Support WAN
                                                                                                                                           Test Access

                                               I                           I
   —Backup data path---                               ____________
                                                                                                         I          1                          1



                                                                                                                                    Disabled in 1
                                    Client      PO       Support                                       Client           Supp
                                    DMZ        DIAZ       DMZ                                          DMZ               DM
                                                                               Inferoam us
             sa mie.                         ^ent,.l LAN                                                        e
                                                                                  LAN p
                                                            Primary                                            a:eE con                         z ~„~
                   .~                    1   0               Data                                                    Data
                                  Branch DMZ                Centre                                  Branch DMZ      Centre



                                                                          Branch WAN
                                                                                                                                        GPRS/EDGE Receiver
                   Earth 9tatbn
                                                                                                                                    EDGE / GPRS I3G Backup


                                                   Ro ter          Ho b                       Ro ter                    Ro ter

  Router & Dish                                    o 0 0                                       0 0
                          Pc                        Pc       PcPc                              Pc      Pc
     BroadBand VSAT                                                                                                     Mobile Branch
         Branch                                        Large Branch                          Small Branch                                    NeiLogical VisioDocument
                                                                                                                                                        0.4




The IT system is hosted on Bladeform technology with systems software being provided by:

    •      Windows 2003 Server (Enterprise and Standard, 32BIt and 64Bit);
    •      Red Hat Enterprise Linux (Release 4, 32Bit and 6413it);
    •      Solaris 10 (Discrete platforms only); and
    •      Windows XP, Windows 2000 and Microsoft NT operating systems for some legacy services.



A number of internal and external interfaces are necessary for the reliable day-to-day processing of the IT systems,
and hence the integrity of the Horizon Features which control these activities and interfaces; which is key to the
effective operation of the overall system.

External interfaces include (not an exhaustive list):

    •      DVLA;
    •      Lottery; and
    •      Bank Payment Channels (Vocalink, e-pay, Streamline).

Internal Interfaces include (not an exhaustive list):

   •       Paystation;
   •       POL SAP
   •       Pay and Go; and
   •       ATMs

A number of batch processes also run in facilitating the successful processing by the system.




                                                                                                                                                                             22
                                                                                                            POL00029750
                                                                                                         POL00029750




Managing the processing of the real-time and batch processing environment is Tivoli Workflow Scheduler (TWS)
which is used to execute, monitor and handle exceptions within the processing environment. TWS is managed and
monitored by Fujitsu as part of the managed service contract between the two parties.

In producing the diagram on page 9, we have considered the IT Provisioning risks in the context of the following
assertion:

    •   Supporting IT management processes are well controlbd.


System Usage Risk
Responsibility for the administration of the system rests with Fujitsu who provide change control, security
management, system operations, and end-user support.

Responsibility for the effective usage of the system, including complaint and effective business processes, remains
the responsibility of POL.

The user base of Horizon can be subdivided into two core areas:

    •   Central Users — including Finance, and users at the Network Business Support Centre.
    •   Branch Users — Sub-postmasters and their staff who are processing shop floor transactions.

Outside of the POL user base, Fujitsu provide administration services, and hold service and super user mcount
privileges within the system.

Horizon supports the processing of a multitude of different transactions including:
    • Purchases of goods;
    • Purchases of services (for example Lottery tickets or tax discs);
    • Payments to discharge customer debts (payment of mobile phone bills for example);
    • Refunds; and
    • Transaction corrections.

Several transaction mediums are accepted, for example:
   • Cash;
   • Credit and debit cards; and
   • Cheques.

A number of controls are in place to support the integrity of transactional processing including:

    •    The Audit Store, a secure area of Horizon which pertains to store all transactional information in
         sequentially numbered records, along with key system events;
    •    Monitoring controls facilitated by Tivoli Workflow Scheduler and associated exception handling processes;
    •    Handshakes and call offs between systems include varior.s controls around the integrity of transmitted
         data (such as digital signatures); and
    •    Backup communication routes between branches and the certral data centre (mobile technology).

Reconciliations are performed regularly both in branch and centrally. Key reconciliation processes carried out
include:

    •   Daily branch cash declaration and reconciliation to Horizon balances;
    •   Weekly balance of cash and stock and reconciliation to Horizon balances;
    •   Monthly trading period roll over (including resoluton of any suspense account issues rolling over from
        weekly or daily reconciliations); and
    •   Central finance processes to reconcile central records b cash remitted to POL, cheques remitted to POL
        etc.

In response to discrepancies as a result of these recmciliation processes investigations may be conducted by be
Finance Service Centre, and if required transactional corrections processed. These corrections are subject to
significant investigation and are subject to approvalby Sub-postmasters in the first instance.




                                                                                                                23
                                                                                                         POL00029750
                                                                                                      POL00029750




Workarounds are not usually required, the main workarcund being in relation to mobile connections from branch to
data centre in the event that the main connection to the central data centre cannot be utilised.

In producing the diagram on page 9, we have considered the primary System Usage risks in the context of the
questions posed within the scope of our work, and reined these risks into the following control assertions:

   •   Transactions from the Counter are recorded completely, accurately and on a timely basis centrally;
   •   Transactions processed to Branch Ledgers are recorded completely and accurately in the Audit Store;
   •   Directly posted "Balancing Transactions" are visible and approved;
   •   Information reported from the Audit Store retains its original integrity;
   •   Data posted from other systems and teams is visible to and accepted by sub post-masters; and
   •   Database Administrators (DBAs) or others granted DBA access do not modify data directly.




                                                                                                             24
                                                                                                                                       POL00029750
                                                                                                                                   POL00029750




                                                                           d




IT Provision Risk Assurance Sources I Gap Analysis
For the IT Provision risks the existing assurance sources appear to provide a good level of coverage over the risk
universe associated with this area of the Horizon processing environment.

Our high-level analysis of this coverage against the three core risk areas is as follows:




IS027001 Statement of            Good coverage                         Fair coverage                        Fair Coverage
Applicability


ISAE3402 Report                  Good coverage                         Good coverage                         Good coverage


PCI DSS Report                   Good coverage                         Limited coverage                     Fair coverage




Detailed analysis at an objective level is included within Appendix 1.

In considering this assessment, POL management should be cognisant of the inherent limitations of each report,
given the purpose for which it was written:




IS027001 Statement of   This document has been produced by Fujitsu, limiting its value from an independence perspective. It stould be
Applicability           noted however that it is supported by an independert assessment of IS027001 compliance by Bureau Veritas, an
                        accredited certification provider.


                        The main focus of IS027001 is on security, although it does also focus (to a lesser degree) on the otter core IT
                        Provision risk areas, Change Management and Information System Operations.


ISAE3402 Report         This document has been produced by an independent third party, Ernst and Young. It hasgood coverage of all three
                        IT Provision risk areas, and is produced accordingto testing standards stipulated within the ISAE3402standard.


                        In relying on this report management has considered Section 6 Complimentary User Entity Controls' which
                        stipulates the controls that POL should be operating in addition to the controls at Fujitsu in order b complete the
                        control environment over Horizon.


PCI DSS Report          The scope of the PCI DSS report is the narrowest of the three assurance reports. It is focused exclusively on the
                        security of cardholder data, and does not span theother two IT Provisioning risk areas to the degreeof the other
                        assurance sources. It provides minimal coverage inparticular of the Information Systems Operations System
                        Provisioning risk.




Of note when considering coverage of IT Provision assurance sources is that the majority of the focus is over
Information Security, whereby based upon the historical issues and allegations being levelled at the system,
DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE ITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                              25
                                                                                                             POL00029750
                                                                                                          POL00029750




Information System Operations and Change Managementwould appear to be higher risk areas in the context of
this particular piece of work.


Peer Comparison of IT Provision Assurance Available to Similar Organisations
Our comparison to peer organisations yielded the folbwing results:

. ..

Print Media                       External Audit                      N/A

                                  Ad-hoc Risk Consultancy


Retail                            External Audit                      FCA (CCA)

                                  Internal Audit



Retail                            External Audit                      FCA (CCA)

                                  Internal Audit                      Loan Loss Provisioning Reporting

                                  PCI DSS


Retail and payments processing    External Audit                      FCA
                                  Internal Audit




Government                        External Audit                      Data Protection

                                  Internal Audit

                                  PCI DSS

                                  Risk




This highlights that the level of IT Provision Assurance Work that POL has performed is comparable to that in other
similar organisations which are not subject to risk and control regulatory requirements.

This should however also be interpreted in the context of the allegations being made against the Horizon
processing environment which may suggest that a higher level of assurance is warranted compared to these
similar organisational benchmarks.




                                                                                                                 26
                                                                                                                                                      POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                  POL00029750




Baseline Risk Assurance Sources I Gap Analysis
Our assessment of Baseline Risk was based upon three core scope areas:

     •    Horizon Project;
     •    Data Strategy Foundation Project; and
     •    Audit Store Changes.

For each of these scope areas we queried relevant POLand Fujitsu personnel in order to understand the project
and change governance documentation available, and fore an assessment as to the project controls applied b
these change events, compared to Deloitte's Project NFanagement methodology.

Our findings are as follows:                     •




                                                          .




                                                                   •




                                                                            •




                                                                                •




                                                                                    .
Audit Store                Changes to Horizon, such as the migration to HNG-X in 2010 involved minimal changes to the operation of the Audit Store. As
                           a result these large scale projects are of minimal interest with regards to establishing a Baseline Risk position in relation to the
                           design and functioning of Horizon Features relating to Audit Store.


                           Some small changes have been made to the Audit Store in more recent years. Samples of documentation correlating to
                           changes throughout the years the Audit Store had been in place were requested in order to understand whether these
                           changes to the system had been managed to good practise standards.


                           Further at the point of implementation of the Audit Store verbal representation was provided that a 'Security Report was
                           produced which pertained to demonstrate that the functionality of the system was as designed. This would be a key piece of
                           Assurance Work, demonstrating the correct functionality of the Audit Store at that point in time, but it could not be located by
                           PO1 and thus could not be reviewed as part of our work.


HNG-X Implementation       Detailed business and technical design documents have been verbally represented to have been created during the delivery of
(2010)                     the project life cycle.


                           Detailed test plans, MI, Defect Management and other key testing artefacts were produced during the cou rse of the project.
                           Several acceptance criteria related to the closure of testing defects. Examples of testing documentation have been provided to
                           our review team during the course of our work.


                           Migration checklists and instructions have been provided. These illustrate that site visits would be conducted during the
                           migration to support the Sub-postmaster with the migration and support the resolution of any queries.


                           We have been provided with verbal representation that detailed project acceptance criteria were agreed between Fujitsu and
                           POI, and then signed off during the lifecycle of the project. An example of such acceptance criteria in relation to Non-
                           Functional Requirements has been provided to us to support this verbal representation.


Data Strategy Foundation   Detailed business and technical design documents have been verbally represented to have been created during the delivery of
Project                    the project life cycle.


                           Assurance Work was provided to demonstrate business scoping and approval of changes to be applied (including a benefits
                           realisation and costings map), requirements tracker document, testing strategy plan, testing report plan and migration
                           summary documents. We were also provided with an example of the weekly reporting process at project close which
                           demonstrated the level of governance and oversight the project had from senior stakeholders.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                            27
                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                              POL00029750




Summarising the work we have performed against Baseline risk we conclude that for each sampled change,
Assurance Work has been produced in accordance with defired change management or project methodologies.
We have not however been furnished with all key items of documentation we would have liked to review, due to the
availability of such documentation to POL, and much of the Assurance Work provided to us were confirmationsof
verbal representations made during our work.

Further work will be required to perform a 'deep dive' review of project and change documentation on paricular
high risk areas (for example the original implementation of the audit store, and acceptance criteria sign off for the
Branch Database commissioning as part of the Horizon HNG-X Implementation project), in order to provide
assurance that the system baseline position were appropriately implemented and tested (timeframes of such
positions varying depending on the component of the system under investigation).


Assessment of Assurance against System Usage Risk Areas
Our assessment in each of these areas is based upon information contained within system documentation from
Fujitsu and operational policy and procedure documentation from the finance service centre, as well as emails
confirming verbal assertions we received during the course of our work.

No testing or independent sources of assurance were dentified over these System Usage risk areas.

Our understanding of the design of Horizon Features responding to key risks is a core output of our work and is
outlined within Appendix 2 where we have provided adocumentary listing of all of the Horizon features.




                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                                         POL00029750
                                                                                                                                    POL00029750




In this section we set out our key matters for management consideration, further to the work we have performed
above.

We have structured this section as follows:

    •         Key Matters for Consideration, by Risk Area reviewed;
    •         Factors to Consider in Formulating an Action Plan; and
    •         Proposed Action Plan.


Key Matters for Consideration




                      a. Risk Appetite: During our work, only occasional linkage of work b the risk appetite of POL
                         was noted. Whilst not unusual in the consumer busiress sector, such articulation and
                         embedding of risk appetite assists with the delivery of better optimised and prioritised key
                         controls and assurance activities.
                      b. Holistic Risk and Assurance Framework: A holistic, risk intelligent assessment relating b
        (~)              the identification and mitigation of key risks to tie integrity of processing should be
                         considered in order to validate the completeness ofthe Horizon Features referred to in our           N/a
                         work and thus provide a complete schedule of key ccntrols that require assurance. Whilst
   General
                         Assurance Work has been provided demonstrating theuse of key forums for tracking the
                         risk environment surrounding Horizon (such as the hformation Security Management Forum
                         and Fujitsu Services Security Reports), these arent set up to specifically consider the
                         holistic risk and assurance framework necessary to enable an overall comment on the
                         design, implementation and operating effectivenessof the Horizon Features.


                      a. Project Governance: Governance procedures described to us (verbally) suggest that the
                         expected levels of business involvement in pre-go lye system and user acceptance testing
                         is performed as part of system implementation projects over the Horizon IT system; and that
                         business users would be appropriately involved in sgning off of system requirements and
                         readiness to go-live (full system reconciliations).To supplement these verbal assurances,
                         management has provided us with samples of documentation from the three sampled
                         change areas (Horizon Implementation, Data Strategy Foundation, and Audit Store
                         changes). Despite these sources of evidence, management should consider whether further
        (2)              investigations into sources of assurance from the o'iginal Horizon implementation would be          Verbal
                         worthwhile, given the importance of establishing awell-founded baseline position over the       representations
   System                Horizon Features.
                                                                                                                            Limited
   Baseline
                      b. Audit Store Baseline: The implementation of Horizon HNG-X in 2010-11 wasasserted to             documentation
                         not have had a significant impact on the Horizon Features. In particular no changes were
                         made to the Audit Store as a result of the implemertation. Therefore the 'baseline' position
                         for the Audit Store was established as being at the original implementation of the Horizon IT
                         system. Key documentation around the baseline positon for the Audit Store has not been
                         able to be provided to us during the course of ourwork. We note that a security report was
                         verbally represented to us to have been commissioned during the original implementation of
                         the Audit Store, although this report could not belocated and provided to us.




                                                                                                                                           29
                                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                                            POL00029750




            a. End User Entity Control Considerations: The ISAE3402 report requires interpretation in
               the context of these controls at POL. They are outlned in section 6 of the ISAE3402 report.
               Without such analysis, the assurance provided by the ISAE3402 is weakened. We are
               aware that POL has nearly completed work in order b address such considerations.
            b. Assurance Clarifications: In the context of detailed testing and assurance pyocedures,
               there are areas of the ISAE3402 report which would benefit from further clarification, in order
               to remove the risk of ambiguity from its interpretation, and overlaps with other sources of
               assurance that may be performed. For example:
                   the report does not state from where populations of data tested in samples were
              o




                   obtained and thus how exposed conclusions may be b internal fraud or deliberate
                   override of control (e.g. for change management testing, were samples picked from the
                   population in the secure Audit Store, or from anotter source?);                                  Extensive
   (3)                                                                                                            documentation
                   the report does not draw out certain key features in the control design, which we would
              o




   IT              assume are present, for example, control objective 4.8.11 (relating to access to the            Independent
Provision          system being restricted to appropriate users) does not explicitly state and test that users        testing
                   must have and use their own unique username, thus inderpinning audit trail integrity;
                   and controls relating to the management of administator access could be more specific
                   as to the extent and nature of the design of contrds and testing performed.
                   the report is not explicit in the sample sizes uses for testing; and
              o




                   the report contains tests which could be strengthened, for example, control test 6.5 in
                   section 7 appears to test through discussion with personnel only, without clarifying if
                   anything was done to corroborate such verbal asserions.
            c. Internal Audit Work — Internal audit work conducted highlights progress h responding to
               and closing down issues in relation to internal audt risks, but a number of issues remain
               outstanding. Internal audit have also not done anyspecific assurance work over the
               allegations being raised on the Horizon system andPOL's response to the issues raised.




            a. Risk Driven Considerations: The current documentation over System Usage Risks has
               been largely written in response to key incidents v events, by non-independent parties and
               from operational perspectives. Whilst detailed, itis also not written from a risk and
               assurance perspective and is rarely evidential in is content.
            b. Risk and Control Framework. There are areas where an understanding of the design and
               nature of operations relating to System Usage Risks is available, but the design,
               implementation and operating effectiveness of key controls has not been aggregated into a
               risk driven framework nor formally assured throughevidence based testing. Further, the
               ability of documentation to fully support informatbn relating to the detailed design of controls
               relating to System Usage Risks is unclear (e.g. whist JSNs are sequential is there a
               systems operations control which checks the completeness of this sequence proactively?).
               The Schedule of Assurance over Horizon Features we have formulated as part of our work
               (and documented in Appendix 2) provides a basis forsuch a risk and control framework, as
               well as targeted testing over key controls. Management should consider enhancing their
               assurance provision by verifying the completeness dthis schedule, and conducting
               implementation and operating effectiveness testingof the key controls there-in.                       Partial
                                                                                                                  Documentation
            c. Interfaces - DVLA: Whilst environmental risk relating to system operatons is largely
               assured in the ISAE3402, we note that no evidence d specific or detailed testing or
   (4)         assurance work has been carried out over System Usage Risks relating to the DVLA
               interface (both IT and business in nature). We notethat many interfaces observed do not
System         relate directly with the Horizon Features in scope for this review, but we recommend that
Usage          such activities be considered for inclusion in theoverall risk and control framework relating
               to the Horizon processing environment.
            d. Audit Store: We observed the following:
                   It is not clear from the documentation we have been provided whether POL has agreed
              o




                   that the current capturing of certain, key system events, is complete and appropriate for
                   potential governance and investigation needs;
                   We have not identified controls which formally report, review and consider the impact
              o




                   and resolution of any exceptions identified duringthe Audit Store extraction process, nor
                   reconcile the data from other reporting systems inthe business to those data sets
                   contained within the Audit Store ;




                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                          POL00029750
                                                                                                        POL00029750




       Investigatory work on the Audit Store has all beenperformed by Fujitsu who, whilst
  o
       technically qualified, do not constitute an indeperdent or risk experienced party for
       assurance driven purposes. POL could consider doingmore independent analysis of
       Audit Store historic data to verify that it is recorded in line with expected characteristics;
       and
       From the documentation we have reviewed, controlsto assess that the digital signature
  o




       is valid and verify that there is a complete sequence of JSNs are retrospective. No
       proactive checks were documented which describe the performance of such verifications
       prior to the copying of data to the Audit Store.
e. Proactive monitoring of key System Usage Risks: The current assurance environment
   appears to be "reactive" in nature, with exceptionsin processing triggering diagnostic and
   remediation activity only when reported. It would appear that no use is being made of the
   Audit Store, for proactive monitoring of unusual orexceptional system events potentially
   worthy of further investigation and action.
f. Hardware controls over the Audit Store: The Centera EMC devices used to host Audit
   Store data have not been configured in the most secure EC+ configuration. As a result
   system administrators on these boxes may be able to process changes to the data stored
   within the Audit Store, if other alternative softwae controls around digital seals, and key
   management are not adequately segregated from Centera box administration staff.
   Privileged access to the cryptographic solution around digital signatures, and publically
   available formulas on MD5 hashed digital seals woutl potentially allow privileged users at
   Fujitsu to delete a legitimate sealed file, and reliacement with a 'fake' file in an undetectable
   manner.
g. Branch Database: We observed the following in relation to the BranchDatabase being:
       A method for posting 'Balancing Transactions' was observed from technical
  o




       documentation which allows for posting of additional transactions centrally without the
       requirement for these transactions to be accepted by Sub-postmasters (as 'Transaction
       Acknowledgements' and 'Transaction Corrections' require). Whilst an audit trail is
       asserted to be in place over these functions, evidence of testing of these features is not
       available;
       Processes around Transaction Acknowledgements and Transaction Corrections are
  u




       subject to out of date documentation, or in the cam of Transaction acknowledgements,
       no documentation at all. Such documentation shouldbe produced or brought up to date;
       For 'Balancing Transactions', 'Transaction Acknowledgments', and 'Transaction
  o




       Corrections' we did not identify controls to routinely monitor all centrally initiated
       transactions to verify that they are all initiatedand actioned through known and
       governed processes, or controls to reconcile and check data sources which underpin
       current period transactional reporting for Subpostmasters to the Audit Store record of
       such activity;
       Security on the Branch Database around the 'Messagng Journal table' is a key area of
  o




       risk due to branch transactional data being held onthistable for up to a day before being
       written to the Audit Store. It was unclear from the documentation reviewed whether
       specific assurance work had been carried out in the area; and
       Controls that would detect when a person with authorised privileged access used such
  o




       access to send a 'fake' basket into the digital signing process could not be evidenced to
       exist.




                                                                                                             FE
                                                                                                                                               POL00029750
                                                                                                                                            POL00029750




Recommendations
We have identified three areas where POL should consider further actions to strengthen the quality and nature of
assurance in place over the Horizon system.

These are actions that may:

    •        Further support Project Sparrow;
    •        Integrate knowledge obtained from this work into the Future System Requirements project; and
    •        Help POL to move towards a more holistic Programme of Assurance.

We have aligned each of the actions we would recommend to POL management to one of these areas, and we
present these below.

Actions that may further support Project Sparrow



        Al          Perform a detailed review           Balancing Transaction use: Instruct a suitably qualified party (independent of
                                                   of




                    Fujitsu) to carry out a review of the circumstancesleading up to the need to use the Balancing Transaction
 Investigation
 of Balancing       functionality in Horizon, including an assessment d the communications with the relevant Sub-Postmasler prior to
 Transactions       any adjustment being made to their ledgers. This work should include a more detailed walkthrough of the current day
  Use in 2010
                    "Balancing Transaction" policies, procedures and key controls, making recommendations for improvement



        A2
                    Perform implementation testing              Horizon Features: Instruct a suitably qualified party (independent d Fujitsu) to
  Verification
                                                           of




   Work that        carry out implementation testing of the Horizon Features (or a selection of key Horizon Features) identified in this
    Horizon
                    report. The work should aim to provide POL with contort that the Horizon Features extracted from documentation are
 Features are
 Implemented        actually designed and implemented exactly as descrbed in that documentation.
 as Described


                    Analytical Testing        Historic Transactions: Audit Store documentation asserts that the system contains seven
                                         of




                    years of Branch transactions, and a number of system event activities. In addition, a number of asserions relating to
                    data integrity, record / field structure and key cmtrol features (such as sequencing of JSN) are made in
        A3
                    documentation, but have never been validated by paities outside of Fujitsu. With modern day technologes, the
  Analytical        analytic profiling and testing of such Big Data set; is likely to be feasible, thus POL should consider instructing a
  Testing of
   Historic         party independent of Fujitsu to perform independentrisk analytics on an extract of all Audit Store data to verify that
 Transactions       (a) key characteristics are seen in the data as expected and (b) what other matters / exceptions I insghts can
                    potentially be derived. This exercise would also povide valuable insight into those Horizon Featuresthat could be
                    automatically monitored as part of the optimised rsk and control environment described below.



        A4          Update / Create documentation formalised all key acjustment and reporting processes in operation over
                    Horizon in the FSC: Identify and document all key activities in the FSCrelating to both adjustment processing to
Documentation
 of all Horizon     Sub-Postmaster ledgers and to the control activities that ensure that transactional data visible to Sib-Postmasters is
  adjustment
                    fully reconciled to the Audit Store's high integrty' copy of Branch Ledger transactions. Use this exercise to verify the
 and reporting
 processes in       completeness and appropriateness of Horizon Features so far identified from verbal assertions, and that perform
    the FSC
                    implementation testing (per A2 above) of such contols.




                                                                                                                                                   RN
                                                                                                                                          POL00029750
                                                                                                                                      POL00029750




Actions that will integrate knowledge obtained from this work into the Future System Requirements
project.


                   Produce Future System Requirements Document: Produce a schedule of key system requirements thatany
      B1
                   future Horizon replacement platform should deliveragainst, as an underpinning baseline for the integity of
    Produce        processing. This schedule would outline key controlobjectives, with current day control activities /Horizon Features
    baseline
                   and /or other examples cited to show how such control objectives could be addressed in any future systm. The
 requirements
   for future      schedule should include matters that will support tie delivery of such design confidence in efficientways, and
replacement o of
                   providing foundations for preventative, detective aid monitoring control activities. It could also higilight key
  the Horizon
    System         questions for POL to consider, such as the longeviy of data head in the Audit Store and the type of cryptographic
                   mechanisms applied to the system.




Actions that may help POL move towards a more holistic programme of Assurance

This area is the more significant piece of work recommended in a broad context for POL to consider as a result of
our assessment.

The development of such a holistic assurance programmeshould be seen as a 'strategic' response to the issues
raised. If delivered successfully it will bring assurance benefits beyond the confines of assuring the integrity of
processing within Horizon.

Whilst not raised specifically below, such an exercise would first require the appointment of a role in POL who
would be responsible for the coordination of assurance across the whole organisation and the reporting of key
areas where assurance provision could be improved (a 'Head of Assurance"). This would ensure that POL
Management and the Board have the ability to map, coordinate and assess assurance sources (and their quality)
on an ongoing basis for the organisation.


                      Risk Workshop': Conduct an exercise with key stakeholders in POL, including those in charge of Governance, to
        c1
                      create a baseline understanding of risk and risk management concepts; share examples of how similar organisations
      Risk
                      manage, define and control key risks; and obtain siggestions and consensus as to if, where and how POLcould
    Workshop
                      become a more "Risk Intelligent" organisation and sporting of risk and assurance matters could be improved.


                      Construct Risk and Control Framework: Extend and confirm the completeness of the HorizonFeatures which are
        C2
                      designed to exert control over the Horizon processing environment. The framework can be used to priortise key
 Construct Risk       areas for improvement (including clarifications / tie removal of ambiguity in existing sources) and embed agreed
  and Control
                      changes in current assurance sources. A key component for the construction of this risk and control famework is the
  Framework
                      initial information produced as part of our analyst and reproduced in Appendix 2. This Framework couti be
                      extended to cover POL's overall risk and control framework, not just those areas relevant to Horizon processing.

                       Test Controls: Once the framework is verified as complete, key cortrols can be identified and evidence based
        C3            testing performed to validate that they are operathg effectively. Such operating effectiveness work could be
      Test            performed on a sustained basis and could be delivered by an independent party in line with a recognises assurance
     Controls         standard. In addition, this exercise can be used tofeedback on the design of the control environmentso that it can
                      be optimised (i.e. maximise coverage of key risks,with minimal duplication).
                      Sustain Assurance Delivery and Implement More Proactive Monitoring2: The longer term assurance map can
        C4
                      be designed to sustain assurance delivery for POL offer key risks. This may include a transition to a more proactively
    Optimise
                      monitored control environment ("continuous controlsmonitorin g°), where automated alerts are generated if certain
    ongoing
     testing          key behaviours in the system are identified.




                                                                                                                                               RM
                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                           POL00029750




Notes:

'Risk Workshop: Risk appetite statements may be considered as part of this exercise, but are typically found by
key stakeholders to be a different area to understand. Such statements are effectively matters which help an
organisation to avoid imprecise or open statements relating to risk, which do not assist with the effective
management of responses to such risks. Statements are mechanisms that also help management to define
parameters relating to risk, against which key decisions and escalation activities can be performed.

`Key risk indicators' are often a tool used by management, and those in charge of Governance, in these areas.
Whilst POL needs to consider their own risk statements and indicators, some examples of those that may be
worthy of consideration in relation to the integrity of processing in Horizon could include:

         •   The number of allegations or concerns raised by Sub-postmasters during a defined period;
         •   The number and value of adjustment postings being performed by FSC
         •   The use of balancing transactions
         •   The number of security incidents on the Horizon systemduring a defined period;
         •   The value of unreconciled differences between systems / ledgers
         •   The number and nature of errors or exceptions in processing; and
         •   Key controls found to not to be operating effectively in a period.

The above are not exhaustive and key risk indicators need to be considered thoroughly in response to the
particular risks and controls which are required in response to the risk universes formulated over the Horizon
processing environment.

2Sustain Assurance Delivery and Implement more Proactive Monitoring: Benefits of these activities could
include:

         •   Minimising duplication in the control framework, and the assurance activities there-on;
         •   Support targeted assurance provision in the contextof existing or potential future allegations;
         •   Provide more measureable benchmarks of performance against other organisations;
         •   Underpin further efficiencies in the assurance provsion, for example the automation of existing manual
             controls;
         •   Incentivise ongoing improvement in both the processes and the assurance provision, by highlighting
             deficiencies on a timely basis and reporting these directly back to those business or outsourced
             owners who need to take a remediation or corrective action; and
         •   Support the maintenance of the completeness of documentation over the Horizon Features.




                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                     POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                  POL00029750




Appendix 1: IT Provision Assurance Source Mapping and Gap
Analysis

The mapping below outlines the more detailed IT Provision assurance mapping against IT Provision risks, as summarised in Section 4:




                                                     A.10 Communications and
              Data converted from legacy systems
                                                     Operations Management
              or previous versions introduces data                                                                    Requirement 6: Develop
Change                                               A.12 Information Systems       4.8.10 Change
              errors if the conversion transfers                                                                      and maintain secure
Management                                           Acquisition, Development       Management
              incomplete, redundant, obsolete, or                               1                                     systems and applications.
                                                     and Maintenance
              inaccurate data.
                                                     A.10 Communications and
              Inappropriate changes are made to      Operations Management
              system software (e.g., operating       A.12 Information Systems                                         Requirement 6: Develop
Change                                               Acquisition, Development       4.8.10 Change
              system, network, change-                 q                p                                             and maintain secure
Management                                                                          Management
              management software, access-           and Maintenance                                                  systems and applications.
              control software).

                                                     A.10 Communications and
                                                     Operations Management
              Inappropriate changes are made to      A.12 Information Systems                                         Requirement 6: Develop
                                                                                    4.8.10 Change
Change        the database structure and             Acquisition, Development                                         and maintain secure
Management                                           and Maintenance                Management
              relationships between the data.                                                                         systems and applications.


                                                     A.10 Communications and        4.8.2 Backup
                                                     Operations Management          4.8.5 Incident
              Financial data cannot be recovered     A.14 Business Continuity       Management                        Information System
 Operations   or accessed in a timely manner         Management                     4.8.6 Major Incident              Operations not within
              when there is a loss of data.                                         Process                           scope for PCIDSS review.
                                                                                    4.8.7 Security Incident
                                                                                    Process




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                             POL00029750
                                                                                                                                          POL00029750




                                                      A.10 Communications and    4.8.3 Job Scheduling
                                                      Operations Management      4.8.4 Availability and
                                                                                 Capacity Management
             Production systems, programs,
                                                                                 4.8.5 Incident               Information System
             and/or jobs result in inaccurate,
                                                                                 Management                   Operations not within
Operations   incomplete, or unauthorized
                                                                                 4.8.6 Major Incident         scope for PCIDSS review.
             processing of data.
                                                                                 Process
                                                                                 4.8.7 Security Incident
                                                                                 Process
                                                      A.1 1 Access Control
                                                                                                              Requirement 3: Protect
             Inappropriate changes are made
                                                                                 4.8.12 Access to             stored cardholder data.
             directly to financial data through
                                                                                 databases, data files, and   Requirement 6: Develop
Security     means other than application
                                                                                 programs                     and maintain secure
             transactions.
                                                                                                              systems and applications.
                                                      A.10 Communications and
             Inappropriate changes are made to        Operations Management
             Application systems or programs          A.12 Information Systems
             that contain relevant automated          Acquisition, Development                                Req uirement 6: Develop
                                                                                 4.8.10 Change
Security     controls (i.e., configurable settings,   and Maintenance            Management                   and maintain secure
             automated algorithms, automated                                                                  systems and applications
             calculations, and automated data
             extraction) and/or report logic.

                                                      A.8 Human Resources
             Individuals gain inappropriate access    Security
             to equipment in the data centre and                                                              Requirement 9 Restrict
                                                      A.9 Physical &             4.8.1 Physical and
Security     exploit such access to circumvent        Environmental Security     Environmental Controls       physical access to
             logical access controls and gain                                                                 cardholder data.
             inappropriate access to systems.
                                                      A. 1 Access Control
             Systems are not adequately
                                                                                                              Requirement Develop
             configured or updated to restrict                                   4.8.10 Change




                                                                                                                           s:
Security                                                                                                      and maintain secure
             system access to properly                                           Management
                                                                                                              systems and applications.
             authorized and appropriate users.
                                                      A.1 1 Access Control
                                                                                                              Requirement 6: Develop
             The network does not adequately                                     4.8.9 Networks               and maintain secure
             prevent unauthorized users from                                     4.8.10 Change                systems and applications.
Security
             gaining inappropriate access to                                     Management                   Requirement 11: Regularly
             information systems.                                                4.8.11 Security              test security systems and
                                                                                                              processes.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                    POL00029750
                                                                 POL00029750




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                      37
                                                                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                             POL00029750




Appendix 2: Assurance Schedule over Horizon Features

We present below a schedule of the Assurance Work and sources we have identified which relate to certain groups of Horizon Features.

We have structured these in line with our three areas of assessment (System Baseline, IT Provision and System Usage), as defined in our report.

We have also recorded our assessment of the level of comfort that POL has over that Horizon Feature, defined as:

   •   "Significant" means we have seen Assurance Work that delivers comfort through evidence based testing by independent partes.
   •   "Partial" means we have seen Assurance Work in the form of descriptions in formal documentation, but no testing of implementation or operating effectiveness.
   •   "Limited" means we have seen Assurance Work that documents verb d assertions we received during our work.
   •   "None" means that Assurance Work has not yet been provided b us.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                       38
                                                                                                                                   POL00029750
                                                                                                                                POL00029750




System Baseline




Baseline   The system was    The design of key elements of the      No information provided.   Preventative   Manual   1 None
           fit for purpose   Horizon system relevant to the
           and worked as     integrity of auditing and capturing
           intended when     transactions was formally agreed and
           first put in?     signed off prior to systems
                             deployment.
Baseline   The system was    Traceability Matrices have been        No information provided.   Preventative   Manual    None
           fit for purpose   documented, implemented and
           and worked as     periodically reviewed to ensure that
           intended when     business requirement documents
           first put in?     have been regularly reviewed against
                             project progress.

Baseline   The system was    During the initial implementation of   No information provided.   Preventative   Manual
           fit for purpose   the software, Key Project Governance
           and worked as     mechanisms were put in place to
           intended when     ensure the:
           first put in?     Working Group
                             Steering Group/Project board
                             Requirements Review Group
Baseline   Major changes     Traceability Matrices have been        No information provided,   Preventative   Manual
           since             documented, implemented and
           implementation    periodically reviewed to ensure that
           have not          business requirement documents
           impacted the      have been regularly reviewed against
           system.           project progress.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                     39
                                                                                                                                                        POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                 POL00029750




                             r•    . .   .                                               .                .   .    .•    .   .   ..




Baseline   Major changes     Key Project Governance mechanisms         No information provided,          Preventative   Manual
           since             have been enacted and operated over
           implementation    significant changes to the system since
           have not          implementation. Examples of such
           impacted the      mechanisms include:
           system.            - Working Group
                              - Steering Group/Project board
                              - Requirements Review Group
Baseline   The system was    Prior to implementation into the live     For Audit Store Baseline:         Preventative   Manual        Partia =      '
           fit for purpose   environment (and in some cases post)      Example acceptance criteria
           and worked as     acceptance criteria in relation to key    document entitled Acceptance
           intended when     system elements important for             Report 20070917BL01.13WIP
           first put in.     auditing and capturing transactions       (note no sign off of
                             were formally agreed and signed off.      acceptance criteria is included
                                                                       within this document).

                                                                       For 2011 Horizon
                                                                       Implementation (BRDB
                                                                       Baseline):
                                                                       Testing plans were provided in
                                                                       the document 'Copy of IT
                                                                       Health Check 23-07-2009.xls,
                                                                       a Risk Assessment of the
                                                                       project has been provided in
                                                                       'Security All Risk Extract
                                                                       090928 v2.xls' and Migration
                                                                       instructions have also been
                                                                       provided in the document
                                                                       'Migration_ Instructions.pdf'.
                                                                       Also a report by third party
                                                                       consultancy firm Wipro has

DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                       POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                    POL00029750




                             ~•                                                                                   .•             ..
                                                                                                                                        t       a



                                                                      been provided to demonstrate
                                                                      the project was delivered as
                                                                      planned in the document
                                                                       Horizon : Performance Test
                                                                      Audit Post Office Limited
                                                                      POL)'.

                                                                      For 2012 Data Strategy
                                                                      Foundation (External Feeds
                                                                      Baseline):
                                                                       - Example acceptance criteria
                                                                      document entitled CFD New
                                                                      Requirements v1.11.xls (note
                                                                      no sign off of acceptance
                                                                      criteria is included within this
                                                                      document). Additionally, an
                                                                      example of a designed, and
                                                                      reviewed Migration Strategy,
                                                                      titled 'Migration Strategy CFD
                                                                      v0.4', was provided, in
                                                                      addition to a Test Report,
                                                                      'POLTSTREP0010 - CFD E2E
                                                                      Test Report vO 1'.
Baseline   The system was    The testing of key elements of the       For 2011 HNG-X                     Preventative   Manual        Partial
           fit for purpose   system important for the auditing and    Implementation:
           and worked as     capturing of transactions was formally
           intended when     agreed and signed off and then           For 2012 Data Strategy
           first put in?     delivered against.                       Foundation:
                                                                      - Test Strategy Document
                                                                      entitled 'Acceptance Testing
                                                                      Strategy' - authorised version

DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                         41
                                                                                                                                                   POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                POL00029750




                            ~•                                                                                                   ..




                                                                      dated 10/11/2011.
                                                                       - Test Exit Report entitled
                                                                      'Client File Delivery Report E2E
                                                                      - Exit Test Report', draft
                                                                      version 0.1 dated 06/01/2012.
Baseline   Major changes    Sign off for design of significant        2005 Design Proposal               Preventative   Manual        Partial
           since            change is formalised and documented.      ASDPR027.doc
           implementation                                             2005 Audit Centera API
           have not                                                   Implementation
           impacted the                                               DELLD026.doc
           system.                                                    2002 Change Proposal
                                                                      CP3240.rtf
                                                                      2004 Change Proposal
                                                                      CP4021.rtf
Baseline   Major changes    Acceptance criteria related to key        2002 Acceptance Test               Preventative   Manual        Partial
           since            areas such as the branch database and     Specification IAACS002.doc
           implementation   audit store.
           have not
           impacted the
           system.

Baseline   Major changes    Test Strategy and Execution have          2003 Acceptance Test Report                       Manual        Partial
           since            been documented and signed off, and       IAACR003.doc                       Preventative
           implementation   provide an adequate audit trail for the
           have not         testing of key system features such as
           impacted the     the Audit Store and Branch Database.
           system.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                     EM
                                                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                                                              POL00029750




                            Description.                                        .    .               .   .   .•    .   .   ..

                                                                                                 r



Baseline   Major changes    Independent Assurance over design of    No information provided,     Preventative     Manual
           since            HNG-X system by Gartner.
           implementation
           have not
           impacted the
           system.
Baseline   Major changes    Programmes and projects affecting       Harmony Delivery Lifecycle   Preventative     Manual        Partial
           since            the Horizon system are controlled and   document
           implementation   governed using an established change
           have not         methodology.
           impacted the
           system.

Baseline   Major changes    Independent Assurance report over       Wipro performance testing    Preventative     Manual        Significant
           since            testing procedures has been obtained,   report.
           implementation
           have not
           impacted the
           system.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                   43
                                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                                              POL00029750




IT Provision Assurance




 Provision   IT supporting        Management have                 ISMF Minutes          Preventative   Manual   Partial '
             processes are well   established forums to           FJS Security Report
             controlled,          oversee the performance of
                                  third party IT providers.


 Provision   IT supporting        POL has documented end          POL End User          Preventative   Manual   Partial
             processes are well   user control considerations     Considerations
             controlled,          to supplement third party       Document
                                  service provider controls
                                  assurance reports
 Provision   IT supporting        Third party assurance           ISAE3402 Report       Preventative   Manual   Significant
             processes are well   reports are in place to         PCIDSS Report
             controlled,          ensure the overall control of
                                  the IT environment,
                                  including: ISAE 3402 reports,
                                  PCIDSS compliance report
                                  and IS027001 certified
                                  accreditation.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                   44
                                                                                                                                    POL00029750
                                                                                                                                 POL00029750




Usage Assurance




Usage       Counter transactions     Only baskets that balance to   Horizon Online Data     Preventative   Automated   Partial
            are recorded             £0 can be accepted by the      Integrity_POL
            completely, accurately   central database (double       document.
            and on a timely basis    entry concept exists).
            centrally.

Usage       Counter transactions     Digital Signature is applied   Horizon Online Data     Preventative   Automated   Partial
            are recorded             to each transaction basket     Integrity_POL
            completely, accurately   at the point of counter        document.
            and on a timely basis    inception to prevent
            centrally.               downstream tampering.

Usage       Counter transactions     Transactional                  Verbal confirmation     Detective      Automated   Partial
            are recorded             Acknowledgement and            from Rod Ismay and
            completely, accurately   manual review process.         Jane Smith in Finance
            and on a timely basis                                   Shared Services.
            centrally.

Usage       Counter transactions     Sequential numbering is        Horizon Online Data     Preventative   Automated   Partial
            are recorded             applied to each counter        Integrity_ POL
            completely, accurately   basket prior to digital        document.
            and on a timely basis    signature application to
            centrally.               provide a 'baked in'
                                     sequence check.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                     III
                                                                                                                                     POL00029750
                                                                                                                                  POL00029750




Usage       Counter transactions     Oracle commit and roll-back      Horizon Online Data    Preventative   Automated   Partial
            are recorded             process is atomic (i.e. either   Integrity_ POL
            completely, accurately   a complete transaction is        document.
            and on a timely basis    posted or nothing is
            centrally.               posted).

Usage       Counter transactions     A fall back mobile link is in    Horizon Online Data    Preventative   Automated   Partial
            are recorded             place to ensure that if          Integrity_ POL
            completely, accurately   transactions are still           document.
            and on a timely basis    processed in a timely
            centrally.               manner
Usage       Counter transactions     A private cryptographic key      Horizon Online Data    Preventative   Automated   Partial
            are recorded             is securely established for      Integrity_ POL
            completely, accurately   each transmitted basket.         document.
            and on a timely basis
            centrally.
Usage       Directly posted          Formalised change control        Email communication    Preventative   Manual      Partial
            transactions, such as    approval and monitoring          from John Simpkins
            "Balancing               process over the usage of        dated 15/05/2014,
            Transactions", are       Balancing Transactions           articulating control
            visible and approved,                                     design around this
                                                                      process.

Usage       Directly posted          An audit trail log is in place   Email communication    Detective      Manual      Partial
            transactions, such as    to monitor the use of            from John Simpkins
            "Balancing               balance transactions. The        dated 15/05/2014,
            Transactions", are       log is monitored by an           articulating control
            visible and approved,    independent department           design around this
                                     that does not have access to     process.
                                     the function.

DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                       46
                                                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                                                              POL00029750




Usage       Branch Ledger            JSNs are processed into the     Technical Design        Preventative   IT Dependent Manual   Partial '
            transactions are         audit store and reviewed        Document for Audit
            recorded accurately in   when users access audit         Extract Process
            the Audit Store.         store information. The Audit    DESAPPHLD0029.
                                     Store will automatically
                                     detect non-sequential files
                                     that are then processed by
                                     the Tivoli monitoring tool
                                     and investigated where
                                     appropriate.
Usage       Branch Ledger            Digital seals are in place to   Technical Design        Preventative   Automated             Partial
            transactions are         ensure that files are not       Document for Audit
            recorded accurately in   amended following load to       Extract Process
            the Audit Store.         the Audit Store                 DESAPPHLD0029
Usage       Branch Ledger            The digital seal applied to     Security Architecture   Preventative   Automated             Partial
            transactions are         the batched digital             Document
            recorded accurately in   signatures ensures that any     Network Architecture
            the Audit Store.         amendments to data leaves       Document
                                     a traceable audit trail         Cryptography
                                                                     Architecture
                                                                     Document




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                                                              POL00029750




                                     I                                  1                            1
Usage       Branch Ledger                JSNs are processed into the        BRDB Technical                              Automated   Partial
            transactions are             audit store and reviewed           Design Document
            recorded accurately in       when users access audit            Audit Technical Design
            the Audit Store.             store information. The Audit       Document
                                         Store will automatically
                                         detect non-sequential files
                                         that are then processed by
                                         the Tivoli monitoring tool
                                         and investigated where
                                         appropriate.

Usage       Branch Ledger                Formalised change control          Email communication          Preventative   Manual      Partial
            transactions are             approval and monitoring            from John Simpkins
            recorded accurately in       process over the usage of          dated 15/05/2014,
            the Audit Store.             Balancing Transactions             and articulating
                                                                            control design around
                                                                            this process.
Usage       Branch Ledger                Audit trail monitoring the         Email communication          Preventative   Manual      Partial
            transactions are             usage of balance                   from John Simpkins
            recorded accurately in       transactions                       dated 15/05/2014
            the Audit Store.

Usage       Information from the         Logical access controls in         Audit Store                  Preventative   Automated   Partial
            Audit Store retains          place over user                    Procedures
            original integrity,          management to ensure that
                                         only appropriate staff have
                                         access to extract
                                         information from the audit
                                         store


DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                   48
                                                                                                                         POL00029750
                                                                                                                      POL00029750




Usage       Information from the   Hardware controls are in        Audit Store   Preventative   Automated   Partial
            Audit Store retains    place to prevent the            Procedures
            original integrity,    modification of data in the
                                   Audit Store



Usage       Information from the   JSNs are processed into the     Audit Store   Detective      Automated   Partial
            Audit Store retains    audit store and reviewed        Procedures
            original integrity,    when users access audit
                                   store information. Audit
                                   store will automatically
                                   detect non-sequential files
                                   that are then processed by
                                   the Tivoli monitoring tool
                                   and investigated where
                                   appropriate.
Usage       Information from the   The digital seal applied to     Audit Store   Detective      Automated   Partial
            Audit Store retains    the batch on data transfer is   Procedures
            original integrity,    checked back to the initial
                                   seal to ensure that hash
                                   value has not been altered.

Usage       Information from the   The integrity of the digital    Audit Store   Detective      Automated   Partial
            Audit Store retains    signature is checked for all    Procedures
            original integrity,    baskets used in the extracts.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                           49
                                                                                                                                              POL00029750
                                                                                                                                           POL00029750




Usage       Information from the      Exceptions identified in        Audit Store           Detective      Automated             Partial
            Audit Store retains       integrity checks on digital     Procedures
            original integrity,       seals or signatures or in the
                                      sequence check are formally
                                      raised and handled as part
                                      of day-to-day IT operational
                                      processes within the Tivoli
                                      Monitoring tool.
Usage       The system used by        3 way match between             Data Flow Diagram                    IT Dependent Manual   Partial
            the Finance teams for     Branch Database,                provided by Finance
            control contains all      Transaction file and POLSAP     (Jane Smith)
            records                   load file
Usage       Data posted from          Amendments posted               Transactional         Preventative   Automated             Partial
            other systems and         centrally via transactional     Corrections
            teams is visible to and   corrections must be             Procedural Evidence
            accepted by sub post-     approved by sub-Post
            masters                   Masters must be approved
                                      before they can be applied
                                      to the Branch Database
Usage       Data posted from          Amendments posted               Branch Database       Preventative   Automated             Partial
            other systems and         centrally via transactional     Procedures
            teams is visible to and   acknowledgements must be
            accepted by sub post-     approved by sub-Post
            masters                   Masters must be approved
                                      before they can be applied
                                      to the Branch Database




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                         POL00029750
                                                                                                                                      POL00029750




Usage       Data posted from          For any outstanding (non-      Rod Ismay         Preventative   Manual                Partial
            other systems and         accepted) Transaction
            teams is visible to and   Acknowledgement or
            accepted by sub post-     Transaction Corrections at
            masters                   month end, a formal
                                      resolution process exists
                                      which enables non-accepted
                                      items to be identified, held
                                      in suspense and actively
                                      investigated to the point of
                                      resolution with the Sub
                                      postmaster. Business as
                                      usual resolution activities
                                      can be taken to conclude
                                      outstanding items and have
                                      them cleared down.
Usage       Data posted from          Sub-postmasters have           Branch Database   Preventative   IT Dependent Manual   Partial
            other systems and         access to view all             Procedures
            teams is visible to and   transactional records
            accepted by sub post-     underpinning their current
            masters                   accounting period's ledgers.
                                      This information is used to
                                      support their daily branch
                                      cash declarations and
                                      reconciliation, their weekly
                                      balance of cash and stock
                                      reconciliation, and their
                                      monthly trading period roll
                                      over activities.


DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                           51
                                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                                             POL00029750




Usage       Data posted from          All processes create an         Branch Database         Preventative   IT Dependent Manual   Partial
            other systems and         identifiable transaction in     Procedures
            teams is visible to and   Horizon, with an audit trail
            accepted by sub post-     to the originator in the
            masters                   Finance Services team. This
                                      transaction ID is protected
                                      by the JSN, digital signature
                                      and digital seal features.

Usage       DBAs or others            Sub post-master must            Branch Database         Preventative   IT Dependent Manual   Partial
            granted DBA access        functionally approve the        Procedures
            have not modified         Transactional
            Branch Database data.     Acknowledgement file
                                      produced by the POLSAP
                                      system before items can be
                                      processed through to the
                                      branch database.
Usage       DBAs or others            Formalised change control       Email communication     Preventative   Manual                Partial
            granted DBA access        approval and monitoring         from John Simpkins
            have not modified         process over the usage of       dated 15/05/2014,
            Branch Database data.     Balancing Transactions          and articulating
                                                                      control design around
                                                                      this process.,
Usage       DBAs or others            Audit trail monitoring the      Email communication     Preventative   Manual                Partial
            granted DBA access        usage of balance                from John Simpkins
            have not modified         transactions                    dated 15/05/2014
            Branch Database data.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                  EE
                                                                                                                               POL00029750
                                                                                                                            POL00029750




Usage       DBAs or others           Hardware controls are in        Audit Store   Preventative   Automated   Partial
            granted DBA access       place to prevent the            Procedures
            have not modified        modification of data in the
            Branch Database data.    audit store

Usage       DBAs or others           Database access privileges      ISAE3402      Preventative   Automated   Partial
            granted DBA access       that would enable a person
            have not modified        to delete a digitally signed
            Branch Database data.    basket are restricted to
                                     authorised administrators at
                                     Fujitsu.
Usage       DBAs or others           Database access privileges      I5AE3402      Preventative   Automated   Partial
            granted DBA access       that would enable a person
            have not modified        to create or amend a basket
            Branch Database data.    and re-sign it with a `fake'
                                     key, detectable if
                                     appropriately checked, are
                                     restricted to authorised
                                     administrators at Fujitsu.
Usage       Counter transactions     TWS scheduler and               ISAE3402      Detective      Automated   Significant
            are recorded             monitoring processes are
            completely, accurately   defined and formalised. Any
            and on a timely basis    issues or errors are reported
            centrally?               and responded to by Fujitsu
                                     as part of day-to-day IT
                                     Operational activities.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                 53
                                                                                                                                             POL00029750
                                                                                                                                          POL00029750




                                     'l   lFTLr.J.




                                                                    'iaiui
                                                                                                            m: .       TT




Usage       Counter transactions     Logical security access        Security Architecture   Preventative   Automated        Significant
            are recorded             controls in place to           Document reference -
            completely, accurately   minimise the risk of           ARCSECARC0003
            and on a timely basis    inappropriate access to the    section 6.2 and
            centrally                counter software within        ISAE3402, PCIDSS and
                                     branch.                        IS027001 reports as
                                                                    well.

Usage       Branch Ledger            Logical security access        ISAE3402 report.        Preventative   Automated        Significant
            transactions are         controls are in place in
            recorded accurately in   relation to the Branch
            the Audit Store          Database and audit store to
                                     ensure that only
                                     appropriate staff members
                                     have access. Key
                                     transactions and tables are
                                     monitored and activity is
                                     verified by an independent
                                     third party.
Usage       Branch Ledger            Database access privileges     ISAE3402                Preventative   Automated        Partial
            transactions are         that would enable a person
            recorded accurately in   to delete Audit Store data
            the Audit Store          are restricted to authorised
                                     administrators at Fujitsu.




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                               54
                                                                    POL00029750
                                                                 POL00029750




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                      55
                                                                                                                                                    POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                 POL00029750




Appendix 3: Inventory of Documentation Reviewed

The following documentation was reviewed during the course of our review:

 ®.              rI.NuIiitIii                                                                                         ~.

1              I Horizon Core Audit Process (Powerpoint)                                                              Other sources of comfort
 2              Fact file (updated with SS comments)                                                                  Other sources of comfort
 3              ISAE3402 Report over Fujitsu managed service on Horizon                                               Assurance
 4              Centrally Generated Transactions document                                                             Other sources of comfort
5               POL Summary of Horizon Anomalies Referred to in Second Sight Report                                   Assurance
6               Report on Local Suspense (14 Branch) Issue                                                            Other sources of comfort
 7              Report on Receipts Payments (62 Branch) Issue                                                         Other sources of comfort
8               Spot Review Bible                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
9               Horizon Data Integrity Document                                                                       Other sources of comfort
10              Horizon Data Integrity Document                                                                       Other sources of comfort
11              Fujitsu IS027001 Certificate                                                                          Assurance
 12             IS027001 Statement of Applicability produced by Fujitsu                                               Assurance
13              PCI DSS Attestation of Compliance                                                                     Assurance
 14             PCI DSS Report by Bureau Veritas                                                                      Assurance
 15             ISMF Minutes for three months                                                                         Other sources of comfort
 16             Fujitsu Security Reports for three months                                                             Other sources of comfort
17              Fujitsu Information Security Management System (ISMS) Scope                                           Other sources of comfort
18              Horizon Solution Architecture Outline                                                                 Other sources of comfort
 19             Post Office to Driving & Vehicle Licensing Agency Automated Payments Client File Interface document   Other sources of comfort
20              DVLA Internal Web Service High Level Design document                                                  Other sources of comfort
21              Security All Risk Extract                                                                             Other sources of comfort
22              Migration Overview Document for Horizon system                                                        Other sources of comfort
23              Horizon Technical Security Architecture                                                               Other sources of comfort
DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                      56
                                                                                                                                                      POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                   POL00029750




                                                                                                                        ..

24           Solution Architecture Document                                                                             Other sources of comfort
25           Batch Processing Overview Document                                                                         Other sources of comfort
26           EMC Centera Acceptance Test Report - IAACR003                                                              Other sources of comfort
27           Centera Accepting Testing Specification - IAACS002                                                         Other sources of comfort
28           Application Interface Design - DELLD026                                                                    Other sources of comfort
29           Audit Server Specification Design -TDDES071                                                                Other sources of comfort
30           Configuration Design - TDMAN006                                                                            Other sources of comfort
31           Configuration Design - TDMAN009                                                                            Other sources of comfort
32           Centera star OS upgrade to version 2.4 design proposal                                                     Other sources of comfort
33           Centera star OS upgrade to version 2.4 design proposal Amendment -CP4021                                   Other sources of comfort
34           Centera star OS upgrade to version 2.4 design proposal Amendment -CP3241                                   Other sources of comfort
35          Exception and Event Guide - TDMAN007                                                                        Other sources of comfort
36           Functional Separation - CRFSP006                                                                           Other sources of comfort
37           High Level Design - SDHLD001                                                                               Other sources of comfort
38           Audit Data Retrieval - SDHLD002                                                                            Other sources of comfort
39           Centera Migration HID - TDION039                                                                           Other sources of comfort
40           Centera - High Level Test Plans - VIHTP014                                                                 Other sources of comfort
41           Horizon System Audit Manual - IAMAN005                                                                     Other sources of comfort
42           Low Level Design Document                                                                                  Other sources of comfort
43           Centera Operational Procedures - TDMAN008                                                                  Other sources of comfort
44           Centera - Performance Test Specification - TDLLT008                                                        Other sources of comfort
45           Centera Support Guide - TDMAN017                                                                           Other sources of comfort
46           Centera Support Guide - TDMAN018                                                                           Other sources of comfort
47           Centera Test Report - VITRP029                                                                             Other sources of comfort
48           Centera User Guide - TDMAN005                                                                              Other sources of comfort
49           Data Strategy Foundation - 04 - G149 Data Strategy Foundation - Client File Transfer - PODG Closure v2 0   Other sources of comfort
50          Data Strategy Foundation - CFD New Requirements v1.11                                                       Other sources of comfort
51          Data Strategy Foundation - Data Strategy Foundation Test Strategy V1 0                                      Other sources of comfort
52           Data Strategy Foundation - Migration Strategy CFD v0.4                                                     Other sources of comfort
53           Data Strategy Foundation - POLTSTREP0010 - CFD E2ETest Report vO 1                                         Other sources of comfort

DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                        57
                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                             POL00029750




..           ..                                                                                   ..

54           Data Strategy Foundation - Revised business case CFD 24 11 10                        Other sources of comfort
55           Horizon Technical Network Architecture - ARCNETARC0001                               Other sources of comfort
56          Horizon Crypto Services High Level Design -DESSECHLD0002                              Other sources of comfort
57          E2E data flows                                                                        Other sources of comfort
58           idocs involving settlement                                                           Other sources of comfort
59           Process Management Systems Diagram (Version 14 - 24.10.2011)                         Other sources of comfort
60           AR11.005 - Horizon controls                                                          Other sources of comfort
61           AR12.050 - Horizon follow up                                                         Other sources of comfort
62          AR12.050a -Follow-up Horizon May2013                                                  Other sources of comfort
63          Horizon Counter Application High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0047                         Other sources of comfort
64          COMPONENT TEST PLAN FOR Horizon COUNTER INFRASTRUCTURE: SERVICE AND PROCESS CONTROL   Other sources of comfort
65          Horizon Operational and Support Services Requirements                                 Other sources of comfort
66          ACCEPTANCE REPORT FOR DESIGN WALKTH ROUGH EVENT DW03- SECURITY                        Other sources of comfort
67           Draft Deloitte Phase 2 Instructions (RDW 07 05 14)2                                  Other sources of comfort
68           Phase 2 - Areas of Focus diagram (DRAFT v1)                                          Other sources of comfort
69           Project Zebra - Phase 2 Potential Next Steps v3                                      Other sources of comfort
70          REQAPPAIS1392v3.2.Pay5tation.ETL                                                      Other sources of comfort
71          REQAPPAIS1391v2.1.PoGo.ETL.                                                           Other sources of comfort
72           Acceptance Report 20070917BL01.13WIP                                                 Other sources of comfort
73           All Streams Plan vsn 0.98                                                            Other sources of comfort
74           BC PLA 001 v 0.3                                                                     Other sources of comfort
75           BCO20 HNG PD Potential Risks and Issues Register v1.0                                Other sources of comfort
76           Change Management Assessment Template                                                Other sources of comfort
77           DES SEC HLD 0010 v 1.0                                                               Other sources of comfort
78           Engagement Meeting Log Notes v1.2                                                    Other sources of comfort
79           Gartner Report Findings 1.1 with Appendix                                            Assurance
80           HARMONY Full Guide 1.1a                                                              Other sources of comfort
81           HARMONY Full Guide 1.1a                                                              Other sources of comfort
82          HNG Benefits Tracking in confidence May 08 final                                      Other sources of comfort
83          HNG Board Report 080408                                                               Other sources of comfort

DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                  58
                                                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                                                               POL00029750




             II.NIIiit1i                                                                                            ..
Iri' Pir1"
  DT7I.4
 84          HNG PID v1.3                                                                                           Other sources of comfort
 85          HNG Reqts Team Meeting 050606                                                                          Other sources of comfort
 86          HNG Risk and Issues 070424LY                                                                           Other sources of comfort
 87          Horizon Testing Strategy - HXTSR001                                                                    Other sources of comfort
 88          In Touch report for HNG 080418a                                                                        Other sources of comfort
 89          In Touch Report for HNG 081205                                                                         Other sources of comfort
 90          POL HNG IMP 002 v 1.0                                                                                  Other sources of comfort
 91          POL HNG REQ 014                                                                                        Other sources of comfort
 92          QRH031 HNG Reqts PID vO.1f                                                                             Other sources of comfort
 93          ACCEPTANCE REPORT FOR Horizon ACCEPTANCE GATEWAY 1 & 2 - REQ GEN ACS 0001 v0.2                         Other sources of comfort
 94          Horizon GENERIC ACCEPTANCE PROCESS -REQGENPR00735                                                      Other sources of comfort
 95          Stakeholder Engagement Log_091218                                                                      Other sources of comfort
 96          Test Report for the Integrity Testing of Horizon Data-centre Disaster Recovery — Week Commencing 1st
             September 2008 - SVMSDMREP0005                                                                         Other sources of comfort
 97          Wipro - Horizon : Performance Test Audit Post Office Limited ( POL)                                    Assurance
 98          DVLA Internal Web Service High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0012                                            Other sources of comfort
 99          Audit Data Retrieval High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0029                                                 Other sources of comfort
 100         Audit Data Collection & Storage High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0030                                      Other sources of comfort
 101         Horizon Counter Application High Level Design - DESAPPHLD0047                                          Other sources of comfort
 102         COMPONENT TEST PLAN FOR Horizon COUNTER INFRASTRUCTURE: SERVICE AND PROCESS CONTROL-DEV
             CNT CTP 0068 v 2.1                                                                                     Other sources of comfort
 103         DVLA AP Client File AIS                                                                                Other sources of comfort
 104         Product Branch Accounting- Issuing Process for Transaction corrections v0.1                            Other sources of comfort
 105         Audit Data Collection and Storage High Level Design                                                    Other sources of comfort
 106         Data Flow - Transaction Processing for client file delivery                                            Other sources of comfort
 107         Data Flow - NBSC Miskey Process - Network Banking                                                      Other sources of comfort




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                    59
                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                             POL00029750




With the prior permission of POL, the following individuals were interviewed or consulted during the course of our review:


                     ..II1!TL.                                                  •
Dave King            Senior Technical Security Assurance Manager                POL
Julie George         Head of Information Security and Assurance Group           POL
Rod Williams         Litigation Lawyer                                          POL
James Davidson       Fujitsu Primary Point of Contact                           Fujitsu
Pete Newsome         Quality responsibility                                     Fujitsu
 Will Russell        Regional Network Manager NT - South                        POL
Phil Norton          Horizon Requirements responsibility                        Atos
James Brett          Senior Test Manager — Post Office Account                  Atos
Bill Membery         Requirements/Testing responsibility on Horizon             Fujitsu
Gareth Jenkins       Distinguished Engineer                                     Fujitsu
Neil Crowther        Senior Business Analyst                                    POL
Matthew Lenton       Document Management responsibility                         Fujitsu
Rod Ismay            Head of Finance Service Centre                             POL
Jane Smith           AP Enquiry Team Leader, Finance Service Centre             POL
Dave King            Senior Technical Security Assurance Manager                POL




DRAFT FINDINGS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT PRIOR NOTIFICATION.
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POL00029750




Appendix 4: Engagement Letter

                  b L"1                                                                                       Deloitte,
                                                                                                             W. wala$mw tr( day gacdib*hd mihid" ►Y w is runadswat WI "oneaarmta
                                                                                                             Máii      mitdNiae55taplliyNtipWialaMditrpelsaiai6dsgatki Ibasn1tWKakkwbfoot
                                                                                                             ►t   PO&nktmlPte'

                                                                                                              n AilliMtp. lbof nsO b wIntly on,f
                                                                                                             In                                       l10I. U"O n, ps ui10 1 nndn" Sods., 4 of to , it obis of
                                                                                                             lotiw0ss *a        5gdas tmhMip to didhhraw, wtwr Wnek to k. no hs 4iwvwwl to not hod Writ
                                                                                                             WMkaat. in mwal wum otwaw.

                                                                                                             Ytq haw adaiwd bits that. all 5000 ft IO5tkI05 of tit p/gXItMBkp PROs fat no t rcpat wt might oak'
                                                                                                             Oft ► I1 p10lild, .4 y we hoimt pepmml in .                  O *It Owing) I'*atioo mnl linked to thr
                                                                                                             prttkl n e f Mil 5du5ca. *Mwkh f tt,c l:nfopootn M Tkws, w sibno tkt.Mtte pxttn rs riot amtdnyeew
                                                                                                             .aural) Pot 1010 dwiter ww work, wt wilt thwcta^o 111oJ05aubie itht ■al tars to itkt *, papons,
     4w April2d)d                                                                                            wwmwtaads wnopondmot aW olhtr it.wtwrt.b prwpantd by 40 aw.bafly'kaRtdly Pmilspv,t aaf
                                                                                                             ( ftdaNia{" fabb10s it lain toodsot an.l toot tfno arc t`oonAlledlifourdkPndtig Wiliiarot,, Too
                                                                                                             Litplkw luwym.
     Qtr Sin
                                                                                                             2     Oir Nilnkw sad hrapnwlbtlrha
     XTR(C'SLY PRIVATE ANI1( O FIMNTUAk.
     FRivlt.PfrPRiWrrt rlatwATlaN<1t 1, C'Lt hTlS3H
                                                                                                             (t '. Ow 1CIMP       ►f Teets
     We sae pka,rd t„ ,                      al pwwtl ti rtslypmrms Mini Whirh we po>pwsl Ss ark) tar.       ►Yamr.AlWNW"GOAJMw will ►e the P011.1                  I0ldbM toYailbrthr.$It84 drmibml
     t/f iss Ltd t`I'e il:                  W'e tttudtaapltd. tW Thi        pspxahnt to stha.tdlet Nrl'im-   in this letkwr wAmw admowhia aptmmil ** Yon (kudl o rsitOak sal b:ha aiwmsomdAy wddtbdd on
                        ._
     `1400 1PwN ' Y                    .s.i to RClrd~'r►.~~M.e"dalisfa* fta Q~tiss Lw hs,. is âs dis said
     tha the phACtabn                 I:: it ate :T. ~i    '*w- Al             rw
                                                                                                             dcIsnod    IMsW Hwwsek on, Set" LYnt.*w.kra lb ants)) f iranNdbtT So die ov,.t sa we Mw iii.
                                                                                                             its Vat. will oho hr a nlolik s}1g1*td.
     Is odo hn s p:oi          .          'I call Y tf nitihd ya I iIIM Soot ah•M *mttWd in pam*sPh
                                                                                                             Cliffs Lasiii a IMenor . this to tioo no1.s drat (ot8t tf knot, wilt tool Ito lof,rcry of on,
     2Ib)iekw rlce.e                            44 la*%*    IgISMItIt*maiawdTit an(Nu+i =
                                                                                                             NRttiPalt►Yo.tagafhw with Most wM+aMs kOdCbaalolto i)naoway, hsxh 5anko Masw*wa. flwy
     -Aw"Kk 5                                                                                                will wwlWl ~t dinar wodimt tekdoxnbipa told.tek xPpra t'uro psopbt to ld o p an bits iCOMbI Tatww
                                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                     awwq htwk art (Tmrk*hc, will In wsppnieal by larn 54;araptnw. pwrnw, Who hill, pmfta►Ml-
     Sa Sot wefatSotstsamilt.Yin. ,       loth PkMi'llladfidil.Yonhave'o.vdoond lollys tfft.                 w4wiM5f 10pw*a4elei wort esa pnparkrd. tsporh wndw ekwllw citcwneWttaa; mad dais wwldwm
     ttapa swdwndFdaoaa Ng(w.ia ih•. : ' .'. std itltagldumaul tpd dir Yaw, "it"fud;too the a wend           elwitamrmnf~idfmtl.
     txwsevtorrkrwribft4bCMarls           tokaYwrtwou
                                                                                                             V.. itsSo mtA 001 Yem i aM trgaiiw mb of twa IIs55 b be drlalblli to so da t ►iamd' ftywlt.
     I     Smpkrdah~ntwn                                                                                     wpsn5< dfitfdd d11Y'5n fF4fifl •aid wohlM pod Is e pM a npr W +►NMrr lgiw'l. doss.
                                                                                                             NriiD55imsd.prPMl►liil.
     In wwke kn raepaadhisfw Mt dts A.feg tine. (which horn hetn. wd WIN in ill ISoI9OX4 amfiew td
     bw idymaoad is tM cmob) y1w "ml to demmWwsu tt,st bilk Iturtnnn NNG•X sywwm is nA..4 and                Towillw6owiilpfiaadN          iislpa~kal'rNek
     npwaan Wilk ittkphy. Wit*tis w ■pfr"r M .snood fenrw+ar bit In newtnxwa W this, Von haws eethwr
     boon iewwint with to cammnoined s ambor of uttkpwhdttM ,nrwsttco rsvfawa lll4o rdem n!Wins              Per dts plop w a.Mhfap wana, neon aih'.ed dint ti. tliNit hot. n PS It, wip aile"OOrLAM
     to IbnM.n i(IO .X•. ry'wMin* r'.u•inmuxm wnJ.vrnnwsing kntcpity                                         Sni 4 Chief l iftMA oa ()fficno Mil A. Ord. l rtnrnti Cads , iieixsfa Csasvy Pfsr.YleRl(
                                                                                                             /Jkaslw; lobe (korpt, Ikad .'f Informntko tit.ntity         xutnp. hit honky 8500511 if sbwa). &M
     T o Innpnn of seokiatt intwt fran Ikkowr IAj (We) (`Dp1 t          ') In W pnnWo, twwd upon bits        Rodtb Wilt.,..., law ( Nfko I,d t itiwtanon I awyn, 'IM c! o M tram will np rt on this w *saoneld 55
     Mahamaroen mores on Ithle to to iy Yo,t, ee Irdrkwottddttl p(ssliK- ommaty of the an.Mnnoo and
                                                                                                             Peals Vn,aslhr Chkl' kaacativr. too moe dint we Will be adriwd art bit fauns thm*es to tlw 511555
     wissr wohlo. tnkna►wt, non. yrnr o not dey Ikaian HWI.X .ymmoo, C. prwmatim to and                      Min
     divay+nm wuh 11te Ir e1. ikuwd ("Pert t work")
                                                                                                             'tMhv+ttertiMgfaamtpir~"d21ra'Yiso.
     We. tndwetmd dtn the iywi pnnwhd by (kioutr .,It sb,.m Y.wt dtxiwnat htb fi Io pnlhrud
     wins oftldlWtesl wortial Von nay ahaoe In amuninns W erslrrb bona W So Alltrtdos: sat                   111) 0001555
     OwA wt mo ba iii o1*od to 'hr drhvw) of tad► mklniw,nt warn ('Pat 2 Wok) Wdet tithe' St."►mp: .
     (Ndr of IPelkf Itnitaywtnwnt                                                                            Pan1P(d!K$ n awSIpuvhdstheful.sMnlp
     Vow Mw nkod its no pnwrda t0 -5W.'a a aatWM In Srdms 2 bltew anti t 11 in t the Npot.                       a Ubauh) is m►dalYaWhhi of the AltaWutals dr-b it rblmt Is and Wrtfahatt waia.s oep tfr
     dosuMled is MJs,o ltd) (the POp55m').                                                                         blobs. UWG. i Feessafag anaifewnan rakvwr to din 1$st otty of p000ainy; 510 m wotw
                                                                                                                   In palm 11..slid cold p!raa►dl taeirtly of sytenw stall .roily and othst halt.Ponad
     wwwwww.MntnalMawrwawyw.x tytww»vw+w.+a++ra.eW<x+oe+.an                                                        rN►ndwl waawydrw a55wpwty brit pIW:wrIkivonotin
     .ypvMann*                  non as r.eaa!eww
                                                                                                     d~
                a>wvrgr~..wows»wawmt,.nwwr ww.n'tw•wb>~t-eM+.wrW.wwa
     h~SYww>;:MCR'aMw•Am~~ey~[Rantl~prwknM~va
                             r~t.w..v.wa».'
                                                 KMtfa:w.i'i~awuhaa.+nkw.+.ktx
          ar.nMw, 550..55'
     +,awrbttwza.a..nmww.aw.w


DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POL00029750




      Deloitte                                                                                             Deloitteai'
        w. Clbgt(n ,.                  v of 40.IRIy             : .ba om`NI ctmw awboln AilK3x.                •   T        .rMylorr«a,rw.l~5a.a~etrnsnilr+                crf~r
           pluiCenat4t rn o,. aer~xr,4 and                              tb runt 11bouUoaf dlR~l lay'
                                                                                                           lb aaapn itorr nuvieea and my dchcrabka will be Reeked nh4 wiaSo Savk:es and llativarnhioa
                                                                                                           aao;eae in dwa (.,ue M,l. We w111 nnakn so enprewtetalew.le fn nd amid will can ♦Y:aa,nla a1) Otter'
         w   (kvwtw. a vkmtww Nord eabp6        4
                                               to              itlmsdpwn lLLaalataue JOIN..                ailed,
             t•a,odlatk'rn ae non wMtck Yoo ar:Moran "paten
                                                       Opp hove W1dw in (aao. A       z
               `r>otces of-         " bairn$ w be w" aca>t,e at tidy stage      ao twee                    (IW wok wtl be patfuEsd.Nutimlo . euneblltaiicn of dank liaaa,t napactkm Nit dwwnnrmtaarm,,
             Arco                                                                                          in. ,*snntivn aagaky Jed    *d M y pnwided evsderoe tee cuotael, as agrned between You
                                                                                                           Ned ttv
                 a   Wwk that IMF m ' pa1kpl,i jp e1A.Yet the tempt and Wiper n or key COMM.
                     aMlvtlies tlat *0*. d awd.ptenrwr IhYF.11dOptily of ptrx'a.rsiog acrt9wa du Ikwiaae   (c) Oat raapoanibtiuea
                     HNI8Xa        a~rw OnAv011ow1
                                                                                                           ha pwfxminp the :Kav1f96fv JtilaiM keaJapalaaikdedhr.'
                O 1A!altk, bi               kaifad be i1QMF dwr drvihlet rind „pe.rnika. c,/ key cwrxaal
                  ncdivltits    ,aniMgdryrdprw oo t~rWov arnm~ln ~. teat, tin: IIYIA tilt                      •   tryt eitkiq`MpplppCNdllp!i1i,an aonayWpnAdlalw nur,kk.etnhke rend
                  pirq atAddlii..adMw i(aahw<ti►  tiri~.x
                                                                                                               •   teaal,Bala,ll al.a_.«              ,aate ell w~a, tnw
                 0 11MMMMMIIt4iMJhdallWQ d bow Iwo     ulain in twgaaiwfit thetaeatk fndaadellr
                   Saaaad  M,jw.e     aid In Y,.,r tupplird ,5x umeett 'l tit. c .ninny oa!w aid$? IC      Yarn emn IkOt04W *M" ant ant                                     we will woe nabs .n ' Ahv_tee Ia,t or
                   rnui                  a t ).                                                            Mari* the Mina         g1W be Ja iM M taWMa of ilu 8Oa'adaeh. In eaae.nlar. aadena odiawhao-
                                                                                                           YldhalaM* by Yea to do so, ww wrath ua1 pljk * *                   uwurrn wenk *aJIM Iw0d J®d
        a    head aAu "401 feria Jakanat .laakin Jr Yo,. ati51nd anus key aYkakoidna as pom                oenoheded on the tkwldp, aaapianta ssfIn.attet epalatliared adctl ans or net wing* neaok arts
             apron tank Yo1l,llw Mw nahrack aaawiadikoli                                                   de ft twit Iwtxeane cnrirennecex

        a' psrpllM      d]n7wahktaonahrtl.Wrtlakalsll~gkatswi                                              our week wilt be Iiwiled by the done rued the *hNinte'ka i alt ia. WAIPM tea will rayon ncr fhnt
                                                                                                           In Je«v apt ca out tw attend IWpo M w xk ktyfal caaaaidalal! Ms ilblswtnn prov ukd w an in It.
         s   Apwd aide vao* auxtl pk Jar Mnlifaeuda aieile wide Yai (dual Td*W 0                    09     Man of enrryins out Ire sorvicn. eidriwMal iaf eraetfan Mae Yawl may rr and as ten an may rule
             JpluwkMrnnlarwo&andMMeouwraawyw aaewrtNprawkila;aid                                           tarot it not pnoei arl t. tarps Ileccrrt eec -A era wrwdcrwt 1'g) aY. /kY' wrtent Y, our l tdlrnukkaw) need rna
                                                                                                           v z+k nbc*Iet rKe hie celled +rpw or b eW aanpechrnniee *              h reapeulo We sea pf as as+} ra,iEnlrlY
         A cony ending       me*aak,c acdbeYawwhidlattallaa61yMekktteatuwaieaheva:                         the#lwOurn tpa ecore d let ,we were rated deli cur udtvnrn (ja)dn hr the epbcitle nature afenr wewrk
                                                                                                           htptwOlia Y rr tea Yoe
     tau eta softquieo (hldow Ion.            au or tan WM gWwga of lkO a ueane wnrh patdarnaed. one
     ,vimon IIu.4nqaney urldmanube or                 ,ev den bu sty4dlaIkwtnmttM(3Xprtecpfa*              hntotrdiwpAw,xeltwlFtkMt.daarrunnawgJJIM,tea wed be r 1.0tepMMkMapkyatMrWepee*Mau
     Mvlrtwmem (tow Ito kldagr-tiOiitFpal{4i11Mgth.                                                        rlae.dltloowt~.., seed *9owab ii) to a nr*drr.e f awed cant What OW*W iaaa told way be tlaUod by d$a
                                                                                                           aMeiMhk
     A. nn gn.iaael eegnir ala0ela alndilaFJwad, alrl wadatINd ****.%n will outline tMtldddliiMdt
     allFpa. sad 1Naatma kx OFck aMadl rM 14e        tARd[e p/aaMdi M aai aaM J.0 Appsndkt 2 tlllp PNO!    N/at.   kl dWcwa teeth Ya/ any dtfl0l"" we anr.^4enter with noa•.p4tint rwr week sacwtd newt
     ten. You Nq imutWpaOdaaaawh*be wd aunatbaa.tkaags(lAdOsproawrrs IbinonyirlakOlry
     kio Won. 0n IMtNaOd Itte
                                                                                                           You athnoanle4 deal Ytnu an. anp eee.cbte fee c, let ung Ned marntne.wee1 net etluel ee m nNal
         a   italkd, Wo dW held it bi Maid be* WiA b1Ib be:oalMM..(taa aanak) taalshaakau                  punhnl syalem that rwhims rite Idulilswt Clod cacao at rten oI,•tt.ee w,It .were rid tannin
             paarialtlt~p drYrA! i1y:11i)l1MlNil tdiIgdanlafknaaan                                         me4ecceted tewwcvee. a den a et etiahnate that Iplwattlay: }aalhhin t en cur work 1mranteex that emcee.
                                                                                                           w s"plarfetas will ten aesa, aaa is a tbwped to dcwet Natty nah neaun in rrntlptkrruan a►aoW lhay
         •   llMMaptMald - t tthleYl w d'i' e► Madk #ld t *1W *u eYeaclaialias e( W earoods as             o
             Ieeawrat tirdOtaialit ti tlla a~yaaallaeaaaokalaJi Deist
                                                                                                           dhtlt.inape orNow-Rawieel. and .out rar,patv,Frifilinn will rid -ifMarYilaaf:0 .ill pIdan the MA
         •         tjMily iaMaqad atiap,oftdae aOhue aid o one.» een* aywtan i owe . eepianee strong ar    n. OWyaFu                    .orOadi , inciter shall on p Ør AW FFN1 WM ai Ike NM .
             d`.w_.
             th                 ec                         .,fl.- ele as~Kw4:                              Dear ccmrpfhnl<aa 1W clariaid awstiay of any vim ktai 0* plgldal U 0 Ate" of (' INIMalixs
                uIkuin, 1I 1NO.X d
                                                                                                           tinA+weel wt ataaalOaP') ee c tIM laaLM10          1,O,f.1ka i nluIfllld{: FaA        aaF eq pWaMOladva. .
             Man. d011idMld              00'10 any aapc a        .Ire ,enee*oI eontoei atvaeaemcee wheeb    k.nrp-inl ucef e,ati rO relate, f<. awe 11M7/K M outs ka Mdlllwd tcyanlnouanr. t ApAWd Paalaael new
             I$i0lflitC W' do aYalaMi Wdaae IlPkr•,1C pr::..,          -.anent which wvre rot to plur at   6s6aLy Art le defteecns deem the ac nccIodRn.waaie                   cbn         lll)IleFdj de sitstmt av
             a pnithtg art eke kp4y Nadine ryaacm                                                          en,iccled, mil where defteececee eeee he rrariak

         a   Uarke. and tot nunrr and nAlcat of also faea with oabot ahlndplvoy:ayolwft end t       doe•
             •/      1 artcarity.ef datafkntaband     naraaa. in.          -and




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POL00029750




     Deloi                 .
     0) 1!attaiM ttttil tttaen[bba .tlalsMar                                                                                       +    Al.racr•r tr ± resdr, t, t'   art ns,c,uran, , r'5,,ur 1 srorancc %t1 u. ..,, ;,, itc.Ci eC Vow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              uow.atd Y.tw
     taaa          as d dt is M1ba wipord Xiha 1b n.wkklla? iraetd by w will be * e J with Yu TIM
     cci        afwANhwoobleaaiaxpode!mbaametta iUs.wrarryambaWMWer eat,eslW a 91
                                                                                                                                  q.b}WeWaik,;«a f             6,rata.al/aapiMF9ey0aledtpaigaierptrty.eacrnt               neat of
     I weuti a Sianmy.                                                                                                        YOa. dIIX(Ogaa 4t'AWANcF„ ': .~+.ueM. tiaad fa.aap'alYir ywpr* lVttBalw Y;=e; i          c„claw+c 5.
                                                                                                                              offer aadiaud.teaar   of It'-'.060       toed"       *xW"mwdw%i*h        the  t;.. .,, ahlss calif be
            a   A a.wmwy ,,(a ohjwtiww, ii, weaei, wart ptaduaad.a.d                 ahnarsndn.n. wok
                                                                                              far llaad
                1aracatatkm and diwwakir in ihak werclasal# tbt 36 A wI2Qtd #nnela#W# It" auh4sWi to
                paint.., of applwahlo and wbbI.u W Ilia araaatty of rat aatMaptkaw and the hrlfihan.t of                      1. thu cvara dwt Yar an M anul aaltart Oalb.shl. with l t                 na say aunwral r anebscrrg na
                Ytnrr rwatwawsb,htic . bow);                                                                                  Tab uet w as a>wiaias •babel hwniesa i d.oak inaa (oe                             hear parndaatlt'
                                                                                                                                 an that
     Wrarcn Irspsw1.
                                                                                                                                    a     del diaalaaiaa tetics will rkn 'tcate any duty, tiobatitr an: rapmuh11ay'ai.a.aWat.           a
            a    Ineradudka, reswwofinag the sy~a Was *ftaappoltatlNafd Mad dtaa0usad'wax4 pa+tnraeI                                      i.01.edal isaaa(S Iwrabtranany tat to en.teats,

                Ow Appa.eh o rhs the p:rxciInte Sm bran ndoptad bt Iia datwaty shat wori., taws                                     a     the Oetiarabk was will prepared For t .ii toe m with data nxd•, a itneansia at tamfh aad
                dac a7marviewaland the hwtithkntaWiabrs4MARVIlilpaad;.
                                                                                                                                    +     Phe atlki keep .an tkiaseioh+cu-tfiklcewwaad aA capy et NKwltle cwt(kl6*wb.,ar
            a   Un4rroaaatias fhu thun tl'tii l pr,caw.vtna tninrurrnenl—ta.Mdu**b. sunnm.tnmt                                            in) estswto uttham. to any stied qtly w'idle.Ittgtarpipl.Iw thsi permtaakm.
                prbWtdlNl a0 Wn. piaWidr al pa~etvwtw•
                  o             as 1Aa Tasbran1 pmcea to cnwtntrmca enviaa d M hr a da rtpaan at                              We nadcavtand that Yost arc saaiikely w1 mmar aay yWda atM p"Was aM which amratd oub. In ran
                     M           WIIIIIp. i.lhf.yNF ftrv,fat tNt* aretan, uata slt A( tufts lakariane r ie                    wwk If thsi +itwakta eteat+ huwcat, Vow are• aiat Yee Wail ant Mal* any mrttb - p #a
                     pataWitialaaaa:                                                                                          anawawt,•.unacat(sp • at this indict rciceraa to DeWitt ax our newt bi atty n e ad*an*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   * yannndsig paiar
                      a {ruyagtq.Na.aaiadtls.papra.arW                                    twfiaWao cdhatuatntas               ss*ls St at of the aandwse at stI putdie ennmseca sent a, ua and a.Mbald aafpi6twaMla4 tatYatlll.aa
                           mli& d by        FsSnuWadsa('          tto dervia+e .red +06ualAian Yf'iM -4rt■ uasarlry           Such worditrte. such eonant will not to withhefak urrtatxrwbiy.
                           plataanh. (dw AtaNtlllaak
                      • tali 0 11 I / aaha>tas to h+ nr                     r.-ntee, swK.ab MWd,   raa.aa.I  awrta.as,        h         Cib.t Ne.lt.watbtnnn wad A..apeiaat
                                                      I—          _      '•that_
                           —
                      • kw *I               Mrb ll h,                    t,rtfr the iimilq of i4 Mepiammurkat, the            .l Chem Map.a                .
                           .inaaofApre.ni,•:                                                and di. Icy                .
                           1~lllluitixn~llNa                             i           ,~ .. ikuliwak0l , lw,ow             _   In     neetw. silk so praaid.a of dM Swvk.n we Mier Yuw to elate. Y ardt..ns hoed I             of
                      • bay saynaalhiitxa. t.ltvtir:                               *na*ton of        bktia4om, R      JX      tlasi.eo Th1N'.ptlkllt t Yt.N rrap.ratbUiry far Shat pltwirkn of nftar.Mtae a.d deaiaitnE•maklap In
                           pe.a.drlg cavtnaamcM, aw k                              n t a.pvy Sam a aw nyags                     tmera'titwt wWbl*a 'Yissa we axe w pnsask (n ndtioa. am ;khvicey utdte Satoana is sk tuitsktw
                           cpaatttrw Unsludirig mot tinuthr                    taas, ttidaa" *and,Yaotnilns)             t    055511 Ycwr aClllpfNipnpf tilt.
                           a+ar nrsµasrt and •rsNtap4l            . ,. t awralN" aarpanihdana over dwaa.Rej
                           art4Vta                                                                                            as   Yow ac►.natl.dyf aid t natlYt Cat ptritrrnattce of the swvscrn Is akpesdeos as #w tartlety ant!
                                 In htu ttaM.aorkUMaael'+• cn. . ,'gaLIMn ba,a                            d -.dl.'aril#a'          elicit., aratpldd to .df    Yana
                                                                                                                                                                 own as'ttwatea iiwt tataaasitratics in tames tax Sala than
                     atarlRr.apal :af' di. lla.lae.            •X vu .. tan. aatdYbls a(i .                     .iI. to            enaappntsm, aswallasdmatydebt<ra and uplrusatt by Yost.
                     pWvidad too t
                      • 6dsi.ijt a.sd`aitatypa.atauntIndMaysaaatad#a.pb,naeat envinrracam.ba                                  a    Yaaalyw to .MhW afudahbgar all inforow'an Vats data,, rekrat ma din rtv*w
                           sakiak HmJlme iaya x w aea..ail
                      a tic #Yp r N                      ipae     d by Ala flyekal Madat RtYdtal             la     b.,       a    You Aare to provsdsna tiarabr mean In aaYWaad.pa snsta1 Tat asset fir sits In Auk saftlaat
                           dmatt y*ftbecaeafaroNoaabuatll6daadp+i#a0elni                                                           iAhxrnatlan to aform sWi sndtthtudlrij.ad lnptlit;
                      • hkraa:waMl.ditto             TI}. NlMblyr.Smrn: -:gmwu* add rimwt rivowstiata*
                           prateaaaanarmat.             nwaaf/.aa.a 4 ,Mwaeanbaadlad;                                         a    Unitta we arc cahcewitc I,,drialcd. Ynw agree k, carryttsg alit alt atMae:t with 1111151 panher,
                      a tW r,zr„rr, . i                      ad. a.d adaf ad faaa'pweAai* Iha aaa axMlosa*
                                                                                                                              a    'Vats ataysea to pnn,dua a nrtunaud postal.dcotaw,t kw ws Ihra,Ohoua flea oak,
                       ✓ a,u,.,r„i .,r Ott                   file W     and aabts6HarlemIIN(;-X.
                                                                                                                              a    Yar aaxre is, paaaisk a stout &r oar Isaac ins! weuru dswlwo hw:iiitwr. Ct taapnrwwk, if smpa sal,
            a   As Aaaaa sz tal.p aIao,             I;, rrc xwraci of Yaw am mat winch Yen bawl abalad oisl                        a1 14a UN StrtaeL lssidsa, and
                w tad dta enm ad k.                     to to die ideSply ofpaaaaaias ihta tin. *we da.gprdIn
                aaw.at                                                                                                        a    YOU e.se ha   aaa.athe rktswerablc we provide Sc You, In 4 5ermuao the mast appntpaaarc            aawe
                                                                                                                                   df.atioe Garr Yaw.



                                                                                                           J9Mal,d rr                                                                                                        liar S.411




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        POL00029750




         Deloitte.                                                                                                       7_
                                                                      .
     YunI.d        std ryi ce IAr aat              rif`A* l0ivitew li                    *d tinily aw
     m7adw.po~omia. of Yaar awlr.dasllaltlia'4tsdms i     Iss moaear                 with dds
     aewsdlrtlwsly4m.lc, t.adv iwdeb Y t.                                                                       Wie+aiRilrewrir       rscpgwadrrtd~eienodaRrtla*eium ►kw                                          .I
                                                                                                                m•walria iid/M3MNX 1M bllCrMp[taM e~w sad 9pply aMMlrb aAae of p.s                                 y
     The rtµmoo-fnic. wf wt *Ofe sadfiMMww:e9+atatarrd N eb m 3 of dw Tam of Yw99ei* am                         OasA iMbiob we bwoptae919yate4 fog Yau is 3613,
     krthwe tefpred to th4 Cua  M*41TIO t)lsltp,aillY lw .
                                                                                                                W•elkllaealt0o dM Pen 1 wwb will              IS tMrsafasrtkeUM.so MIR 4opMsw dp aGMNar aaa1111ab~
     pryAMMnY01inM                                                                                              a+xr atMl .tl6trt..are wdl asp tt4r /a Yf tMr:1As'Plal l 90016 ad BSff All6 piVAT*    mtpsdts
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                        Ow wab dom wits. ■aaewpJ omw vW .ba.brrd as da• sat and fader (b
      the tics x n t'@r..ranra       ~-M 0t4 tI %K1100 4 6N6Wr) SW llMf00M..' 0011aiMkd l p     tt c f IOW      .ddia iu0 icp indw awiw.rhl,rMdasaaMtlwewfapaptsi
                               (illi                                (
       i{YYnMnitoe5• r prrteopd171a9indtpdtlrrw9iaFt'        by Yna5.K_

     •     lkstnwt IINci-% b All, baeAws we 1lenam Udins sa Yaw             L We will rckr let 60                                                t:rn4!R. .           Titer. Na4s
           peat eIt           P M Hbiaoi I       X Mlt od*,uu$ a9M 1MmL 76e a ocin which f&iriimn                                                Pent                      8430
           1lN A nplwed will ba ritpswlaas"l69lt8esy fl•ruwa syMMaM'.
                                                                                                                                                                            5$..
     •     C*sm aw a geteg w 000 O"r        s" f *3 X p03ser9ha0.$ will be eamidwwl in "a                                                    8taldes                       £436
           awbrrr. W eriP mi anaiiMR my: b4brum itat ruleei ae.ds Upwy lltaim0 rya so, with Ow
           erla9p-1 , et -LIMN aaa*elsry-pr wi to ;.Main m ulOwmikt of k     wtcenwms dim Ow                                                                               8310
           Hike* tQ O.X 4*Pitsead ribaa ii awn 1mM k no:atad                                                                                                                f Li
     •     lktpdtic wrN ne pwo1des hp l .>t w y other upwm w as &V..p m On'alyp" aw wwk;                                                                                    l4S

     •     Th sufk* n .tomb               • ebM oe a MMely ®wld M'l              dw awepe M4 eW3eMM MM          ifrdralaj dr 4twae a1 aaa eMtdla ar           faMd r *MA Mr a aced ktr         MR~t, lalaMw( lw<wIf M
           latbva•trka Iso to kw be dole ni carry out a•9 ws ,                                                  WeçmoedIu 01Ces Iaea                                pit 1a drbr •ro aid i d eitrpmt wrll1wcIMaierd

     •     "19att •it patmastt int:nar9em nrstut4, o abe so* at ib. AOW900 ip                 t Yee lim heave
           ptiwidcd toadlitarhthetwaMuabilrlrrnwlRO)bg40 .id's AllegA                                           S     tpaaaa/3lMaMaaaaaitlaA           1"aariitatla

     •     UeU0 afton laea9l*ds *M 13sioba $adf wijt bM ea thrw cardact wish env chid party                     Tba ttaabaad toen of 8eelasta 0aat as laq'lnsl pan of the ( rod totwca• w &ad your •tMoatign it
           si ar tbae tasaMedPty aMe~roart tsf Ypa p9orld9 sad :                                                dI b16aw1 You a . 0m Owswpurfoo ofcl•u.o ii 'how Ian.i o9 k+•mcu, ow
                                                                                                                NibU*y        '0mewie      youywcutuw .manharclwry                 daaaoaetoadG750.0O
     •     Till}.W1Ms         alp<..Wed to IIMIMkiMW *111to0001b. Ie h, uo Ave iWtl'tcumw inns Isn w•. 61,
           pws*alwa aar *wk #chit do peWad of aw ww9MWft Mwdl Ih ti p,Maim tat• bm owwrcted as                  S     YarbMtlaMws
           MArrfr  ie  by You la,i vest fund= kdolMariun MAarld old► bltMsgaYltk
                                                                                                                If You 0I    fpint44aaf of ylcpmewod pry addoak ediftcat on or nibs damp mm me swvim
     •     ~wb1Ma Ms49 ass. vwify' or wa lacy iwlbesellaa p Busted tdeatdy by Yew                    by rbird   arm            —           alto Cenimah, weimmA    to (uthrw oee chimp soma pmaddaw
           pwdwedwYa~                                                                                           doaa0ed1e Apps& t

     •     De Ukb'rIll atlnpu a 0109 Iaaited agppsaedlt It aw wa96. apgt#Iliq, pf hay m'ab1Ms.
           dspeadwd tm Ow ".;Wo x of •w' swadp16ao and Ow ftartka rf of Yastf            bk6 abaww.
           med
     •     Ikk'ttcwitlnr*tnicwallyco ef•eXilmpro, ilK,asiapbwlaRltiaNvieaadlAUdpoleist
     It)     t1kaeewat, f

     We urnktueid that t4wric Willwmv, 1,.efeation r*wyae. wiltbIYwlawalbal9sdpOlmaepaaaawa mif
     trod rtyoot+v f o fattwmtkm nil, ,miinil.000.i i,kr roc ocrpiad9a6dirda     .




                                                                                                 r•p Vapid




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL00029750




      Delvitte.                                                                                                      Delothe.
     Aek .w-                ..d nGeeptnnos
                                                                                                                                                                                                       APflNflIXI
                                                                                                                    I'        GKMCN1 I.ETTF:R D4?=#AIa.2!14
     1lsa        altos R p slaw; tw to Iw f yoraice kr You oI hwk ftnv srd w eufl t$, w, h
     u itt       ll. Yell Oaabe aao,,<d that it will rrxaciac .wx rYc,x MleanpaA.
                                                                                                                    sOI!RI'E$ (W UNFORMA1 VO l

     U MA~V~ .                  the FFzrr~araa uS Rht< C:«nIf*I Ynu cxtnGgibR thli thdy arc n:4                     tat tan I w.wl. wG »ill nee the *Akwltra wwnccs tit infimmwwlak which i~NroMlYli            lry'kow:
     aawFtan MYi~Y61cIM~Y4d1lf .r                             .     y
               M a!!R !w ^T 1\iA1M~ O Mx pro o d wp(K•tu1muu* ynlw:.~r/) nIf @'
     iMlMa          tel.U'w Itoon Yiva wnusn utareentoat tar itreae wrrwlMan1a1101Iry elptutg and o,•u,,, ., ,.,         1.    " I k w vi t'nrr. Atoll I ro ou   whu   t%nlpt0a trues Ikon un MW b04Mh                  G.r
     Ii.           Qp r.a"t olkEOf
                                                                                                                         L     nDtwn l wtrle ott It towia wttbMWrOLitsnHoik~unjING.X.lwYd.                   uøontt.
                                                                                                                         Y.             "t of Fuj-tra,,a 5ygttpa aal rr Nr1Y~     Y#~a NppC l                Pgo ~1M1'G'r
     Y;•                                                                                                                       1:8MYI"I Pt A SAP stud M04              atsrnt'sk aiI k6 111.8                  IY tWIk:h
                                                                                                                               Fiarierww emmiCe,

                   G_ RO ._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._.I
                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                         S.
                                                                                                                               "1 sb9C of llw, dslkaow:y thu.noo" whnh oudik11.awttrr.al liir wam of tkc alla-Ipwtrtwu
                                                                                                                               thiliunsrnr FIFYrX is JGlxcwer.;
                                                                                                                                 IEM. Snounto. ,r('too of Sight ma;inn      1tI11aIt to a1:lfwtsrl PI 11 acamnaty of the
                                                                                                                               t boulbo wAm fonts, Il?41, X tufcwtity:i4 *II 64 b 4.19 uC S000iol .SidWl's                .
    ~Uelwitle I.t.P'                                                                                                        *13ltepgwt.
                                                                                                                         4. fkokw`a ttsPt*t"e em oho -1.oust sasprsly"':l M Brwewhino 1ply:
     No            1.M           *l,.                     of th4n411. III M and wklecI to Ibo terms of Ikr
                                                                                                                         ?, tyjIUU..*saponus on am Ilucopu twt?trabwt               ~t araMl~ll
                                                                                                                         6  ml"Spot R*rW I Wr. w%M otFtaunt **110 '1p40ot Rrtistwtf' mo Fit FM MW M S
     CSaavaetari1011IIR.~rIC1~M01MM0tl                Ias[.9ntht?_s_ntit eltcr.._._._._._._._._._._._._._...                wat W^w PM Iq($tlwwWV40thtJ 2013                         k
                                                                                                                         6 tuiliMa"a17alkwatl                              *I*lt ptav i s           d

                                                    GRO                                                                     IMMMIrf tat> . IIMEt tflk' MI ~.
                                                                                                                            —IndiflMna~elaw.la. and1. edpdml111t1e'w►awtlmaalnww~Ing~11Rh
                                                                                                                          & NtFjlwass `&ioakratt Ailitlt om* b
                                                                                                                            oodwAtil d.
                                                                                                                                                                   a.atYlaal dat.
                                                                                                                                                                 tliyfw
                                                                                                                                                                                             >.      . Mdrar Mw.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Irie~tM 6. .
                                                                                                                                                                          Post ojlsoe 1.01"- 4wwwm ",t61n ~Iraridw M
                                                                                                                                               n0Of do kwnwurus des en bosh Ima tot* n 11"" 10 IpA-- dlhl
                                                                                                                             f.II iSy aed tonllsbsno a+ to Itow tM e n rasmr" spill kr aloh in
     tA3h' udtuwdnl kn and                 iY of lWm Utti o
                                                                                                                         It. C1ttN1?°JIgnPDXtst7 o0icanitieetwnt,
                                            :sai                    tlsw'G'"                                             It lkeipuatcI li I Yalta., PO° ISMS wtstonwnt ttI Appiwabikty •
     Primki NOW.,
                                                                                                                         13. 7110P Otll90ll trsur PC I D%S I;av wwo;
                                               .p ..'nw.                 a wr t t 3..++ .                                Id. Us.ft11(1t6M lks,soo Pf I DSS aiWtwd AOL,
     Puet~fan.                                                                                                           13. 1b.NoelOdIIQOKwilm PCI InfS b C.
                                                                                                                         14, TbeWM13 tnhittbod Prwt CITice tSMP 000utwac with Fs tos, nad
                                                                                                                         I7. the MIt3 Fujitsu k'ou,tty ()p+ Roil: n"

                                                                                                                    lufd64wnwf ekoultiernaa rosy ba Puriidrd Yry You us peas rtI ttufeq/litl1.The it tLF Otb     mmd'ln
     A
     Yp,,p~
          rdGt. t -ltotaaupolwlMtrtMa.                                                                              auutass will he drwlord in Gvt Ckitvwakk.


           M*In4 •[1~Min~tl                  111bY       aI ~md           AdYIM01~'       aaWt




                                                                                                       rsu t.;r1t                                                                                           ANKH




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL00029750




                                                                                                                          Delok .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      APPENDIX 3
                                                                                             APPENDIX 2
     It kilsppagiaperi.srtrsaa1M'iE tA1!Rtil.2eIt
     CIIAIYtiBCoi+tTRo                                                                                               Eno4,r.e.3ttn1 I.atI1,kUA7 ED!Arm21i4
                                                                                                                     ('IIiW.f. ()au, aNt1M          R

     [             dafarrbhwr pM. tM'kAr. $o ,at,rtrl r+1 nrvwtnatali eexwy~a,d~dan,, nwwliliSalx,n N .Afar
          abaa(~-aa lba          -aa-pnrincwa—c rrifuirr i umkrt de {,..Llaract to "( karRe'.i, o. car.)
                                                                                                                     •: (:Iran NaawaadAdi1ata.
          ptapaaifMab#c%W at= WiF aiCtni a w;ut rc4wm Bw tae (low(a'"thaaatt krqura( h> late
          atlarptxt~r.
                                                                                                                     prrdiw awt.dn.at~>
     2    AM Cdr Re.l* t, wt11 er to ur t$                      iui by JAo tlaatad pun+w, wh„ iurw
                    F'AWt Fntrnt I:ctm f4 and ,ut I hail or Mc CRi"K, it71yI cmr4 cksw Nax{;Wg%
                  idle Clicat oh I7oktflk d*M n nu pnuau a .pocifiad in im Impaamncnt I ctarr
          ki iba Me at'Ctnaec k quaff kdfk dby lktktim.

     3    lkAa,tEt wabl rxivcslipp     Awbo ille"iaelr* Ilkr (:uuuaa of                                              'lilhr    ly111~ROi1IR {trIwiis+g any r,fa{+arrtK+eYr 11E~RpM .►a..   I,   MMM,I r.Y.   1N1f.1 .NMtt. .'   . b11YlY
                                                                                           .f     4                  (Ai,la ral 1lwawaa t Dakwta U ("Iaalaiitt a `wit"! aad K a 11awd+d >, s aM auNild b
          b(gtataa rtdptapwaatrd>'rbd....Gilts.tpaapaad                      Uaddr,.iatwiRaaaitallahad.ta                                                                                                          app
          Appra aibt iar ka t.rp.da af,I * Lbwye it 1a 111 If id A ptagi`►jat~wwatra der fiat 1b aaIMP(is            Ovdw x) at m wa          eta drone, Thab              Oahe awawilli,r.i s a** wr>         4p NO
          u d tapadt                                                  of t(>talr ai tdadw oalrplwllOf ate            belwoaal tbtt ( iwa and fhlaiile arilb rtdgaolR Io ilea tilawyia iwl a1M 1A11Dit dFaaww s IrMrlr aM ptial awd
          1s*atyr as                n a dI To              s. dad! pray wiIt ft* dr awtltr irsmy. no                 awd+atilMaa                    +Nhwep~ollowcMv                                                .R
                                                                                                                                                                                 aiimokwk d,hwtawiiwit ibi w~rlowrca$*         ,,4
          !rteyriNtartnNdIpapprr~ippia0 ! 0"MofalOW                                                                  mW -         be aaroadad is aaalt a ayarI byandlofrrd mptgattota an of both ptatltw

     I    W* co" wld n               bat * to Wd            tt Na daailiaa, as ~a..i kav: ei, aot It widwa.to        f1* End                       La   *it taath below land ug rarlicr Ch+wlpa ($nkr(s) oo amrmtrn(rua
                                                                                                                     dautalo o b11Xdty'amandaid, a the N ti((addadirr data of , Bmtgcai, by 1w fdkrwingl icai
           lalpldltlatlldrr ptdpaaa!d G (1a/F as /dale aK IIMIM , . b iwMt    lda.4tM.br Y7~'+i9adw wa base dMtli
          ! tbgnf tarare► oilier padiod yplead bX flit padali) ai ar nadpt or a CMatlaa               atdtaillrtdi
                          9 ld 1w               *o pnwsmd              b. pmpai                                      i        IIaarraad
          aitabbc                  a.lw parrofdr                                                alad lal►idof
          dla (hut aad 1be 4 tt Mtrrkr pwtblir. tw #m awdnrrkwd                                    (oylb sI wd
          drxuawm Mairgl referred b ia"Cbm r(kdarr);                                                                 I        Oar Sonire+ roar rrspuwl6dirim

     S    Nctdwpargiraiailradktplwawd'a               W*                      t+ .AlataW"Icoft"Ilvilta
                                                                         apiaatapnlji tttaimasadtlad>..              3        (litat Hrrpaahilrihkra aad Aaaaalp40M
          ('Mmgra(arilvmlmWch%*ptr)wAba Reetinetwd
          CkarKa i a<,Jor t., Ii:n- (h.or, k aiaatad on bewail of b tk Wiaa. Bari! daa.(.'Maa~a tladarfar
          uy 1                                    rteowiliaoauraaratfatixramtd6spailAralr9~da°Yroaaaa
          ii ttu-    ,c :rv.r 04 WOO l,                                                                              4        0"Cbaraaa

                 .hwu Bee rntirk I t,r leave (o rill ma.wnblr Coate aa.l. r+pnewfI M anlad n annna0kka
          wale uwa+tti imil flit imp(rax.•na of a CtAtarr Kepner, whrt+wmr at Im a Chaos (N                                   tmits,garatiai aA.uara to lice ('aatrru[i
                                                                                                     s
          signed a rcapcct of saoh C$ s I agaar




                                                                                                  PAWlla/la




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                             POL00029750




        Deloitte.
    t',~o,l Ns aa(xalsdy w   (           61wn'.t mraain asrkhnegn,.! Pk2:t
                                                                                     Deloitte.
     oMlM;a[G Your .prmnetne w I h   N wd mornus      t>b' n'At 1#rc ww:7,w. d
                                                                                                                                                                                    APflNDIX4
                                                                                                                   IRra:A Mtvt La rrls DATF:Fl9 Arwn, 20t1
    uspy of lS., (hr at f Ater.
                                                                                                                    UF:I.o1 TTE L.t.P TERMS -        OF
                                                                                                                                               BUSINCS.S
    Ycxw,r fa.thftAly,
                                                                                                                                  IFFll,)CFTF UP
                                                                                                                                TERMS (W 6I:SINF.%

                                                                                                                          ('at.uki.K awd Adri+,rt tierrittt
    Parlutt
    I).icatl, I.I.P                                                                                                                             .1- - t.M1 Ci.,ww wa,w..a~a stor.t 1a w aaw a.a~1{
                                                                                                                                                nl.a.waMat at •,war: wwaMw a waM. w aawwlMrK a.lau
                                                                                 0 oM,aiwa.Mwwww.o,w+lnw /wpMw'G,W;a')wPM
    A;t,d A rem ON,, t.a~At                                                      NMwwXMlaalad YI1•FF aw               +fMt.ar 4tJCAhM►M1M".ii
                                                                                           ®r4"A4dxwwv a1ww1a1uwf1ww;osw wi o                    /A Ililltlr lt(,t1wr M.la.aalN..M..1'aw+11Rl i..lwlwa. t.
                                                                                 NAWMA
                                                                                 w1w1.w. if
                                                                                 dww.wlw.w.drwMawt
                                                                                                    wd aYt 11N..tlw. W MWwa! iMlttlwn.erMte'
                                                                                                                         4.ea1/'i.w.wMM.7tww
                                                                                                                                                wa4LlIMwK.I.M.rawplwrNl.w RI M. aal.k.a wtaw'Maw;
                                                                                                                                                .Mw Maw awp~iw aa1A..t-Ai1~CMrw.w k rr.war.
                                                                                 a/rw►w.Ga.aMiato                     'MI-w.11wwriNaiwk         —14.1Mw                R~ wwww. a r ierinr, aai/.is
    Baeastss laMKa(Pa108Fna LA.F                                                 anr.wNWdM                    w.r.wa1.InrA.kA.Am tM4            wsaltBw watM.a4w Mw.~w.y               waal~.lawwalMrwq
                                                                                 ew.nwww •Www.ia.ii owl wl amwa ea Mt. 1wesl.w.Maac.                       ia~isridMataN~lY~rirtr+lrifrrw.
                                                                                    MwMMtwASA1rw.4M►wNaawtWSW '- wn.aarW wok
                                                                                 1I.afMaytw'.wwlaw.t..wr ta..w kwMRw -wowp                      ai../Mwira
                                                                                 ,w1lYlillw. M iFl. Ta1aA..t Na1a111a. R t.. C~.IwIR a1*N..of   ol f Na a.1w41 MFwMaMwMIF t!iAw CI.         .MralasN
                                                                                 wwSlailiMUiiaMwMwM4lYUagMMN#!tleii~A.Nww,w
                                                                                                                                                  laeCw.M.Ma (Mpw aWaMralstAN
                                                                                 .3 awaww              1wrMawla(Fy.~,t.r~I.await.l.Ilwaaw.      RMot.
                                                                                 twit• _M*               ..watwlw. F aM. >aw          a. al.
                                                                                                                                                110 fl .flwwr+..e+~+r w.Alrw+Kfwita.e~..w..ri.
                                                                                 U. Aw mwbw wa ww: M alarrwii.w.tlMtFYleMa
                                                                                 I .ptwkt.,awl.dl,ww.trr
                                                                                                           1WN iN llw ra, f.                    I    4t!)t ipa1Ma31.A" *mwlllrlNlaAm w oaw
                                                                                 Mww nlM.nakaw..,R...Mf=lhltwkwkwl4Mawwr                        1t F1Naw Mtwtwtrli1 wt*IIS AWM
                                                                                 aaMaikwwNat► m.daftl11l.rwwleoaa.rtatwwhMwd                              a4w.wr wawaw- n1aM w            pr
                                                                                 rrrwKr,wa                                                      MMar/.kF'InIYIIY'1.Aa w        o.IsaNMaMI t.M1at
                                                                                                                                                IMMkwaaw.:wlMtM.Mwr            1a.M+w.wFlaww►wa
                                                                                 'Ir raK}iwiiwwtYilll.lww.M.Ms.wwatattwAMw4                     ,aawW It mwo -100 awKrwwR.ak!+a.iana➢w-
                                                                                 aaa. R aaetwrr i..aw1MR r aaa..ad► awww.w R Iw                 111wIIa1:M M %"mW& #ft
                                                                                 MMwM.y.1wWMMa.apetMariMw Rr1lswrinYre.Mr.!                     WRMWNrkwlaMbsl.~alMsr•b               RBIWo W9
                                                                                 wNs                 aw,.lwMl.ar.ltw.atwwlM a+wrM•~             $N •N wMy ~• •a• swNaw w twwMa NrN.wals..t
                                                                                 Maawwiww MItww MwIM1aM.                                        w.wwsFM~«drwira++,.aww.araan~:.
                                                                                  U        UP*. I                     .. MrWRMttw
                                                                                 T     feM.rwIlwaei ' nrat.  Pit M.}waaw as i4                  is• rlraw:.,r. ,.r~~*S.11r.wu~ w~
                                                                                                                                                                                w~ 0* $.        *.
                                                                                 CS 4A.lYI.tAwt wwa.alteaw.INlarw.waaairtw                                      M              t i!F.1a.w11wFwMwrw
                                                                                 elrr$ MwaF.l. «raur nM RM • N. WGIYw                            awMw.dawwrw+
                                                                                                                                                        t        iaaM1W..~lN.nrf~wwlailrM
                                                                                                                                                •Crrfw.ewsiwai.wai,a. tawwa aattlM..wa+uwa
                                                                                 .wAWkaawr.,:.r.waa N.
                                                                                 .wtraws      ,I.Owarea MYdMwXt.Il•1I1iM°tMMMA                  ww.a..w awwMrY .rlwa I,wn..w.aw I,1,a1Mn k1 N.
                                                                                                                                                wwaw..wwwWlwMwwlltM araw.aYMwa.c
                                                                                 _.         ►           $     Sw.In     w .w hoVA
                                                                                 ewikyafir.rww            MMawaailt!Miiw a. twwMc               U       4wnwlllowwMMM.If'a*wwrait*0I*0 MRaaw 0
                                                                                 waawaMrrcw.wAlal. W*Sr ...twwswr.IMrar
                                                                                                                  .                             .wnw.cawarwa. alawal9.w.I i.aalallla/w.11.
                                                                                                                                                                              rit
                                                                                                                                                                                                    aww
                                                                                          w: ri1. DNuu Arat.w a a,wlr:M M.w.ila..arw            tt~Mwrr raTNl rrw~w.a...arMaw
                                                                                                                                                                           R.ww.. railalM.aarar.r
                                                                                 Ia..+dP"rMwaM: M:Akaaw ail. MOFM. w.kMo lw!. WA                ~Mww.WwMfa:wrwipw*rhlA
                                                                                 .w 4r aN~,M~N. w .a..r dG,w r S. kw I.1Iw.. 4*.
                                                                                 cw4w_ww*lxA":.
                                                                                                                                                IA   S         NWNbS.          NN MWIM lk+rarrWrw.
                                                                                                                                                          #i ki..6,i.wlMt.
                                                                                                                                                     N. weita.Ntiw*. Ma                        pi.iwewt
                                                                                                                                                     ttallgwtrMtli YwIMS.t.1w*r'9.r~'} 'alr
                                                                                                                                                     N, Ma, wwwrie M,AR,..IfeM a wR.,rt+11.        w.wta
                                                                                                                                                     ~'a•1a:w•'  awwwi.  wa.kM./.ww   ~wwri►f.k   Raw M
                                                                                                                                                            s.*u       r llmw w:awAawf iaiYMa4.wbt
                                                                                                                                                     M aw1 ..,nr~1l7:. ort..ni.....a.tRlwk.Iulrlw: ew►I.t
                                                                                                                                                     aMkawlla ,. a.rn.,alM          OTtEs          Mwwarr
                                                                                                                                                     ala.t MsMw Mwrwt sa w.w lr aw.a             at 1iM M
                                                                                                                                                              Wti.ak4iAsft a:                  IM,.Ym.
                                                                                                                                                     ~      awWbMnwNa•aMWa . .
                                                                                                                                                     SMwa..wa(w!W4awarw IkrMw.w.agan.t M.a
                                                                                                                                                                                               ginw.wMwl.

                                                                                                                                                     N .wrap   w.twr a 1*. !1N w w A1Mw M
                                                                                                                                                          w~la aAF X11{}a MMI~.II.11w MRIIIM.w
                                                                                                                                                     arAl
                                                                                                                                                                R ..aaw[ aa1.~ 11111.*0110~. N
                                                                                                                                                     ~         aarRatM. r. Gr. wrpwr alw.w erw
                                                               r'a, rl rd ra                                                                                                             tirp lIa/tMt




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00029750




        Doftti~.
         wlafeaiA~w,.~arp                   .bwAwAlNr           ~lRlil!MIG lMbi MM1M4MM       fIK1A*Il1AiiMffN,IAla        awl
                                                                                                                               .D
                                                                                                                               .... rNI
                                                                                                                                        tt .    NI Ni *.NI r NI AAIwA6i
                                                                Iwwwf al! NI }r! MI Y .1. lirr MOwe*       O aAft          riil0alNidrlAl~OwtM~~YwNY~fYr liMR - :111
         twa00E.lw~ll*YM11kWwwY0A14
    U xewN4Nd*A -~Y                   M111Yi1~/AlI11LL11111     awwlwl~IrlwMe4fY4wwAwtlwl•         1MA1wA1irwr 6.Nd
                                                                                                                           e~rYwIAwIAIIwIwIwAa~wwAYv
                                                                                                                           4A.rIp+MAYAwwN WMKa~rYIAY
                                                                                                                                                         IMtrsMMN
                                                                                                                                                             BMit1w r4'*M
                                                                                                                                                                                      U  M014*44       4YMIwwiJ'A>AM4~tA10t0ew4
                                                                                                                                                                                      MrMAIK.AIi e111~Mr*R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        11aw*w         IYM44  0A01
    wa*wwAl> - Mw M AAw/wAA ettAYlwOi rwwAYlaY MIM aw                                                                                                                                 Mholit iMY     IA11t, ri itM•A*AwrA~MA 1M
    ~ iN~IA~ryAiSY N~~A1wr~w) Mwiwl pAM%i~.                                                                                                                                           1tN0 aM.wwA1M~w         wYMw w.Aww Mx*YY.w1
                                                                                                                                                                                      MwwWMRM~•t OrAwrMPwa'
    AA 1YwwM0w11ewiet1w14MMwa4 wN Mp4rdwr
    AAMwMww Y1w0i044            ;     MAMAAIM M W ii Y
    "tfwYNN.twlar"Mtw1M11AwwetlwtltwlAAlANw.AMA 10 AA
                                                                II             44N AIM wMw14Nd .I i   w N rwwlwAi d.
                                                                hNwMMAAIw NMa 0$00 Aww 4.r .w,.                  xw
    Yin+ AAw            WI'.*       lwAwAUA.            Atw o   •wYwalY I w wYAw b wa               to       w .AMAt.
    a o+.Mrc Mi. -        MM MIIIAAAI►AI! FIIIIMIMwwf : Nd      NY1t'AIw M.f t,?AA *                          4' 0*
    "-    •+Aw+rA"YAMN~Mwc.~MnlMYtwirw+4M+•iArlwA               wrirMeaiblw/LerArC/kiYIAMc {+MiY 4* b ilowi at
       , 'was+rAnerrvwr~Afflr~ta~~SNYrAei.                                +*I       fMlwati*WYM xf_44          Moray'
                                                                eaIAM         wa1Yw Aw Ywi11~*r ww*f AAawi: '•7A AAt
    I                                                           -.aeiq                 wagriMwAAww Nd*N4IMplwt..
                                                                P+xf mof wAi1w. ww MIer..g
    f:l Yfa w wwrMRAOM NA dMwww          Nd Mt Mw11f at 4f      aMwAwArraww*f et A!'MlwtiYwt 1M/ar M 1441 11w11wwA aw
    plWl~l111~1fYf1MIf,'/iMAMI111F                              E.kIIIfMIM I           x w N.          1Yw e:A1w r4*
                                                                tl w• -      wi         #tMwiNu. rw4MMxwwalAwl ivar'
    33 OM wrMM*A*wwatwu'MYAtaa,w*M.wAN1Aa.wwOwMtaf!Aw'
                                Nd                               u    44.4 INlrwlrNNdNdl              wM~aww trw
    $' wtj*44 Aaalwwt„rrwr.ww.wrwA               44 waif►        ww E444 «i iww AY1wwwA Nor 411 . iiwww wwi w
    M~prrYtwa.                                                   4447 bb11, p."Mitw* R 45d4411 l4'1444 lw WoN..            4*0 +MN wo1wAiNa w e1Me.wylwtiai.R eieMAM AweMw9t                %WSW wwomolowItredlwttdaMMw*SI *.
                                                                .Ss'          Mil to A4 Yw[ is t+wih44 wow wwi NI          1wMIAMwM lAb tllrlw10.wYiA et w*w aYINw 1i 4* OAMeAMri     laltrlaltic -wwNd WOO:: 101E .raw wii aiANr_1rAir
                                                                 tW1wwA'44S        MNd4'4.4'w.Ar wwwwiAw AY1+Mwf            Yfldh A IM Nd0*       rAWwirA MwwrYr a Y►.' CAMwAw        .MAMiNMw.iiwY*w+~1.'.
                                                                 5*            Nr                N. w10p*M4wN*wYMwa          1*110* AtwlAfNd 44 wl11f.4w~ eu AlMuwA rawlArnat
                                                                 eMiwlAwwAdwt.Mlww 44 MAYMA1M www NIP M+MAwI%              (*IIaY14
                                                                                                                           i         ar .i Niw Mif1wIA A tll11 nMM rwwAtAwr 1Aiet     4: ld11MYt~Y✓MAd1A1lMMRi
                                                                 M*tar.awwwlyRiwlMA /MaAYi4.M0I*AYa*wMAMwa
                                                                                                                           YAYA~Ywi.liwlNYr~irwAe~ii
                                                                                                                                      w                    ~bM./~w~i~i~w~i            *1 worn adl WMMMwM at ,Awww'.       Roo" Awl *wA
                                                                as ns tiAnllw+w IMAAARMAII~M 1A.1 f1 nAI+AMir.Alw          ail atAlwMNw.                                              iwwiM.m
                                                                l N         ayrJ___sA.wrae-Arlw+kw
                                                                44 -  ISM* a         W.N..                wrrww
                                                                                                          ew se
                                                                                                                           x       .
                                                                                                                                                                                      It rA111Aw wIpANN4 M4* *am wo'" 00 MA4 yAMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~1 wy~,
                                                                wwwwlA•Al Ar M NI ftrw tr iu0miw r t'wA1SNI
                                                                fAM   erwArAwwwMlAlfranl+s~AlYt'~ww4                                                                                       NI****1N          N           Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    **I*10II*INI      at
                                                                                                                                                                                      IwtA*Awr Mwwwi;MPMAw'...* * wt-_ Ya1-wwow-fl irt
                                                                14 AMwwAfwMMIRdYww.wt, irtw¢lliw/1!tMUYAUMt1A1.                                                                       -IAtY xA tN- aw A'Mtrl iwAi.wtt 44* AiiANi /iw►
                                                                Alwwr MAw1 YW1Mr 4 YAwww       - +IIAAA NI "W'sow,                                                                             i wr.rRelarliMR +AAIYYAANI¢ i Y Fi1A*MAtA .
                                                                            M A. AYIiy..IN oft M144*EMIpA' N p AK
                                                                                                                                                                                      62.1 lll No Nd 11AWAW 'Iwww Ad111iM111t]iw.'Ars'
    U NMellwwdM                       .= YwY evw.fM             41 AiA14a~AM4Mrw44lAw#A0lw4        'iw'rN~wri#M                                                                            atwtQ.17M1AMriYMMMw wtwwwAweYlNdi
                                                                Iww 44 4.wf Se4 M'fRaEAI/w'fMM MMAi1NwAAA NMIFwA.                                                                          Mww14Aw~1MIwAwi*.
     Zz". 1eM#l0 W    _       ,.+. P cVrAMMwAw4YYAM*Aw
     woo AI%AAIIA aw w ;s o I waa nwwii wwwMAA w1At R           Ii 1w1AU II S.a.. NI                  awNAA a0 9MWw                                                                   W     *4'S ww tw lw*+k *I tM.la lt11xCDd 14 IN N
     wI1MMAPM4 awAin *~ aw eur*wi +irlAwtwY Nl                  PIN IA.II!«RA1 wRwr s.W iYwAe #AW*IM aiYpf.                                                                                 ewlwww of wH A aw MAr' *i* aMw w SAN
    IMAwwM w1_ww+     wi**Y.. ad MawM1 P.       ~wAw11
                                                -               WiwwewwwwMwiw MMBI !f 44 .!wwwrrwAll4 M'                                                                                    wlawwNwrGre+e'wy •4 aMwi*fryyawi wYwY/Me►
                                                Nd              w1l wA                    MMwAxI NCM NNR.--                                                                                 4rnlb wvr M..w..v
                                                                44515 USe
    w'1wMgywMlwwww yw OwMMwwwM*A wwaaMwwa                                 MpM       - 4&M 41 -      K IAAr 44r iMIMA .                                                                R2S   wwNV. 44 44 4d to Low*#A 01FM a 4w
                                                                             wYlwA!w! y*r                pore                                                                               pol 1 ui %%             R 11*MIM : wlwiMM4
    Uf MIwA/IwAi7AAAAA~wIwwA}A.lwM~YA1A ir                AIA     I AiripYwwsf~R41AtwARNA~IkItlMwrllwfw                    U A11tfMe tlw*       Arwr OsddpAfalO 4411IwIwI0w0.               AIMwNOil7Ak 1r. x Al            r 11wlwfwwa
    atptw dyMw 1uNd Nd af.A1w144 wi -                     ✓r                  N aw11.r eMw ea +YAw •YUrl.gr, iw 44 Se -.   fY*:yAwiAw.wA        w01M             hI-~iu.M                   4w11NIwYwr/w ~w1~laYAAAw M iwI.FAMAwwIw AA' 0a1
                                                                                                    NF 1 Rw 7ww iIYi11Y.   wxAMIwAAA,.tIMeMlniwMir'4'tlw0+          ~A1t4is                 MAAAwrIAw 1Aw MrtltltlwiAYM4rwIMw twiAi aiA' w
           MIH.IA}wrrlwM          i+MwmA4'                      i        w(wwAUIN t                                        to Awllwwww for fiwwrw AAw Yt A*        V1AIi'w*                 AwaYRwAw fMMAMiAwaMfiil+.rAYwwwiw.r
    0q aIYAwJ* AIMYIrYrliYYw Y wWa 3w► Y44 NN A*                                                                                                                                            YfNw/w'wiw':iM1                   WwwIMM r'
    N II.AMwM i!AAIloAawAA4Yr~Y*QwrwA b                                                                                                                                                                                                    ..
    W wial aMM wMMwAdNd yw* WN 1 1 1 M liil                     11      ak Awlidon b      MnwMlwAa f +1AA1 44
    OAlklll*rAOxMiiwM wwwAOt M14wwtwwwwry 4 wMwt                eA.altwatwMMl AMx fletrlwwwwA OAOAIMA t1A11w.              *3                 MiAMYIMYM A1AtMA1AIMM IFAA. A                 MONVAM w r'awiYwMM.NNW$ 4 w Axlw1w w
    wwa~IM~MiAMwIAt                                             pwNN 5* 51444/riYw0eAN 51Se t whore Se awMlMk              Y                           be 0* ow M'wi #AWA                             '+ilwfll11Y111wY'YbIwO'Attiw#,iAwi i
                                                                N.Ram all rw .44 444* fw*N 4 MAMMA. MAaa rww               V.*NdMr4               A,AMwsTh ww0awAwNIA•IY1
     U 10Aww 7Ar aw Mq-fAN 1YwY.4 P44 wMMiOYMS                  wM1tAWWA MY~k}pllrWww4      NI*                            0AA        wAMFMFM1AAwYAawaiiYMAR N0I1i MlwF.
    wr N                    w
                Mw ewwwM4 wiles a{ tM 1d4N N 44
             kA.w } MF.MAf 444 .~-AIw we iwwAj
                                                                                     44              714 awe R             wwlr►pw 4̀         v4w wwwaweON wwrwArMww.
                                                                                                                           wrt61w.Malw a*wwA Ywr wwYe*A~IA,M.1r wY*iyw YA f4 x
                                                                                                                                                                                      wta   awA-'Mww .Mrr ww' 4* Awi *144 Now 1N
                                                                                                                                                                                            aaOwMaaw -*0 54* CAiwww M A.00" .44*
         #NOW        p444* l►waAwlAic Ae.M      et                                                                         I*i.r1*wwI*l 4N    d wAlltaAt.xrswwAw*Mi111~*A':                 AA*k Iw 1w x MAAMw! W MM~k'10d 004.44'
    MAwt ImAAI wM ANA-~.        1fwMli w.~wi MI                      yawl Ai                                               NI          w44eaM ai 1*w aena N M tUMpwaW tYrMr
                                                                                                                                       54444                                                0wawa w w iA*MY awMAMlw i 1t1iMw wA1a~w11R .
    lwllwYetwMM.NMeANwwA                                        II               Nd 44.      IW - Mtwr wwwwrwMAM.          4* *N ia'wrwMliwaAilwYAMwlt4 AM1*RMAyMlf_ 4'                     wwwif MM1MwrMMwAf atwMtiMaAr1lft AF'AM Riww'd
                                                                NI NI.4 +.wMwtwNA+Aiw.+wwrt MAMA.I               N•        awes YW1Mr.I MlwaYwwwAlwwMiArClMAww.KI+wO*.**4 N.                                    1wMt * a wl1 o aaAlwww. w.
    Ajf wAfwllAAww.wlX*W**appW*fC6wMwramW0hW                    wwtl 14..5 l d.AAM*u Nd YAlSe irlw aM4 l                        -             161Aw tiAwMw.i AMM+►WrarAwew                  Y 0 'w1 A011w0b awr ww w-NI 8                -*
    Mrriawam
                                                                                                                lwA
                                                                Nd 1'rw MMi*IM Aw Yes NI /w 1** 441Iwe1* tl 44AAM w4       N                                                                YwMli~/ a mp w NI Ar l w ~~.MIIt141*5 ww.fwwn
                                                                                                                                                                                            1*~11AA -.N*w Mw 4*44** fMIAf1NN NI YNI Y**
                                                                     _     atts    NI wiw YA11.IfwaA~eM   ww               3A' -.1wr r.. awiw*ia :AAwsM1W y1r wif Ammomm Aw 4*%k w.         wAtw+MlMMwwlA.w*LaYwAI(M~IIw~wlw:Xw YwAAw.,YAt -.
   }.i     7!MWMAMtMiwlwilMiMMwA{ltlAAAMII+M.t                  lkiAMiAnwi101A4#1*►wrfiw444Ul           'Ul5*              IwwwwMlriwAAwM w4 rlMa~rwMlwewiRr IWA*AwNPtA                     Yi1wYllriwr. ,y MwwAwwa~ixwwwawwMu
   MAMw►wIM'+MMw 71AsrwwwlMfwlwlr4Aw*w6Mww.                     aiynww NI wAwlww *tiel..      000 4rwww.N                  IMwwMfiAwes0444-rMaPiwpMMo           w- ittwk4Mlwi               Mw         +Mltafs►iw       .t44 wwNMM
   "M.tY bf
          l     Awnya4iA owiMr'di~wAawwwAA-                                                                                u+wArMM 4 OMWMiYn. iYf lMaw w' IIaM wlww WM iAV+rw'              10A1' w M*f10wi` wAN'A UNwrYt4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *      a a p R wwAwft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i Awes
                                wo Ar ww rwAAMi N
   MwwwY A~f Awes w*MA MrM.wY M w               w-              oftSe P5          54'     I44444      oodo w Si            iwaw                                                             dwic wwwrrMw i AwelwYaA. R Y11' MwOAlwwr e1MA

                                                                                                       Ngprt)r"ti                                                                                                                 +




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     68
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL00029750




                            ~~«d~r~w~wrrr~ww~+e                                                                                 ..
                                                                             +rr■rrr4*
                                                                             MwW.rrNWtttM.MNMb.iM        t   MIM.n1W; {}MiMtttgtt                 #0 tN rr    aM.g iw ,w   1* as#   40
                 NtINMIMhwMMM.(liltMNMMWN MtMltM7MMNIit
                 w111M~'tlMYli~'~IIMb1k/tM '                                 rYw'M.If Y1ttM OW
                                                                                                         MN41 arMtaNw7e              *                                                   tttMMrMMIR. MYNM1t QIMItIAB /At rF NRMM tt tItMMMMM
                                                                                              l o 1W11ilIR14Nr          Wr wpMtW..
                                                                                          IMI!W tNNr M.uMM          —iv*ttM              ==l                                             t     wrMMMMNikttrM4
    Nm3M         (ttY1 w                                      N mmom                                                                     *4 lIr1YlrYli        lwilWrFMrlskYl{±wl WOO
                                                                                                                                         W► NMMM W tt WAF • itAtlA O'N -     Ut WIN*
                 • ~MM1tiMN1}r MW'M N N. ilaMtt ~ 1M M9lMI                   *1 A NM Also, raw— rr — > 0     bm ill ad lmgl'.            t15     M 4* p MjgW N AWW_WW* It NO alp"
                 MtIMatA MM  .11~ltlr~t``~4M~siM Mt~lll+etrW!Ml'a+w MYA at   towltdodmW1*NI M}rw Iw+MM.tMtMMRaM *NNt                                   MMMlttltwYtw/       irtl~/rl06k   L     JG,     tM!wgMiMtMW$W1MM4 dlMrMilIwAWW
                 MFIIIIM5N1tIMG.MIMM11liW~11WII~MM6~Mt:~tM'wp                  oil No tNMMl4AIM~t YAWAP             lMt YitrMtl-         a                                               M tMN*MMWl +t1lM Olt d         rM- t M Ntw14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                 Nttr IJMtMN14Yr~s Mr ow m o #'PA                      00    rwMM.dM tMtr€.l1W4 roarM      V"               *W* Ni                                                       Nnttllte        Qr' ~ YA► lti     «i~t~tMttd
                 Ilil CsnttM Yti Mt tttMt AM rMtMrr NptWTlt Net              UYt1U i      ibKMwtw wr b&N trir : rr5~i                                                                    IMtWWMM    llrbthW3+it_twYtaq~~yWti►iMlM
                                                                             ttWNaih1             IAAdNillARitltttlnittM'Irr~NiY4r MM
                 ~Atttrii                  N     s d 0                       ++rrswMtt~      itawtaMwai.Wrwwr                                                                                          .Mn.ier     wlii                  Al
                                                                                                                                                                                         sttt'M
                                                                             xi.tYwMsrMlMtwM tWltlSr~Mtt.F1Y1 tMtaIwM:N. t1.1
                 lY1MINw 1t.rl!Yr.1Yut Ii.R w.tMt W Jftl   tt MW             OMMM aW Cam' MMW         M itt1NR NI a ft d NAN rM
                 4MMtW1MMt4NMM9~iM1Mt#'fM~tMM~t11Mw.:Mt
                 N' . IMItJL. Mt1NM
                                                   MGM IIttYtrM'             'u. N    t ON J 1 6 Ika iwMMt 4* 14 MM.mow"
                                                                                    '{lta(tS*** lAt*IMitaINM YMFMMIYiitMM}IrktYW
                                                                             NIIMMN NMpM~gfY11MMa7rKMttMpMMMMjnRaMl iMtt
                 Nt1MINMMW4MwotYt~ oftMO—M"w#41i                             tMa/NIIMMitaMt,
                                                aM.""NN rI ARAM(
                                                                             tl' iMaitMMWWtMNMMtAr+IMt/tMr9MaNt•MaMrw
                                                                             NtYnttllt►iM.~t~lYt1.91t1ktYtakaNrttttat.
    t,} a        *N          dNp w M liMttt M                 w MMIik
                         tin         *W1Mr
                 NM                                r~+tMYOK
                 tai A&K * Ni I i* .r1               Ml:. AAWW'              RI Ni MNA tMW Ni tttW r1Y tit   *l** MA* N WN
                 AgrMlMwgr w MNri11NM Mt4M~_ 4M st M           M             Wi tiN/MtwWrtwM1MNMrst~t!!ffMtsR+ttAl atnntftip#r.
                 111t[.MM+IttnMMeU6R Pm b k tMpM15Nt-         9t             aMt w NMWMW "   rMrlW , I*av V * m t Mt o n
                 OYl IMd1aMM, —, paN4:                MtiUM N                @ftt'r MtbrtWNNr tiMwNN ttMNtW .Ni $N
                                                        MtI*i _              a}w.
                                      UMtMNiY"
                               rM~GI~MM
                 pwo w M1Mr.NA*%Mwi1Am WiM MM OttIMMt                        CZ'- -.St ti aa+ w. rrw tNMt is -   aMtW ! W OW MYk
                 U&M~'ptllIS M11rfr4MM.x!tttNtl
                                                                             tom° ,             •+wA7111&Wno "No 4W watWM
                                                                     ahn.     x+o.,n           ", MMNMMMD [11tN'MN ofto pwllyw
                                            r                                                     -ft""Wommumom t}ir~4tW
    4* tttra 11Wr1! atrtt l! IlM 11 . rWtP tNM4k w                                              •. YIN - WN N MI1t~tMtMYrtMr
    •itiitMwNtrUiMtattNM W WNribtW,.                                          4w: gar a,.::wY weds alit w4MNiM.MMMMw • MMwdMtt
                                                                             wMNWWMWtL
    hN      pr         N WM t1wMWYlr —               WMtM (K-tM.MIF 4
                                                     tttttytrl!tt4. M'       li   Alp 4*M1Mw'MtiM tNi.i MKiY tW1M
    tittl            lrMNr            s~. Y
    4) uMMMN1MiMWwlWM wMrt1W}i.s4.w Ii                 ae
    AtMdti mas*"               MttWrMwir+Y mommor                            *    /.a NttM.tl .IMHI tit' MNNriM
    NtwrtNMltlw MMMYtt4M1MWitMAMM4>1s                  tM
    1ttM1tN►inl NAM iWMtw M i}AMti. YtilYtt tMMtM N
                                                  Al Ltin.
    MMdYt1Mr.MMNMMrttMN O 0 4i t ta, tiMt              tMY.                  Mtl a. M. in1 u~« 4MY UNtlt aW Ma1MN ttYM w..X M
                                                                             i111ttIM.M 4l a. air IIM1MNItit lrweapait"     .rcw.ea
      MNrMM           lia'l"MFIr? "Wo NY 4* *   00                               MN.M1* tM mMM'tI WM/tllllw Mlt/rWltltir
                                                                             MIM'tMI
                      w.       t    may    = dlr /tfiMkf,~141N               Itt         tr    #tYe. tMMK~YáyI Mr w.n, ..n
                                                                             rwwMAisiMtl4M,            .NIt}IWt**N.a. ,.
                                                                                                        Me wt IMM4 ►4+Mai+a
    MY. CkmtwM                             LWiitbat**am i4mom
                                                                             ~      ttM a wIM M
                                                                                     ♦dAttKl: .
                                                                             N3                                 Na t.
                                                                             a*      Ni IIR +WMF a. 4WMW1'tl MawrMW k.nn*aN M
                                                                             fa1rIMAANtI        MC11f7trt.RM4*dN.M ..yMMWmd
                                                                             WMt1tYWMl6lrtrltnle marom dsomob" ~~ tw KArw
                                                                             N                              M    pN. *' *W t.
                                                                                                                 M
                                                                             1MWMM           NtMtYWit~7M iMR. : . 'w: Ni t
                                                                             tsA         1YtM~.~3 A1t4ty lt~4MM,ttitM~ as Yau. Mi+l
                                                                             XL
                                                                             tr~MrlrltrMtrWtt
                                                                             Rl '~MO~NWMRMIwMMwy/irltt Ylr MiM4t Mh
                                                                             alVNt NtrXt1W tMtMW    ttM NMMt1pfW 1* MG1MMrY
                                                                             NMMtb Wt~•Nr MNtMtWMMMMMtw7WM         tttMWtM'MIlM
                                                                             t/Mw1MAai Yf4tNNY lMeIUNMt              WpftlwWw,
                                                                             tNMMIam,           MtA1ydaM d* rnN ANON1tiM/1•
                                                                             ii /W1* M Irrt4tdM ~4~e1lt~M iMM iW MiYltMrr~tit tM
                                                                             MrtttMW pttty~WtMMRrttlMitt BM~l4        tAlt► 7t MW
                                                                             MMPMI *N& 1* Na.a.                41*m*bi9Mw N.
                                                                                 NtttdlNltr MMIN4MtM IA11IM -Ni- tllttt MltttW17
    zt 1lNMM1YY      trilNWY)t~t tMlltlltl6'RNWtFMI~                         • ACN tMilYlMt dllt ii' iy/ t r# inMMYMM Lin
    tpN NV m*mm I dl. MMN IMst*4 MMtt NOUN t wf


                                                                                                                     pwit*VN                                                                                                 f'e   !M ,i IN




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL00029750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POL00029750




Appendix 5: Change Order 01


                                                                                      Ipr- gTgi
      ENGM:YME tCr Lrn'k.R DATED Ow APRll.20) 4
      CIIAN(1E ()ROiR NUMOER,01 (V[RSIO'i 2)
                                                                                                                lkki0a w1O r.vkr AwdRr dt          0k1. r.hlAg1 Is the aporpk dmip 1laatutos Cl' Ili pertoodtw,
      (M My .1014                                                                                               envi'oriixni whi,h nM ernnnf b b. i. ple. to aakrpia I" key ob eltiv'n

     Mr (:Mw Aufard                                                                                                 I. 7Mt      b potllp -y hm 1610 ownarrnhip ted vhihilky of ail 00.11. in Ihch O,w'oh htilkerr,
     pant I Olin ltd
     144 Ctrl Sn«,t                                                                                                 2    11111k4 ur."    kd~(ca noorda Os keg by the symcen wtk incgrl) and full ndn tnrl,
     Londm
     holy 9144)                                                                                                 lkk:s,e will iwo;luot a ratrduk of thew sprit. ibis , fialman.. kki,Iulk l u u,ly llnosgk dcsklop
                                                                                                                1110,1011 ,lisnno,4a11on prnvikd by tons I lfOcr, and tam thin in asses, whether the existawe of 1110
     I'« It. nlcnte.. ofe'hria Ansel                                                                            epeclfs sks< st hau.o I., teen tas?N anon aaw.cd. 1hki tc will a.vannt on the 2 111114 091110 III
                                                                                                                141, 01)011141.

     ran, Si"                                                                                                   iiotc,llo wit not cannon on the $041,,) of dmr.navnh,n and will 1111 pmfo m an) impkftm.celicn
                                                                                                                01 olitmitg etttnlrelleaa 11116191.
       td, C.1s c lick; (inchding any appcldtet, acheduka, wslf,r 411 okment,i, m oot, 1910011 chmtged
     es We C4 l4t hctw<cr, rkk.kre f Lb 1"lkhihlt" or •'v¢n'l awl too, , ktke l td (914 tar °6    sty
      19 Apll, 20)4. as aninhrf Imy prim ag,t<el ('hangr QdeMt) lit r,ilakr,mur Iherclo. Ohl, (bongo
                                                                                                     dashi      CDek,n<'r snob . .,t,11 tiled 00 ,k ktop mnew *o'0ctloueo, will sits, l   hda:

     014.1411004 th,tlw Ili <n:r< u.dentanding soil ogveorncn iitwecn ll. 1 15,4 ad l slnili with awpnd               l' ,rndvvwh n wah Oil appav,.mde Ikl tit siieilwt M raialak Ito Aidi $100110 011940r pealed
     to the ehonpc, ail o'A in this dotrmlen. i)pertrdcs sit prom oral ,rot wngten 000nnnnieatam, w ill,              rncchannttr,.
      0144001 h, sods,kanges (ioohntieg, bit 014 hnuosl to ("lea,,. R inr,us), awl 115) only l,✓ amcnkit to         • Unkrnanio$ key hi tonc changes in ordoo n, aw.nss if toy ,sera, wh.h co41s1hie ioyd stud
     wnt ti , st ysecl by nnYmiscd ,<pnwnW iris of lash pinks.                                                        the cv+xnit eksign femmes shove.
                                                                                                                    • Ilighhgning loss deli.. hnrurro wI.re. !lather nupkninmi n rot nperming etlpctiwuway
     "Pitt ieellt,) of iti liiigagda}grlf lsli<r no &Mh Fikrr too nentky sotcn ks:l, attcolfrt 40 044 9( May          1111168 toms.! 's 11011,dned by 11111, k, pn)orOi further nneerce to Vic IsaRif
     2014, by the tolk—o )cal.
                                                                                                                lkkiuc will integrate a ,k',cripter. of ewe appnlch, Ending, and reecamrncnWlimx from thtc Work
     I       Iro)0e,1401-.ad ObincWts                                                                           inn nut tklvovahk.

     Yoko pilots n,,,rpe net 116 ectiwcs rnmwtin to pewwanaly aloesalid wthtn coo eng.M., otol kik514aeed       111 1111,41 0 III Ilto .bi- a<.s of addkinni wr,wr, Dek14le will supi.nt 'la: dclivsu :.f' 0lgining
     119 April '2014,                                                                                           ).ae.i uldaie mewing• with 1'(tI. Oahch+kk,. ionp     n Booed Ik lkxc dre,,nto t (nwkell as iks4)
                                                                                                                aa',nck)tc of9v Sudan. the TtRyek)y I) a 1040 2011 and Frisky 14 Mny2014,
     2       thm,
                % n iota Bait m4)004aib1lhire
                                                                                                                4       Ore ClsrRm
     Ckn wrist, with., 24b) of va, wripum. dater! Oil 6A1961 20111 wd1 to       YOMta1 to 6M.111101 402
                                                                                                     00 twttr
     h lk,loI g onmcivn.110.0                                                                                   dhu tine clastees for thu a,kiti.ail work will be .hoga9 at a tibfl0 and mat<rkda linsdri, ill It with
                                                                                                                lbs talc car el •town m ,wr arigil,al f 0848011ru Inciter.

                                                                                                                0       C.m quatbl cb.ngea 1. Ihv 1, 0,041061
    Y1k.4le win 01111010010101,011 runts +,opptKd docn,irtols,o 15101111,44 in the 2010 itnplcttil)Iatiuuof
    I 1161,.16 amt mkr rev projeof 1100011,wn4l;en a.pph,d by Iva)., in Doter in aurparc the nduee .ltd         Except n ea1mvily mottled licirm all other 10000<011100141441111111011110 ColumnOl rmnahi tm ilenlied
    0,le04 ill 11944051 $1191014115 aid J, cuni,uol,un okh be [kk„e rtitie.k,kagy. lbc aswsunen will
    444110104 reok,v nf&Kume1110 oat r.wloi ilost Mw Iran. - 04,,:41 hooch doisllnos ant A<dit Sioro            I'bore ndicaee )n,ur .41000*41 m the tceno of have ctmo gc illukx by ai440i1g n.I ea°ennnil,t lna D.lakto'
    lttio.e, 41 the 4)m41 war inpiacd by the in 4140011610,                                                     14w enck,wd 4044) 0)' thin ('barge lksko.

    he addhlnn rkMkie wit sae* dnetrrClSaihn r0Otil,, to tigm>tl 01 buum.s , yuirclrina as well ag
    Iha pm)eel'a liming 540044,100 tad Waling antirmnt b001111

    DOiltic wd1 Inlefrot; a de%riptkin of 1040 olpo.ek, rndiryp end ticunmricidAtiurca fr,nn phis work
    6061 the dtdlvcmbic.



    [riya"',m""lYld                                                                                             04144100111




DRAFT FINDINGS
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                      POL00029750
                                                                                                   POL00029750




      Y"o#n ficthrully.

        GRO._._..
     .._..Gia,s*s
                               ---------------------------------------.-------,
                                    GRO
                            _..............-._..._..........._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._ _
      For andm i      tf ai`►'u;A (It,-     I.imkt&

          cd'4ame:          Cis
                               15   • oly




STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
                                                                                                        71
                                                                                                                       POL00029750
                                                                                                                     POL00029750




Statement of Responsibility

We take responsibility for this report which is prepared on the basis of the limitations set out below The matters
raised in this report are only those which came toour attention during the course of our work and arenot
necessarily a comprehensive statement of all the w®knesses that may exist or all improvements that mght be
made. Any recommendations made for improvements should be assessed by you for their full impact befoe they
are implemented.


Deloitte LLP
London
May 2014
In this document references to Deloitte are refererces to Deloitte LLP. Deloitte LLP is the United Kirgdom
member firm of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited ("DTTL"), a UK private company limited by guarantee, Wiose
member firms are legally separate and independent entities. Please see www.deloitte.co.uk/about for adetailed
description of the legal structure of DTTL and its member firms.


(a2014 Deloitte LLP. All rights reserved.


Deloitte LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered numberOC303675
and its registered office at 2 New Street Square, London EC4A 3BZ, United Kingdom.


STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. SUBJECT TO LEGAL PRIVILEGE.
