                                                                                         POL00172809
                                                                                      POLOO172809




                              Security 4 Weekly Report 12/3/2010

HOT TOPICS:
Risks and Opportunities

Weekly Incidents 1St to 7th March (1st week of Period 12)
• Fraud Casework losses for period 12 to date are £Ok with 2 fraud cases raised with a loss
  of currently £Ok occurring in the first week of this period.
• Supply Chain losses for period 12 to date are under target with a loss of £Ok against a
  target of £56k (£187k target for the full month), with 2 incident and nil losses occurring in
  the first week of this period.
• Network losses for period 12 to date are under target with a loss of £6k against a target of
  £82k (£187k) with 5 incidents and losses of £6k occurring in the first week of this period.
  • Of note, there have been 3 recent `Post and Go' incidents during the period, Ludgate
      Circus, Arndale Crown and High Street Sutton Crown with a total loss of £430.


                                                     ( 1f
                                                Weekly Incident
                                              report 1st - 7th Marcl
   Weekly Incidents Report in more detail-

Accomplishments

   Post Office Branch attack arrests
   • Robbery at Newlands SPSO, G41 3JF on 26th February 2009. Male arrested
     15minutes after the incident_ £5k Loss recovered
   • Robbery at Yetholm SPSO, TD5 8RA on 26th September 2008.11              GRO        has
     been found guilty of carrying out the robbery and will be sentenced of t1 nd -Of-tthe
     month.
   • Geneva Rd SPSO, DL1 4HG on 12 January. Suspect arrested by Durham Police
   • Andersontown SPSO__., BT11 8BD.on 17 February & Turf Lodge SPSO, BT11 8EF
     on 22 February.;            GRO           ;appeared on two counts of attempted armed
     robbery and remandedincui%6Efy.----------
   CViT attack arrests            _____ ____     _ __ __
   •         GRO             and______.______GRO         appeared at Belfast Magistrates
     Courf-on-2'Tt~fFel~ruary and were remanded in custody following the robbery at Seymore
     Hill SPSO, BT17 9TX on 26th February. Activated lbox with contents was recovered



Casework Results
  • Alderley Edge SPSO, SK9 7JT — Defendant given 3 months custodial sentence
    suspended for         period of 12 months and ordered to undertake 120 hours unpaid
    work. The Defendant was also ordered to make a contribution towards prosecution costs
    in the sum of £410.10
  • Bath Road SPSO, SL1 6JA — Defendant sentenced to 8 months imprisonment
  • Glasgow CViT — Defendant found guilty of theft and given 120 hours community
     service. Full recovery of £6k loss
  • Southway Drive SPSO, PL6 6QR — Defendant sentenced to 16 months imprisonment
  • Putley SPSO, HR8 2QN — Defendant given a 12 month Community Order. Unpaid work
     200 hours. The defendant was ordered to pay prosecution costs of £300 and
     compensation of £1,572.56
                                                                                         POL00172809
                                                                                      POLOO172809




   • Otterspool SPSO, L17 0BJ — Defendant given 12 months imprisonment suspended for
     1 year with a requirement to complete 200 hours unpaid work. He was also ordered to
     pay investigation and prosecution costs of £2,200
   • Jesmond SPSO, NE2 2SY — Defendant given a 3 month Curfew Order. There was no
     order for costs or compensation.
   • Erpingham SPSO, NR11 7QE — Defendant sentenced to 40 weeks imprisonment
     suspended for 18 months with 200 hours of unpaid work.
   • Pant SPSO. NP11 5BX — Defendant sentenced to 12 months immediate custody. No
     order for costs was made.
   • Blackhorse SPSO, WA8 9LQ — £33,944.76 Fraud Recovery
   • Funtington SPSO, P018 9LJ — £28,298.00 Fraud Recovery
   • Rugeley MSPO, WS15 2BE - £8,975.51 Fraud Recovery
   • Tean SPSO, ST10 4DY - £8,000.00 Fraud Recovery


Project & Programme update
Network
   • Safer Post Office Initiative Programme — 213 joint visits with GMP have been
      completed, with 160 offices receiving the accreditation. Bolton Crime Reduction
      Advisors have agreed to commence visits within this area running from April through to
      May. As at Period 11, GMP robbery incident numbers reduced year on year by 30%,
      whilst losses are reduced by 27.4%. An initial batch of 8 offices have now received
      discounted CCTV, as part of the camera solution for failing offices within the `Safer Post
      Office Initiative' in Greater Manchester
   • Case across the counter - 50 offices have volunteered to participate in the Case
      across the Counter trial in London, Offices will be assessed for their suitability of the
      trial, with the training to commence.
   • Northern Ireland Project - Analysis is on going to aid the design of a Northern Ireland
      Project.
   • Post Office Security sponsored an award at the Greater Manchester Police Chief
      Constables Excellence Awards at the Town Hall in Manchester on 26th February. The
      winning Officer received the award from Head of Security, Post Office Ltd.
Supply Chain
   • Operation Ingress — Out of 25 supply chain depots to be visited under the Operation
      Ingress project, the last depot assessment was completed on the 11th March 2010; the
      overall report will be completed by 31St March.
   • Principal Unit Manager meetings have been attended and will continue with
      collaborative working approach within Cash Centres and CViT Depots.
   • Collaboration between security and supply chain has implemented a robust Post
      Incident Process following incidents at supply chain sites.
   • To conclude the Tiger Eight Programme a change risk assessment has been completed
      for the decommissioning of Tiger Foot buttons in Supply Chain vehicles. Subject to
      Senior Area Manager concurrence, a residual risk will be addressed before the matter
      is resolved.
   • A meeting has been arranged with Parcelforce security to understand and assist them
      with their vehicle security and crew awareness in mitigation of robbery risk.
   • The Security Team have been represented at a two day Tiger Kidnap conference
      hosted by Bank of England.
   • WH Smith Security has expressed concerns to POL Security over CIT crews servicing
      their kiosks through the hatch rather than inside the kiosk. WH Smith are to reiterate
      the correct transfer procedure to their staff and an item will be included in Cashcade to
      ensure our crews also follow the correct procedures, which effectively is case behind
      the counter.
                                                                                         POL00172809
                                                                                       POLOO172809




  •   Security attended a two day course run by Resolve Security Consultancy as observers;
      this was aimed at CIT crew safety and threat assessment. This will now be assessed as
      to its relevance to POL.

Security programmes for products

  •   Stock Issues - A Project Initiation Document has now been submitted in relation to a
      number of issues around stock and remittance processes at Swindon and P&BA. A
      programme plan is now being completed and will be circulated to the appropriate
      stakeholders for agreement_ The Security team are meeting with Business Efficiency
      next week at Swindon stock centre to share information and ensure collaboration when
      moving the programme forward.
  •   FONCH (Foreign Overnight Cash Holdings)— A briefing document has been compiled
      with the assistance of P&BA and Inventory regarding the non-reconciliation between
      POLFS and Branch declarations of holdings. Security are working closely to support
      P&BA in obtaining verifiable data on the scale of discrepancy, within the next few
      weeks. Once this is available Security will provide analysis of root cause issues in
      conjunction with P&BA and Inventory and then produce activity planning to resolve
      issues.
  •   Crowns - Meeting held with Communications Team in order to continue to drive the
      use of communication channels by the Security Team. Various topics were discussed,
      including proposals for Security WTLL sessions in May. Loss league tables should
      appear in this weeks Crown Focus (now a monthly BAU activity) and a quiz highlighting
      the remits of the Security Strands should appear in next weeks Crown Focus.
  •   Scratchcards - Following the Stakeholder meeting of 4th March, it has been agreed
      that a new process of monitoring holdings will start. Based on the volumes of
      dispensers/inserts at branches, rather than a blanket £2k target, Camelot will provide
      accurate information about the volume of dispensers/inserts across the network. It is
      envisaged that this will take 3 months to complete (via Camelot Field Sales Teams),
      when new monitoring will commence.
  •   Horizon Online - Due to live service issues, the decision has been made not to migrate
      any further branches until these issues are fully understood, necessary actions agreed
      and success criteria met. In effect, the Pilot 'stabilisation' period has been brought
      forward in order to assure the quality before proceeding. This will allow Fujitsu some
      time to resolve issues, including a higher than expected number of screen freezes and
      resultant recovery transactions.
  •   Cheques - As part of the due diligence work around the Cheques ITT evaluation,
      members of the Security Team will be part of the team visiting both bidders to observe
      their operations.
  •   POSS - The Security Team are working with P&BA to arrange phonecalls to branches,
      who are holding excessive amounts of POSS when compared to their sales. The
      intention is to support the withdrawal process by tackling the worst 50 - 100 offices at
      an early stage prior to migration. The phonecalls were made in early March and the
      results will be analysed by P&BA and the Security Team during week commencing 15th
      March. The current date for withdrawal of POSS is 25th May 2010.
  •   Spoilt Postage/Rejected labels - P&BA have made phonecalls to the worst 20 offices
      for spoilt postage and rejected labels and the results will be analysed in April using the
      data from period 12.
  •   POca - Following the intervention calls made in January, data has now been provided
      to measure the impact and benefit in reducing duplicate transactions. Although not fully
      completed, initial analysis of the results, show a reduction overall across the 29
      branches of 15% in duplicate numbers compared to the period prior to the calls.
                                                                                   POL00172809
                                                                                 POLOO172809




• MVL - DVLA have agreed the branches to be contacted as part of the manual
  transaction reduction initiative. The data is now ready and the call scripts are being
  prepared. It is anticipated the calls, made by Security will be completed mid March and
  reviewed in time for a meeting with DVLA on the 25th March.
• Analytical capability -The Security Team are currently scoping out the use of software
  to advance the efficiency of fraud detection. A presentation from Comsec on their
  Intellinx software and a demonstration of ACL (Audit Command Language) of how
  Deloittes are building bespoke exception reporting for P&BA are being evaluated for
  application to current fraud issues. The strategic analysts have had Mapinfo software
  installed to provide Geospatial analysis and enhance modelling of crime threats_
• Risk Assessment processes - Property Projects have been provided with a risk
  assessment model for use in allocating TDLC (Time Delay Locking Compartments) to
  new safe installations. Since the start of the project, 119 requests were authorised
  leaving 281 being rejected, resulting in a saving of £18k. New local Risk Assessments
  for high risk branches considering screenless working are being trialed with a view to
  full out in the near future_
• Critical Business Processes for Security Management - For this year an additional
  two processes have been added for security. These processes have been mapped for
  IT Security Management and Physical Security. The self assessments of conformance
  to these processes have been sent for sign off.

Business Programmes, Security Issues
• Grapevine Tender - The Security Grapevine tender process is now complete, and
  Professional Witnesses Ltd. were awarded the contract. A Grapevine strategy meeting
  is scheduled for April to plan the way forward bringing together various representatives
  from other directorates.
• PCI DSS Audit — The audit is now complete and the only item that caused a problem,
  was that Patch Management and Anti-Virus were suspended during roll-out of HNG-x.
  Auditor visits to Branches were delayed to coincide with audit on Patch Management.
  Fujitsu supported the audit exceedingly well and demonstrated that they have
  implemented a very professional service in line with the requirements of PCI DSS.
• Meeting with Streamline went exceedingly well. They were supportive of our planned
  programme for PCI DSS across the group.
• It has been agreed with Fujitsu that getting HNG through the Security gates for AG4 is
  the highest priority at present. There are, as previously reported, 3 High acceptance
  incidents, which are being managed. Two of these, Fujitsu have assured us that will be
  completed before the gateway deadline, these are being monitored at our twice weekly
  meetings. The third is around Risk Assessment, this is more problematic but a way
  forward has been agreed with Fujitsu, we should see the results of that at the meeting
  Monday 15th March. If this is not satisfactory the situation will be taken to a wider
  forum for discussion and resolution.
• Progress continues to be made in the areas of collaborative working with Service
  Delivery, Royal Mail Group and other suppliers. Some projects upon which we have
  been relying to provide us with enhanced security of removable media (USB
  drives/CDs) have experienced some delays and issues, although the approach of
  working closely with RMG and the suppliers is ensuring POL will not be unduly
  exposed.




   Ernst & Young Audit - Further progress has been made and the audit is now drawing to
   a close. There has been some overrun by E&Y as a result of delays in the provision of
                                                                                   POL00172809
                                                                                POLOO172809




information from Fujitsu and the time taken for E&Y to gain sufficient understanding of
the systems, including Credence. Engagement with Service Delivery and
Finance/P&BA is continuing to iron-out the outstanding issues. The deficiencies in the
change control processes for Credence means some additional financial audit work will
be undertaken, although the extent and implications of this are not yet fully understood.



                                                                    Security Team
