                                                                            POLOO105145
                                                                          POL00105145




Review Information Summary



Reviewee Name     Review Name            Review Status   Overall Rating

Robert Daily      2013/14.Year End PDR   Activated
                                                          IRRELEVANT




                                          Pege1
                                                                                                                                               POL00105145
                                                                                                                                             POL001 05145



Review Information

Reviewee                Robert Daily

Review Owner            Helen Dickinson

Review Name             2013/14.Year End PDR

Review Status           Activated

Review Period.          Start Date        01/14/2013

                        End Date          14/034014




Section Information

Name                    Performance Against Objectives

Robert Daily Comments
                        I have conducted interviews and submitted reports within the agreed timescales. Case related documents

                        have been completed and submitted within timescales. My monthly Cases on Hand updates are submitted on

                        time. I have ensured a pro-active response to all incidents and reported accordingly. ingly.&# 160, Examples

                        are my same day response to Lanark PO after a fire. I ensured Cash & Stock recovered and the welfare of

                        the Subpostmaster. arranging the uplift of cash & stock when informed of an emergency closure at Galston.

                        I continually support the Crown Office network and Supply chain through visits and advising on suspected

                        offences. I have supported and delivered the Crime prevention visits in the Wirral tam proactive in responding

                        to the Employee Opinion Surveys. I have demonstrated inter strand activity by attending Chesterfield to view

                        the fraud check system and ascertain how it relates to specific cases I have.&#160;I have been covering Crown

                        Office strike action when called upon attending Paisley CO on each occasion. I communicate with my CVIT

                        Depots on a regular basis.&# 160; 1: also attend Glasgow Depot regularly and the remote depots when and if

                        required to discuss and action any issues that occur. An example is attending Aberdeen Depot to rewrite new

                        Security Instructions for their satellite depot in Inverness.&#160; These will be formalised as part of the local

                        process pending agreement from CVIT Crew. My PDR is completed to timescale.&5160;I have achieved an

                        86   recovery (&pound,63,733) in my cases. Scotland has no FI involvement however I contact them for advice

                        when required I have built relationships with Safer Comnnnrities Department (SCD) within the new Police

                        Scotland, liaising with them over the 2 ATM Gas Attacks in Aberdeenshire.&#160; They deal with all CVIT

                        incidents, robberies, burglaries in Scotland.&#160; I arranged a meeting for new members of their team to visit

                        Glasgow Cash Centre to view the layout and security. &#160;I negotiated with SCD to ensure POL would still'be

                        informed of all CVIT Industry incidents in Scotland after the split.&#160; In return POL will inform SCD of all

                        PO incidents.&#160;I regularly attend meeting with the SBRC members to work on projects and discuss issues

                        that relate to all financial institutions in Scotland.&#160;I have conducted TORCh . visits including extra visits

                        at branches in Aberdeenshire where incidents have taken place. I promote Grapevine during visits to branches

                        and within the SBRC meetings.&#160,[ have conducted new entrant training and have promoted Grapevine to

                        those involved. I have conducted a case review in Scotland engaging extensively with BTO Solicitors.&#160;

                        This has resulted in a considerably reduced administrative and investigative process bringing POL into line with

                        the Police and other prosecuting authorities within Scotland. The review has been forward to be included as part

                        of the POL casework National review.&#160;I recognised ESA in Scotland required Courtroom awareness and

                        delivered a training session on the subject to them alongside I31O. I have been an active participant in the now

                        complete Reward & Recognition Workstream receiving significant recognition from the Work stream leader for

                        my input and efforts. &#160;I created the new Reward & Recognition candidates & winners presentation used

                        at the Security conference.[ manage the Security Compliance & Safety Activity Programme for the North Team

                        ensuring the timely Progression of allocated activity programmes.




Section Information

Name                    Demonstration of Behaviours




                                                               Page 2
                                                                                                                                                POL00105145
                                                                                                                                              POL001 05145



Robert Daily Comments   Scottish Business Resilience (Crime) Centre &ndash; I have sought and obtained membership to the SBRC and

                        have actively engaged with members of the Private Financial Sectors and Police Scotland through Physical and

                        Vulnerable Adults at Financial risk forums. did 160; These meeting are designed to minimise risk to our business

                        through sharing best practice and information.


                        I have prepared and submictod an article for the S13RC quarterly newsletter introducing Post Office Ltd to the

                        members explaining our evolvement as a Security team and promoting Grapevine.


                        There is massive potential to promote Grapevine and POI, within this group and intelligence sharing

                        opportunities are currently being considered with this group with the support of Dave Wood, Grapevine.


                        I have regularly attended SBRC meetings and I am working on a project relating to Vulnerable Adults at

                        Financial Risk.&#160; 'the aim is to reduce crime against Vulnerable Adults from Bogus Workmen and Cold

                        Callers The main gap being criminals can drive vulnerable people to various Post Oltices to withdraw money

                        over several days.


                        My proposal is to makeStaff aware of vulnerable people through a &ldquaKnow Your Customer&rdquo;

                        communication to all branches_


                        Post Office staff will need to be directed as to how we need to address them if they suspect customers are being

                        scammed.&#160; Grapevine is the obvious outlet for the branches.&# 160; In turn Grapevine needs to know who

                        they pass the information on to.


                        Success at the end of the project will measured on quality and quantity.&1t160; To do this we need to know the

                        numbers of vulnerable people affected, reduce them and enhance their protection.


                        I continued attendance at meetings on behalf of POL to engage with members of the Private Financial Sectors

                        and Police Scotland through Physical and Vulnerable Adults at Financial risk forams.&5160; Engaged and

                        liaised with North Lanarkshire Adult Protection Co-ordinator to write pledge for the Vulnerable Adults at

                        Financial Risk pmject


                        Security Compliance & Safety &ndash; I currently manage the SCS for the North Team organising Stripe

                        activities and Cross pavement surveillance.&#160; Stripe has progressed significantly and has with significant

                        input from myself developed into a compliance system for all CVii operations. I have prepared to my Line

                        Management a program of activity in the North to support this program and ensuring all activities are being

                        progressed within the timescales by regular communication with Team members and reporting back to the

                        Program Manager.


                        I ensure activities are being conducted within tinrescales and any potential failures are reported and rescheduled.


                        Solicitors &ndash; Scottish casework has been operating without appointed legal support for many years. I

                        have had to progress many cases without legal support unlike my UK colleagues South of the border. In 2013

                        I realised that Scottish casework deserved the same legal support and I set about obtaining that support. In full

                        consultation with Jamail Singh I have recently secured the services of Brechin Tindall, Oath to advise on all

                        casework within Scotland.&H160; This is of great support tome and to my colleagues who operate in Scotland in

                        support of me. I nominated this company as they employ former Procurator Fiscals.


                        Since coming on board with POL [ have organised and overseen Horizon Training for the Solicitors taking them

                        through Post Office Ltd processes to ensure they understand our systems and that they are fully conversant with

                        current issues surrounding Horizon.&# 160; This development would never have happened without my personal

                        input.




                                                               Page 3
                                                                                                                       POL00105145
                                                                                                                     POL001 05145



I have worked with and advised BTO Solicitors and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service on my

cases in relation to the Second Sight review. I have advised on present cases and the outcome of archived cases

including those where Horizon issues were raised.&6160;


I have regular case review meetings with 010 Solicitors to go through cases advising on issues and how

they have been dealt with historically including cases were Mental Health Issues were claimed by the

Subpostmasters.&#160; This has resulted with me in conjunction with BTO putting in place A in a new

process being put in place on how to deal with Mental Health Issues claimed by Subpostmasters at or prior to

interview.&#160;


In full consultation with .Tamail Singh and BTO I have put in place a new process in dealing with cases in

Scotland.


Along with BTO Solicitors I delivered the Courtroom Awareness training to FSA&rsquo;s in Scotland.&#160; 1

held several meeting with BTO to have the training content amended to take into account Scots Law.


Case Review - I have conducted a full casework review taking into consideration the Scottish Legal system. I

have engaged extensr'.ely o itt the aforementioned Solicitors. This consultation has resulted in a considerably

reduced administrative an,,, irnesngarive process bringing POT, into line with the Police and other prosecuting

authorities within Scotland. This has never been mentioned by POT- lead team level and it is something that I

have progressed extensively with the support of my direct Line Management There is now a completely revised

process commencing with a new layout of reports for submission to the Procurator Fiscal.&# 160; The new

reports have received excellent feedback and have been forward to be included as part of the POL casework

National review.&#160; This review commenced by myself has reduced the time of report submission by

minimum of 5 days.


Reward & Recognition Work stream &ndasb; I have been an active participant in the Work stream receiving

significant recognition from the Work stream leader for my input and efforts. I have attended meetings, engaging

in conference calls and giving 100% commitment to this project.&# 160; I have identified improvements to the

scheme including the process for the Thank You cupboard and personnel to be recognised.&# 160; I created the

new Reward & Recognition candidates & winners presentation that is used at Security conference.


Financial Investigators &ndash; I have long recognised that a Ft is required for Scotland as the Crown Office

has now deemed that Police Scotland FI&rsquo;s are no longer to be used as a Debt Collecting Agency for

external business .&#I60; I have set up and attended an initial meeting with Police Scotland and Post Office Ltd

FI&rsquo;s.&# 160; The meeting discussed how POL can access recovery from POCA through a complicated

legal. system.&#160; lam currently engaging with the Scottish Business Resilience Centre to ascertain if there

are any agreed protocols concerning other Government bodies utilising POCA powers. This is an issue that has

never been progressed like the rest of the UK and I am determined to progress this as far as possible to ensure

POL Scotland have the same recovery procedures and support as in the rest of the UK.


This continues to be a work in progress and SBRC are making enquiries to assist POL.&6160; I have discussed

with BTO Solicitors regarding running a Civil case alongside the criminal case to ensure POT, are at the forefront

of Creditors. A draft is being worked on by BTO to be put to POL for consideration.&# 160; I am taking all steps

to ensure POL can recover funds from Subpostmasters.


Specialise Reporting Agency (SRA) &nda.sh; I delivered training on the SRA. website to a POL Security

Manager involving the layout of the file prior to the submission and the different fields lobe negotiated&# 160;

I then liaised with the COPE S to ensure he was made active on the live site_&#160, tam currently writing a

training package for Security Managers.


Police Scotland - I collaborated with Safer Communities Department (SCD) to ensure POL would still be

informed of all CVIT Industry incidents in Scotland after the split with Safercash.&# 160; As part of the process



                                       Page 4
                                                                                                                       POL00105145
                                                                                                                     POL001 05145



I arranged for Grapevine to communicate all POL incidents reported to them to the Police Scotland SCI) email

address. If required SCD will send local personnel to branches to advise on Security. I have also arranged for

SCD to copy Grapevine and Post Office Security in on all communications relating to CVIT incidents in Scotland


Lanark PO &ndash; I was informed on route to Aberdeen that a fire had deetroved Lanark PO following a retail

burglary.&11160; I took charge of the incident engaging with the Subpostmaster, N}3SC, Grapevine, Branch

Support, CVIT and Audit though various times of the day to give updates.


I arranged an uplift of the cash and stock after ensuring the safety of the premises and establishing no damage to

the items.&# 160; I also arranged for Audit to attend and assist. 'Ibis was all conducted remotely.


I attended the branch in the evening to view the promises on return from Aberdeen.&#160; I met with the

Subpostmaster and assessed the damage to Horizon and Security equipment.


Due to the Subpostmaster&rsquo;s conditions              G RO              !I made the decision to remain with him

to ensure the premises were secured and to give him a lift home to ensure his safe return.


I then communicated with all relevant bodies to update them with the situation.


I have received as a result of my actions significant recognition from the field support teams for my handling of

the initial incident and in the manner I progressed it ensuring the safety of POL staff and assets.


Commonwealth Games &ndash; 1 am currentiy Post Office Ltd Security&rsquo;s liaison with the Cross Sector

Safety & Security Communications Scotland.&6160; I attend events on behalf of Post (>111ce Ltd and participate

in bridging calls.&# 160; I report information necessary to the business to the Lead Teat.&# 160; I ensure they

are aware of all events and secure attendance for those they wish to attend.


&# 160;Recognition &ndash; I have received recognition from Sue Hanson for the work I have carried out

in the Work stream by working on my own time to prepare and deliver the presentation slides in time for the

conference.


I received recognition from Branch Support in my handling of the Lanark incident. It made mention of not just

passing it over for others to deal with but going above and beyond in my involvement with dealing with the

incident.&#160; For this I received a gift from the Thank You cupboard


I received recognition and a voucher for my timely dealing with an emergency closure at Galston PO.


I also received recognition from Jane Adcock, Camelot for resolving an issue of emergency packs of scratchcards

issued to Galston PO. These were stored at the Glasgow Cash Centre after the closure and if I hadn&rsquo;t

reacted in a timely manner Post Office Ltd would have received a fine for each pack not returned within

timescales.


I received recognition from Flaine Spencer for setting up the information sharing process of CVIT incidents

between Safer Community Police Scotland & Grapevine following the demise of Safercash


My Line Management (Keith Gilchrist, Simon Hutchinson and Andy Hayward) have on several occasions

congratulated me on my considerable efforts to progress complex matters within Scotland.


My Line Manager prior to his resignation from the business expressed his absolute delight in the manner that I

was now attending to all POL security issues Scotland


NFSP &ndash; I was requested by the NFSP and attended an evening event to deliver a security presentation and

answer questions on security related issues their members had.&#I60; The feedback given was positive and I

have been asked to attend a future event.



                                       Page 5
                                                                                                                                                POL00105145
                                                                                                                                              POLOO1 05145



                           Sub Post Office Security issues &ndash; Angus Rd PO. I was contacted by the Subposi master early on a

                           Saturday morning as Romec Arc had called to inform her alarm signal had been down for 2 days.&#160; I

                           contacted Romec Arc ascertained what the problem was and requested a Rapid Deployment Kit (RDK) for the

                           branch. I advised the Subpostmaster to report the fault to BT and to contact the local Police to inform them the

                           PO alarm will be audible only over the weekend and request they respond to any audible activation.&# 160; I

                           reassured her that I was available to be contacted over the weekend if further issues arose.



                           Haslingden & Higher Audley PO&rsquo;s.&#160; [ was contacted by Andy Hayward on a Friday evening

                           requesting I contact the Subpostmaster who ran the branches as no one in the North West was contactable at

                           the time. &#160; Andy informed me the Subpostmaster had received texts informing her Haslingden branch

                           was going to be robbed. I contacted the Subpostmastec&# 160; She said she reported the matter to CID and that

                           enquiries were continuing.&#160; She said she had a previous incident where a male videoed the cash delivery

                           but she didn&rsquo;t report it.&# 160; I emphasised the need to report such incidents to Grapevine and advised

                           heron Security procedures for both branches.




Section Information

Name

Weight

Weight %                   IRRELEVANT
Self-Calculated Rating



Competency 1 Information

Name

Description

Weight

Weight %

Raters
                            IRRELEVANT
Robert Daily

Robert Daily Comments




Section Information

Name

Robert Daily Comments




                            IRRELEVANT
Section Information

Name                       Areas for Development

Robert Daily Comments
                           Following the Security Skills workshop I realised my knowleadge of the Security Equipment we use could be

                           developed. I will seek to increase my knowledge this year.



                           I look to further&# 160.develop my knowledge and understanding of the legal system in Scotland through

                           working closely with BTO Solicitors.



                                                                  Page 6
                                                                                                                                           POL00105145
                                                                                                                                         POL001 05145



                       I will look to further enhance my relationship with Police Scotland.


                       I will develop a training package/guide for the SRA Website to be used colleagues when reporting fraud cases to

                       the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service.


                       I will discuss development with my Line Manager and create a personal skills matrix to track my progress over

                       the next year.




Final Overall Rating

Self Overall Average
                                              IRRELEVANT ----------------
                                 ****** End of Review 2013/14.Year End PDR ******




                                                             Page 7
