                                                                                                                                                                          POL00101968
                                                                                                                                                                     POL00101968




Message
From: Belinda Crowe [IMCEAEX-
       _O=MMS_OU=EXCHANGE+20ADMINISTRATIVE+20GROUP+20+28FYDlBOHF23SPDLT+29_CN=RECIPIENTS CN=BELINDA+20CROWE79I
       569F-4526-A078-F5B4958A8917220L-_. — _ .GRO
on     Belinda Crowe <IMCEAEX-
behalf _O=MMS_OU=EXCHANGE+20ADMINISTRATIVE+20GROUP+20+28FYDIBOHF23SPDLT+29—CN=RECIPIENTS—CN=BELINDA+20CROWE79I
of     569F-4526-A078-F5B4958A8917221z _._._._._._._._.GRO._,_._._._._._._.i [IMCEAEX-
       _O=MMS_OU=EXCHANGE+20ADMINISTRATIVE+20GROUP+20+28FYDIBOHF23SPDLT+29 CN=RECIPIENTS CN=BELINDA+20CROWE79I

Sent:   08/01/2015 18:1.0_:0.0_
To:     Rodric Williams I              GRO                           'Jarnail Singh                               GRo                        Mark R Davies
        [r             GRO~                                                                                                       _._._._._._._._._._._._._._   _._._._._._._._._._._._._.,
                                          - -- --- -- - -- -- --- - ----- ----------------- - ----- ----- ---- Melanie Corfield [
CC:      martin smith                               GRO                                                                            ._._._._._._._._._._.__. GRO                            ]; Pati
        Bourke ;                GRO                    Belinda Crowe;                                         GRO
Subject:RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview


Looks good to me.

Best wishes
Belinda

 Belinda Crowe

 148 Old Street, LONDON, EC1V 9HQ

                     GRO
 belinda.crawel                   GRO



From: Rodric Williams
Sent: 08 January 2015 18:09
To: Jarnail Singh; Mark R Davies __._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._.     ._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._.
Cc: Belinda Crowe; 'martin.smith (                                                   GRO                                                   D; Melanie Corfield; Patrick
Bourke
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

All - how about this:

"Only a Court can overturn a criminal conviction. It is and has always been open to anyone who has been prosecuted to
seek to appeal their conviction, including with material provided through the Scheme. The CCRC typically will not,
consider a case until all rights of appeal have been exhausted, and we are not aware of any applications having been
made to the Courts for an appeal.

"Post Office is acutely aware of the duties imposed on it when it brings a prosecution, and is confident that it has acted
in accordance with those duties at all times."

Jarnail -- copying Martin Smith from Cartwright King as per your recommendation.

Martin .....does that work (we don't want to refer to the review we did because it will just open up another line of
enquiry....)?

Rodric




                                                                                                                                                                      POL-0101551
                                                                                                                         POL00101968
                                                                                                                       POL00101968




Rodric Will ia is I Litigation I_.a v- .



                              143 Old Sect. f ONDON. ECIV 91:1;?
                             --------------        ---------------------,
                                            GRO
                            ...-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.
                              rodnc.william; - - - -   GRO               -.-.-.l

                              Post.   Office stories
      #~,.                    (cul~t~stuffi~efliews



                                                             VL                                    $11
                                                             .......................................................
From: Jarnail Singh
Sent: 08 January 2015 17:07
To: Mark R Davies
Cc: Belinda Crowe; Rodric Williams
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Mark
The more I give consideration to what I have read and the implications .POL is in very serious position. I would strongly
advice this considered by our external lawyers. Do you want me to pass these to them and arrange a conference?
Regards
Jarnail



From: Jarnail Singh
Sent: 08 January 2015 16:39
To: Mark R Davies
Cc: Belinda Crowe; Rodric Williams
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Mark
The answer is as follows

"POL has commissioned a review by external expert criminal lawyers of cases heard after 1 January 2010. It is
understood POL was liaising with CCRC shortly after the commencement of the review process and POL took advice from
its external expert criminal lawyers. In any event it is necessary for applicant to the CCRC to have exhausted their right
of appeal and we are not aware of any applications having been made to the Court of Appeal."
Jarnail


From: Mark R Davies
Sent: 08 January 2015 16:15
To: Jarnail Singh; Belinda Crowe; Rodric Williams
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Thanks.

Please can you give me an answer to the question re CCRC, pasted here for ease.

    1.    What is the Post Office's response to James Arbuthnot's opinion that "There should be an investigation by the
          Criminal Cases Review Commission off its own bat, and even those who have pleaded guilty should be able to
          take advantage of such an investigation." Does the Post Office plan to review convictions of subpostmasters




                                                                                                                       POL-0101551
                                                                                                                       POLOO101968
                                                                                                                    POLOO101968



         between 1999 and 2013 in the light of reports from Second Sight and other forensic accountants commissioned
         by subpostmasters

It is open to anyone who has been prosecuted to appeal their conviction or apply to the CC:RC. Post Offices has
reinvestigated all cases in the Scheme and would, where appropriate, disclose any information that comes to light in
relation to any prosecution which may assist the defendant, It takes these responsibilities seriously. -- Jarnail?


Thanks

Mark




Mari: Davies I Communications and Corporate Affairs Director




From: Jarnail Singh
Sent: 08 January 2015 15:51
To: Mark R Davies; Belinda Crowe; Rodric Williams; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Tom Wechsler           _._._._._.     __-_._._-_.
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwoodl; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; 'Susan.BARTY. ._._._._. GRO
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Mark
I had a look at this and i am concerned that POL is entering dangerous territory. This situation is not straight forward and
cannot be easily simplified in a couple of lines.
Whilst Post office wish to say that there are no systemic faults, the second sight interim report which has been disclosed
to the defendants and their legal representative`s does mention two defects/ bugs which give rise to 76 branches being
affected by incorrect balances or transactions. The fact that the bugs manifested in more than one location could be
described as systemic but not system wide. Accordingly there are arguments over terminology used by second sight and
it is important from criminal law perspective that POL does not misrepresent the content of the second sight report.
Not only have second sights use of terminology give raised to potential argument in relation to terms used by second
sight. It also raises questions as to whether POL knew of the existence of those bugs. if so, to whom at POL Fujitsu
communicated them. Those were certainly not known to me at POI.. legal until day or so prior to the publication of the
second sight interim report. The difficulty here is made worse by the fact that Garth Jenkins, an employee of Fujitsu has
been making statements for use in criminal proceedings which made no references to the very bugs which it is
understood he told second sight about. People were prosecuted and pleaded guilty following the receipt of his
statement which implied no bugs had been found. Of course it would be highly embarrassing for POL were it to be
suggested that fujitsu had informed some part of POL and that information never reached the security team. Equally it is
embarrassing were it, to be suggested POL were kept in the dark by such an important supplier such as fujitsu.
It follows these are very difficult topics from a criminal law perspective.
Suffice to say that POL instructed external lawyers to review prosecutions where there had been hearings since 1
January 2010. it has done this as it takes it prosecution duty of disclosure seriously and as a result of the review the
disclosure of second sight report which has of course disclosed number of bugs at different locations to number of
defendants and their representatives who had wish to argue that they had experience problems with horizon at their




                                                                                                                    POL-0101551
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POLOO101968
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POLOO101968



branches. POL is unaware of any application having been made for leave to appeal since these disclosures were made.
Accordingly as result of the review which it commissioned, PO1 is confident it is not responsible for any miscarriages of
justice in those cases.

 Defendants have generally taken legal advice before entering plea. Whether or not defendant chooses to have legal
advice at an earlier stage i.e. at point of interview under caution is of course different matter but never the less right
which could have been exercised. I understand the security team when conducting an interview give the SPM the right
to have a friend present and a solicitor/ legal repr .sentive when interview takes place away from a police station. If,
 however interview takes place when suspect is under arrest at a police station (which may be because a SPIV was
 reluctant to cooperate with the investigation so assist of the police was sought) there is of course no right to have a
friend present but have a right to independent legal advice, it is a right which a detained suspect has.
 Hope this helps.
Jarnail
..... .......... ...................................... .......... ........................... .......... ................................................................................................... .......... ................................................................................................... .......... ................ .......... ..............
From: Mark R Davies
Sent: 08 January 2015 12:49
To: Belinda Crowe; Rodric Williams; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Tom Wechsler
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwood?; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; Susan.BARTY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRO
Jarnail Singh
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Copying Jarnail to comment please where noted.




Mark Davies I Communications and Corporate Affairs Director




                                                                                                                                                                  OCE


From: Belinda Crowe
Sent: 08 January 2015 10:57
To: Mark R Davies; Rodric Williams; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Tom Wechsler
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwood?; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; 'Susan.BARTI"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GRO
Belinda Crowe
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Thoughts from me.

Best wishes
Belinda

    Belinda Crowe

   148 Old Street, LONDON, EC1V 9H0.

                                           GRO
                                             GRO_._._._._._._
    belinda.crovi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PO L-0101551
                                                                                                                     POL00101968
                                                                                                                  POL00101968




From: Mark R Davies
Sent: 08 January 2015 09:16
To: Belinda Crowe; Rodric Williams; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Tom Wechsler                         r ---------------------
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwoodl; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; 'Susan.BARTY _. ._. ._.__._._. ._
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

I.t

I have been thinking this through further this morning.

I think we should:

      -    Delcine interview given confidentiality and events next week
      -    Offer at the same time at briefing session to deal with the complex questions they raise
      -    Answer the questions below (my first drafts are below)

Grateful for views.




Below is a summary of the issues that will be covered in the programme to which you may wish to respond:

      1. Geoffrey Sturgess, expert in contract law will say that the Subpostmaster contract is unfair, and that the Post
         Office is unusually unfair in the way it enforces it - ie - holding subpostmasters are held personally liable for
         shortfalls in Horizon accounts, but the number of known problems with the system and complaints against it is
         not made clear to them when they sign the contract. The contract also allows POL to interview them under
         caution without legal representation.

We do not consider that the contract is unfair. It is:
      typical of contracts of agency, and broadly similar to those used in franchising arrangements throughout the UK;
      allocates risk in a way which:
      0   should be expected where an agent (Subpostmaster) is entrusted to protect the assets of his/her principal (Post
          Office);
      * reflects the general law (e.g. the equitable duty of an agent to account to his principal); and
      0   is used In the contracts which Po.ssst, Office enters into with large commercial franchising partners
 It is absolutely untrue to say that the contract allows interviews under caution without legal representation. This is
simply incorrect. We follow PACE guidelines to the letter and any suggestion otherwise would be incorrect. We have
absolute confidence in Horizon — we do not know what the "known problems" referred to are — what is known is simply
that a small number of people are suggesting there are problems . No subpostmasters are forced to sign the
contract. It is something they chose to do.

      2.   Professor Mark Button from the Centre for Counter Fraud studies will say that the Post Office has a unique 300
           year history of investigating and prosecuting its staff and agents, and that these sorts of prosecutions, unlike
           those carried out by other public bodies like NHS Protect which use the CPS, are more likely to lead to
           miscarriages of justice.

We follow PACE guidelines. It is incorrect to say we have an `unique history' of prosecuting. Post Office is not the only
organisation which brings private prosecutions. Others include local authorities. The BBC used to do so too. Post office
has seen no evidence which supports the suggestion that such prosecutions are more likely to lead to miscarriages of
justice.




                                                                                                                  POL-0101551
                                                                                                                      POL00101968
                                                                                                                   POL00101968




    3. Sandip Patel QC will say "I think with what I have seen that there          be grounds for arguing that the Post Office




                                                                             may
       ought to have known at the time... with due diligence.., reasonable inquiry, that perhaps the system was not as
       reliable as they believed it to be. And so. if they'd failed to carry out that inquiry in circumstances when they
       should have, then it could be argued that the conviction as a result of that is unsafe."

This is the same quote from your One Show film. Our previous position stands. This statement: is so caveated as to
render it: meaningless. It: is a general statement which could apply to any set of circumstances and therefore impossible
to answer.

    4.   Professor Charles Mclachlan will say: It's absolutely clear that the makers of the system have admitted there are
         faults and those faults could lead to discrepancies that would make losses for post masters. There are
         subpostmasters who are unable to demonstrate they have not committed false accounting or fraud because the
         Post Office has not released the information that could allow us to investigate this properly.

Incorrect.

    5. Some subpostmasters say when they were accused of being responsible for losses and told Post Office
       managers/investigators Horizon was creating discrepancies, they were told by the Post Office they were the only
       ones having any problems, despite a number of other subpostmasters having raised concerns, and despite the
       Post Office having been aware of other people affected by problems such as the Calendar Square issue and
       others.

There is no evidence of that anyone has been told that they were the only ones having problems. The fact that we have
a helpline and a range of other arrangements available to spmrs is acknowledgement of the fact: that spmrs do need
assistance about a range of matters. But it does not follow that there are systemic faults in the system.


    6.   We will run a clip of James Arbuthnot MP saying in Parliament: "The Post Office has built up the hopes of sub-
         postmasters so the scheme has their support. It has broken its word to Members of Parliament in so many
         different respects that it is frankly bewildering. There are many ways to describe it, but I think the best is to say
         that the Post Office has been duplicitous. It has spent public money on a mediation scheme that it has set out to
         sabotage."
Incorrect in every way. It is very disappointing that Mr Arbuthnot feels that way.


Further questions that may form part of the programme:


    1.   What is the process for interviewing subpostmasters when criminality is suspected? Is it, or has it been since
         2000 possible for subpostmasters to be interviewed (as stated in their contracts) under caution without legal
         representation? Was/is it the case (as written in the subpostmaster contract) that subpostmasters are instead
         only allowed 'friends' who had/have to be Post Office staff/agents or NFSP representatives and were/are not
         allowed to speak except by way of offering a written statement? Is it the case that this interview has been / is
         followed by a PACE interview at which legal representation is allowed and during which reference is made to
         answers given in the previous interview? We have been told of specific cases in which this happened. We have a
         copy of the subpostmaster contract. What is/was the Post Office policy/procedure?

[Legal please provide a line]

    2.   Andrew Bridgen MP in Westminster Hall referred to the case of Michael Rudkin who claims he saw live Horizon
         figures in a sub post office being remotely altered at a Fujitsu office in Bracknell. What is your explanation for
         Michael Rudkin's account of what happened there? Is it, or has it been since 2000 possible for any person or




                                                                                                                    POL-0101551
                                                                                                                   POL00101968
                                                                                                                POL00101968



         process (eg transaction reversal) to remotely alter the balance of Horizon accounts of a sub post office without
         the knowledge of the subpostmaster? Why was the fact that the visit took place initially denied by POL?

This is not possible.

    3. James Arbuthnot MP said in Westminster: "Julian Wilson, of the Redditch constituency, was told by Post Office
       staff that if there was money over at the end of the day, he should put it in an envelope and put that envelope in
       the safe, and then use that money to pay later shortfalls. It is so obvious that that amounts to false accounting,
       on the instructions of the Post Office itself, that it is bewildering. He kept asking for audits but the Post Office
       said, "We'll audit you when we think you need an audit." And yet he gets prosecuted and decides to plead
       guilty." David Jones MP said "Does the hon. Gentleman not agree that a lot of sub-postmasters who were
       subsequently prosecuted for false accounting had in effect been encouraged to engage in false accounting by
       Post Office support staff? In other words, was not the Post Office itself counselling and procuring an act of false
       accounting?" Albert Owen MP said "that the Post Office encouraged people to commit false accounting, and
       then it penalised them in the hardest way possible-by taking their livelihoods and reputations from them and
       destroying their standing in the proud communities we represent" Is it, or has it been since 2000 Post Office
       policy to instruct subpostmasters to commit false accoutning? Have helpline staff encouraged subpostmasters
       to commit false accounting?

This is untrue.

    4. The Post Office has disputed James Arbuthnot MP's assertion that "the Post Office has been arguing in recent
       months at the working group stage to exclude 90% of the cases coming before the working group". What is the
       correct percentage in Post Office's view?

It is public record that we have declined to mediate in two cases. That is not 90% by any measure.

    5.   How is the mediation process progressing and when would you expect to have concluded all the cases currently
         put forward for mediation?

Refer you to A Hooper letter.

    6.   Has any compensation been paid in relation to cases being mediated (We don't need individual details as we
         respect the issue of confidentiality). How much compensation in total (if any) has been paid to date to
         subpostmasters participating in the mediation?

[Answer — assume confidential to WG] Refer to the letter from A Hooper. A number of cases have been resolved prior to
mediation and the details of those mediated are confidential.

    7.   What avenues will be open to subpostmasters to deal with disputes related to Horizon once the mediation
         scheme closes?

Matter for SPMRs

    8.   What is the Post Office's response to James Arbuthnot's opinion that "There should be an investigation by the
         Criminal Cases Review Commission off its own bat, and even those who have pleaded guilty should be able to
         take advantage of such an investigation." Does the Post Office plan to review convictions of subpostmasters
         between 1999 and 2013 in the light of reports from Second Sight and other forensic accountants commissioned
         by subpostmasters

It is open to anyone who has been prosecuted to appeal their conviction or apply to the CCRC. Post Offices has
reinvestigated all cases in the Scheme and would, where appropriate, disclose any information that comes to light in
relation to any prosecution which may assist the defendant. It takes these responsibilities seriously. --- Jarnail?




                                                                                                                 POL-0101551
                                                                                                                      POLOO101968
                                                                                                                    POLOO101968




       9. When was the last time the Post Office asked its SPMRs/staff what it thinks of Horizon and how does know that
          it's Postmasters are happy with it/find it a good system to use?

We constantly review.

       10. Is it true Horizon is in the process of being replaced? If so, why?

We constantly update software. Matter of public record.




Mark- Davies I Communications and Corporate Affairs Director

     Floor, Banner Wing, 148 Old Street, London, ECIV 9HQ
le




             GRO
               GRO_._._._. .i ._.-
rna;I.r_dnviea

                                                                    `FB;r .:
                                                                :




From: Belinda Crowe
Sent: 08 January 2015 05:28
To: Rodric Williams; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Mark R Davies; Tom Wechsler
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwoodi; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; 'Susan.BARTI._.-._.-.__GRO
Belinda Crowe
Subject: Re: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

And apologies from me. In my previous email I referred to JFSA considering mediation. I meant litigation.
Belinda
      GRO

From: Rodric Williams
Sent: Wednesday, January 07, 2015 06:58 PM
To: Belinda Crowe; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Mark R Davies; Tom Wechsler                             _._._._._._._     ._._._._._.__
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwood1; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; Susan BARTY (               GRO
                         GRO
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

All,

I haven't yet looked at the detail of the email, but see the BBC want to film the interview by next Friday 16 January to
run on Monday 19 January.

There is a lot happening next week which could impact the future of the Scheme and our approach to the complaints,
namely the Working Group face-to--face meeting on Wednesday 14.:r and JFSA meeting on Sunday 18`r'. I therefore think
it important t:o properly consider and work through the possible outcomes of those events (e.g. that JFSA/postmasters
decide to go to Court) before making public statements on these issues.

Not really a legal issue I know, but given the BBC's approach to date, the close engagement it has with JFSA, and the
timing of the piece, I smell a rat....




                                                                                                                     PO L-0101551
                                                                                                                                                                     POL00101968
                                                                                                                                                             POL00101968




Rod                 ------ -
----------GRO
From: Belinda Crowe
Sent: 07 January 2015 18:11
To: Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Mark R Davies; Tom Wechsler; Rodric Williams
Cc: Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwoodl; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker; Belinda Crowe
Subject: RE: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

My only concern with th is atthis stage is that JFSA have now said explicitly that they are considering mediation. My
view is that we should take a legal view about whether we are in danger of this being sub judice.
Best wishes
Belinda


  Belinda Crowe

 1.48 Old Street, LONDON, EC.V 9H0



  belinda.crowe                 GRO

 ....... .. ......... . ........ _........ ......... ...... ... . ........ ......... .._....... .. ....... . . ......_. . .. ...... .... .. ..... ....   .. ....... ....... .
From: Angela Van-Den-Bogerd
Sent: 07 January 2015 15:05
To: Mark R Davies; Tom Wechsler
Cc: Belinda Crowe; Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwoodl; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker
Subject: Re: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

Mark,

Yes I can make myself available. I°m in London tomorrow so perhaps we can pick up and coordinate diaries.

Thanks

       GRO
From: Mark R Davies
Sent: Wednesday, January 07, 2015 02:56 PM
To: Tom Wechsler
Cc: Belinda Crowe; Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwoodl; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X
Barker
Subject: Re: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

I agree Tom. My view is that we offer an interview to take place back end of next week. We also offer a session to go
through their questions in detail as background.

Angela, are you available next week at all? We may need you for some of this.

Mark

Mark Davies




                                                                                                                                                              POL-0101551
                                                                                                                      POLOO101968
                                                                                                                    POLOO101968



Corn munica_t_ions and Corporate Affairs Director
Mobile:;_._._.
                   GRO
Sent from my iPhone

On 7 Jan 2015, at 12:33, "Tom Wechsler"                                 GRO         } wrote:

        I was just talking to Mel about this and we broadly agree. We also wonder whether there is merit in
        getting Jane French in first for a "frank" discussion. You will be more expert than me on that.

        On a Scheme point, Brown is awaiting mediation. Featuring his case does not heap that process
        although the fact it has progressed to that point may help with rebuttal of certain points.

        II


                  GRO
       ._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._..._

        From: Mark R Davies
        Sent: 07 January 2015 12:24
        To: Belinda Crowe; Patrick Bourke; Mark Underwood!; Angela Van-Den-Bogerd; Tom Wechsler
        Cc: Melanie Corfield; Chris Aujard; Ruth X Barker
        Subject: FW: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview

         All

         As expected, the One Show folk are back with questions below and the request for us to take part in a
         filmed interview. Mel and I wil l consider next steps, but I think we need to agree this and use it as a
         strong opportunity to put this to bed (alongside other steps). Please can you consider and feed any
         thoughts in to me.

         Best wishes
         Mark




        Mark Davies I Communications and Corporate Affairs Director
        <itnage00 J .png>
        1 0 Floor, Banner Wing, 148 Old Street, London, ECl V 9HQ

                          GRO                  .-._._
        mark.r.davie4                    GRO
        <irnage002.jpg>



        From: Jane French,._._._._._._._._._._. ._. GRO _._._._._._._._._._._._..
        Sent: 07 January 2015 11:46
        To: Mark R Davies
        Cc: Nick Wallis
        Subject: BBC Inside Out Request for an Interview




                                                                                                                    POL-0101551
                                                                                                              POL00101968
                                                                                                         POL00101968




Dear Mark,

Thank you for your input into our programming for the One Show. I am now writing to invite you to give
us a filmed interview for our regional current affairs programmes Inside Out which will be reporting the
subject on January 19th on BBC One. The programme will include a number of comments and allegations
made by MPs in the adjournment debate of 17th December 2014, the full transcript of which is here:
http://www.publications.parliament. uk a cm201415 cmhansrd cm141217 halltext 141217h0001.htm


A number of Inside Out programmes across England will be taking cases from their patches as
illustration of the issues and will be exploring some of the questions posed in Westminster.

My understanding is that you are not prepared to comment on specific cases so every case that will be
covered is not listed in this letter. If however the PO does wish to comment on every case that we
propose to feature then please let us know by return. By way of example in the South we would expect
to feature Jo Hamilton's case among others and in the North East it is likely that we would feature the
case of Tom Brown as mentioned in the adjournment debate by Kevan Jones MP, in the East Midlands
Michael Rudkin and allegations made by Andrew Bridgen MP, in the West Midlands Julian Wilson whose
case was raised by a number of MPs.

We could accommodate a Post Office spokesperson for a pre-recorded interview on any day in any UK
location between now and the 16th of January.

Below is a summary of the issues that will be covered in the programme to which you may wish to
respond:

    1. Geoffrey Sturgess, expert in contract law will say that the Subpostmaster contract is unfair, and
       that the Post Office is unusually unfair in the way it enforces it - ie - holding subpostmasters are
       held personally liable for shortfalls in Horizon accounts, but the number of known problems
       with the system and complaints against it is not made clear to them when they sign the
       contract. The contract also allows POL to interview them under caution without legal
       representation.
    2. Professor Mark Button from the Centre for Counter Fraud studies will say that the Post Office
       has a unique 300 year history of investigating and prosecuting its staff and agents, and that
       these sorts of prosecutions, unlike those carried out by other public bodies like NHS Protect
       which use the CPS, are more likely to lead to miscarriages of justice.
    3. Sandip Patel QC will say "I think with what I have seen that there may be grounds for arguing
       that the Post Office ought to have known at the time... with due diligence.., reasonable inquiry,
       that perhaps the system was not as reliable as they believed it to be. And so. if they'd failed to
       carry out that inquiry in circumstances when they should have, then it could be argued that the
       conviction as a result of that is unsafe."
    4. Professor Charles Mclachlan will say: It's absolutely clear that the makers of the system have
       admitted there are faults and those faults could lead to discrepancies that would make losses
       for post masters. There are subpostmasters who are unable to demonstrate they have not
       committed false accounting or fraud because the Post Office has not released the information
       that could allow us to investigate this properly.
    5. Some subpostmasters say when they were accused of being responsible for losses and told Post
       Office managers/investigators Horizon was creating discrepancies, they were told by the Post
       Office they were the only ones having any problems, despite a number of other subpostmasters
       having raised concerns, and despite the Post Office having been aware of other people affected
       by problems such as the Calendar Square issue and others.




                                                                                                         POL-0101551
                                                                                                               POL00101968
                                                                                                          POL00101968



   6. We will run a clip of James Arbuthnot MP saying in Parliament: "The Post Office has built up the
      hopes of sub-postmasters so the scheme has their support. It has broken its word to Members
      of Parliament in so many different respects that it is frankly bewildering. There are many ways
      to describe it, but I think the best is to say that the Post Office has been duplicitous. It has spent
      public money on a mediation scheme that it has set out to sabotage."


Further questions that may form part of the programme:


        What is the process for interviewing subpostmasters when criminality is suspected? Is it, or has
        it been since 2000 possible for subpostmasters to be interviewed (as stated in their contracts)
        under caution without legal representation? Was/is it the case (as written in the subpostmaster
        contract) that subpostmasters are instead only allowed 'friends' who had/have to be Post Office
        staff/agents or NFSP representatives and were/are not allowed to speak except by way of
        offering a written statement? Is it the case that this interview has been / is followed by a PACE
        interview at which legal representation is allowed and during which reference is made to
        answers given in the previous interview? We have been told of specific cases in which this
        happened. We have a copy of the subpostmaster contract. What is/was the Post Office
        policy/procedure?
        Andrew Bridgen MP in Westminster Hall referred to the case of Michael Rudkin who claims he
        saw live Horizon figures in a sub post office being remotely altered at a Fujitsu office in
        Bracknell. What is your explanation for Michael Rudkin's account of what happened there? Is it,
        or has it been since 2000 possible for any person or process (eg transaction reversal) to
        remotely alter the balance of Horizon accounts of a sub post office without the knowledge of
        the subpostmaster? Why was the fact that the visit took place initially denied by POL?
        James Arbuthnot MP said in Westminster: "Julian Wilson, of the Redditch constituency, was told
        by Post Office staff that if there was money over at the end of the day, he should put it in an
        envelope and put that envelope in the safe, and then use that money to pay later shortfalls. It is
        so obvious that that amounts to false accounting, on the instructions of the Post Office itself,
        that it is bewildering. He kept asking for audits but the Post Office said, "We'll audit you when
        we think you need an audit." And yet he gets prosecuted and decides to plead guilty." David
        Jones MP said "Does the hon. Gentleman not agree that a lot of sub-postmasters who were
        subsequently prosecuted for false accounting had in effect been encouraged to engage in false
        accounting by Post Office support staff? In other words, was not the Post Office itself
        counselling and procuring an act of false accounting?" Albert Owen MP said "that the Post Office
        encouraged people to commit false accounting, and then it penalised them in the hardest way
        possible-by taking their livelihoods and reputations from them and destroying their standing in
        the proud communities we represent" Is it, or has it been since 2000 Post Office policy to
        instruct subpostmasters to commit false accoutning? Have helpline staff encouraged
        subpostmasters to commit false accounting?
   4.   The Post Office has disputed James Arbuthnot MP's assertion that "the Post Office has been
        arguing in recent months at the working group stage to exclude 90% of the cases coming before
        the working group". What is the correct percentage in Post Office's view?
   5.   How is the mediation process progressing and when would you expect to have concluded all the
        cases currently put forward for mediation?
   6.   Has any compensation been paid in relation to cases being mediated (We don't need individual
        details as we respect the issue of confidentiality). How much compensation in total (if any) has
        been paid to date to subpostmasters participating in the mediation?
   7.   What avenues will be open to subpostmasters to deal with disputes related to Horizon once the
        mediation scheme closes?
   8.   What is the Post Office's response to James Arbuthnot's opinion that "There should be an
        investigation by the Criminal Cases Review Commission off its own bat, and even those who
        have pleaded guilty should be able to take advantage of such an investigation." Does the Post



                                                                                                          POL-0101551
                                                                                                         POL00101968
                                                                                                    POL00101968



        Office plan to review convictions of subpostmasters between 1999 and 2013 in the light of
        reports from Second Sight and other forensic accountants commissioned by subpostmasters
        When was the last time the Post Office asked its SPMRs/staff what it thinks of Horizon and how
        does know that it's Postmasters are happy with it/find it a good system to use?
    10. Is it true Horizon is in the process of being replaced? If so, why?


We would also obviously welcome any other general or specific comments the Post Office would like to
make about the parliamentary debate or other points you feel it is important for us to consider.

Regards

Jane French
Editor, Current Affairs
BBC South
              --------------
        GRO




                                                                                                     POL-0101551
