POL00255949
POL00255949

Message

From: Amy Prime T-y4 Y

on behalf of — Amy Prime <. GRO

Sent: 26/07/2018 19:

To: Rodric Williams [f

cc: Mark Underwood ( , Jonathan Gribben

_ Andrew Parsons £7
Subject: Project Zebra - Privileged document query [WBDUK-AC.FID26896945]
Attachments: 151077627.msg

Sensitivity: Private

Rodric

As part of Stage 3 Disclosure we have come across a number of documents which relate to Project Zebra (Deloitte's
report). Whilst most of these documents are covered by privilege and therefore do not need to be disclosed, we have
come across one document relating to Project Zebra which does not seem to be covered by privileged. | have attached
the email chain but the document of interest is the Zebra Action Summary attached to the email. This is a document
produced in response to the Zebra Report which sets out the recommendations from the Report and the remediation
which should be implemented to Horizon.

Counsel's initial view is that privilege cannot be claimed over the whole of the Zebra Action Summary but the parts which
repeat or summarise the contents of the Deloitte report can be redacted. To finalise this conclusion it would be helpful to
obtain some further information on the background to the Deloitte Report and the Action Summary. | have set out
Counsel's questions below but would you be available for a call tomorrow to discuss these? Stage 3 Disclosure is
due on 31 August so there is some urgency to work out how to deal with this document, apologies.

Counsel's queries:

1. For what dominant purpose was the Deloitte report commissioned — e.g. obtaining legal advice or obtaining
information in connection with the conduct of anticipated litigation? Counsel would also like to understand
whether the Deloitte report was also obtained for the general purpose of making Horizon more robust.

2. What are the roles within Post Office of James Rees and Emma McGinn who produced the Action Summary
(Julie George was Head of Information Security); who was the Action Summary produced for; what were the roles
of the individuals cc'ed to the document; and for what purpose was it produced.

If the role information is not known then WBD can find out from POL HR if these people still work for POL and
their roles.

3. Was the Action Summary disseminated and any actions taken as a result of it (ie. were the recommendations
implemented)?

Kind regards
Amy

Amy Prime
Solicitor
Womble Bond Dickinson (UK) LLP

POL-BSFF-0094012
POL00255949
POL00255949

WOMBLE womblebonddickinson.com

BOND
DICKINSON v in]

Please consider the environment! Do you need to print this email?

The information in this e-mail and any attachments is confidential and may be legally privileged and protected by law, rodrie.williamst “only is authorised to
access this e-mail and any attachments. If you are not rodrie. williams GRO } please notify amy.primed GRO fas soon as possible and delete any copies.
Unauthorised use, dissemination, distribution, publication or copying of this commitinication or attachments is prohibited and may be unlawful. Information about how we use
personal data is in our Privacy Policy on our website.

Any files attached to this e-mail will have been checked by us with virus detection software before transmission. Womble Bond Dickinson (UK) LLP accepts no liability for any
loss or damage which may be caused by software viruses and you should carry out your own virus checks before opening any attachment.

Content of this email which does not relate to the official business of Womble Bond Dickinson (UK) LLP, is neither given nor endorsed by it.

This email is sent by Womble Bond Dickinson (UK) LLP which is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales under number 0C317661. Our registered office
is 4 More London Riverside, London, SE1 2AU, where a list of members’ names is open to inspection. We use the term partner to refer toa member of the LLP, or an employee or
consultant who is of equivalent standing. Our VAT registration number is GB123393627.

Womble Bond Dickinson (UK) LLP is a member of Womble Bond Dickinson (Intemational) Limited, which consists of independent and autonomous law firms providing services
in the US, the UK, and elsewhere around the world. Each Womble Bond Dickinson entity is a separate legal entity and is not responsible for the acts or omissions of, nor can bind
or obligate, another Womble Bond Dickinson entity. Womble Bond Dickinson (Intemational) Limited does not practice law. Please see www.womblebonddickinson.comv/legal
notices for further details.

Womble Bond Dickinson (UK) LLP is authorised and regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority.

POL-BSFF-0094012_0001
