                                                                                              POL00006484
                                                                                            POL00006484




                               PRIVATE & LEGALLY PRIVILEGED


                        Summary of Conference at Maitland Chambers
                                  Tuesday 12 June 2012



In attendance:         Richard Morgan QC (Counsel)
                       Daniel Margolin (Counsel)
                       Gavin Matthews (Bond Pearce)
                       Susan Crichton (POL)
                       Hugh Flemington (POL)




        It was recognised that an impasse has been reached in relation to the Horizon litigation
        which POL is seeking to address. The question is what is the best way of breaking that
        impasse.


         The proposal to instruct an Independent expert to prepare a report on the Horizon
         system is the highest risk response to the issue. What will it achieve? It will not be
         able to address any of the civil/criminal cases dealt with under "Old Horizon". Will it
         seek to review particular cases? If so, which ones?


         Whatever the findings of the expert report it      not resolve the problem. POL will be
                                                       will




         "damned if they do and damned if they don't". If the findings are that there are no
         issues with Horizon people will see that as a "whitewash" whereas if the findings are
         negative that will open the floodgates to damages claims by SPM's who were imprisoned
         for false accounting and Access Legal will start to pursue all the civil cases they are
         currently sitting on.


•        POL will always have this problem - some people will never trust computers and will
         always believe they have an inherent problem.


         A less risky approach is to agree to take the relevant MP's privately through particular
         cases in which they are interested.


•        POL needs to engage with its stakeholders by perhaps sending out a questionnaire
         about Horizon to SPM's getting their views and seeking to address the more sensible
         ones. This is more a PR exercise.


•        Richard Morgan QC is happy to discuss the possible approaches and merits of each with
         the Board of POL at any time.




3A_3919815_1
