                                                                                        RLIT0000039
                                                                                      RLIT0000039




Neutral Citation Number: 120221 EWCA Crim 1197

                            Case No: 2022 01584. 01574. 01579. 01588 and 01602 B3
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL (CRIMINAL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE CROWN COURT AT NORWICH, CHESTER,
MANCHESTER, CHELMSFORD and NOTTINGHAM
HHJ JACOBS, HHJ HALE, HHJ ENSOR, REC LAIRD and HHJ MILMO
720050197; T20120537; unknown; T20100344; T20111207
                                                            Royal Courts of Justice
                                                       Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

                                                               Date: 1 September 2022
                                      Before:

   THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL, CRIMINAL DIVISION
                     LORD JUSTICE HOLROYDE
                        MR JUSTICE PICKEN
                               and
                       MRS JUSTICE FARBEY

                                      Between:

                              RICHARD HAWKES                             Applicants
                              GRANT IAN ALLEN
                                 JACK SMITH
                              DURANDA CLARKE
                             ROBERT JOHN BOYLE
                                    - and -
                             POST OFFICE LIMTED                         Respondent




      Graeme Hall (instructed by Hudgell Solicitors) for Mr Hawkes and Mr Boyle
  Kate O'Raghallaigh (instructed by Hudgell Solicitors) for Mr Allen, Mr Smith and Ms
                                        Clarke
Simon Baker QC and Eleanor Lucas instructed by Peters & Peters Solicitors LLP for POL
                               Hearing date: 25 July 2022

                           Approved Judgment

         This judgment was handed down remotely by circulation to the parties'
       representatives by email and release to the National Archives. The date and
            time for hand-down is deemed to be 16:00 on 1 September 2022.
                                                                                                            RLIT0000039
                                                                                                      RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                        Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




Lord Justice Holroyde:

         This court has previously considered a substantial number of appeals against
         conviction by persons formerly employed as sub-postmasters or sub-postmistresses
         ("SPMs"), or as managers of sub-Post Offices, who had been prosecuted many years
         ago by Post Office Limited or its predecessor ("POL") and had pleaded guilty to, or
         been convicted of, offences of dishonesty. The judgments in those cases are publicly
         available: see The Queen v Josephine Hamilton and others [2021] EWCA Crim 577;
         The Queen v Robert Ambrose and others [2021] EWCA Crim 1443; The Queen v
         Roger Allen and others [2021] EWCA Crim 1874; and The Queen v Margaret White
         [2022] EWCA Crim 435

2.       Those cases raised issues as to abuse of process, and as to the safety of the
         convictions, having regard to concerns about the reliability of a computerised
         accounting system, "Horizon", which was in use in sub-Post Offices at the relevant
         times. Fraser J, in earlier civil proceedings, had made findings which showed that
         there had been inadequate investigation of those concerns, and/or a failure to make
         full and accurate disclosure about the concerns to those who were being prosecuted on
         the basis that Horizon showed a shortfall in the accounts of the sub -Post Office. The
         court used the shorthand term "Horizon case" to refer to a case in which the reliability
         of Horizon data was essential to the prosecution, and in which there was no
         independent evidence of an actual loss from the account at the branch post office
         concerned, as opposed to a Horizon-generated shortage.

         It is unnecessary for us to repeat all that was said in the previous judgments. It is
         sufficient for present purposes to say that, following detailed consideration of the
         evidence and submissions in Hamilton, we were satisfied that throughout the relevant
         period there were significant problems with Horizon, which gave rise to a material
         risk that an apparent shortfall in the accounts of a branch post office did not in fact
         reflect missing cash or stock, but was caused by one of the bugs, errors or defects
         which (as Fraser J had found) existed in Horizon. We also concluded that during the
         relevant period POL knew that there were serious issues about the reliability of
         Horizon, and had a clear duty to investigate all reasonable lines of enquiry, to
         consider disclosure and to make disclosure to the appellants of anything which might
         reasonably be considered to undermine its case. POL failed adequately to consider or
         to make relevant disclosure of problems with or concerns about Horizon, and instead
         asserted that Horizon was robust and reliable. We were also satisfied that POL had
         consistently failed to be open and honest about the issues affecting Horizon and had
         effectively steamrolled over any SPM who sought to challenge its accuracy.

4.       On 25 July 2022 the cases of these five applicants came before the court. Each of the
         applicants sought a long extension of time to apply for leave to appeal against their
         convictions. They also applied for leave to adduce fresh evidence, including
         statements by each of the applicants. Each of them had pleaded guilty to the offences
         of which they were convicted, but — as we have explained in previous judgments —
         those guilty pleas are not necessarily a bar to a successful appeal against conviction.
         Their grounds of appeal contended that each is a Horizon case, that their prosecutions
         were an abuse of the process and that their convictions are unsafe for reasons similar
         to those which have led to the successful appeals in the earlier cases.
                                                                                                            RLIT0000039
                                                                                                      RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                        Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




         These five cases have been considered and prepared by all parties on the basis of the
         principles established by the previous judgments to which we have referred. As in
         previous cases, we record our gratitude to all solicitors and counsel for the care and
         attention with which they prepared and presented the applications.

6.       As a result of that careful approach, those who now act for POL concluded that they
         would not wish to resist any of the applications. It was, of course, for the court to
         determine those applications. All parties, and the staff of the Criminal Appeal Office,
         cooperated in making appropriate arrangements for the court to consider the
         applications at an early date. Again, we express our gratitude to all concerned for
         their helpful approach.

7.       Having considered all the material which had been placed before the court, we were
         satisfied that POL's concessions were rightly and properly made in each of the cases,
         and that each of the convictions was unsafe and must be quashed. We noted with
         sadness the enduring consequences of the convictions, which have continued to affect
         the lives of all concerned notwithstanding the passage of many years.

         In order that the applicants should know our decisions as soon as possible, we
         formally announced them at the conclusion of the hearing. We indicated that we
         would give our reasons in relation to each of the cases individually in a written
         judgment, to be handed down at a later date. This we now do.

         Richard Hawkes:

9.       On 27 June 2005, in the Crown Court at Norwich before HHJ Jacobs, Richard
         Hawkes pleaded guilty to five counts of false accounting relating to the period
         between 21 April 2004 and 21 October 2004. No evidence was offered in respect of a
         further count alleging theft. On 9 September 2005 Mr Hawkes was sentenced to a
         community order, with a requirement to perform 120 hours of community service. He
         was also ordered to pay prosecution costs of £337. No application was made for
         compensation or confiscation because Mr Hawkes had already repaid £11,047.99.
         Indeed, it should be noted that it was only in April this year that Mr Hawkes finished
         paying his brother back a loan which he had been given in order to enable this money
         to be paid.

10.      In brief summary, the facts of the case were as follows. Mr Hawkes was the SPM of
         the Tacolncston Post Office. On 25 October 2003 he telephoned the Post Office
         helpline to indicate that he had a shortage in his branch and that he therefore required
         an audit to take place. An auditor who attended later that day found a shortage of
         £11,047.99. A shortage of £167.73 had been declared the previous week, and so the
         difference was £10,880.26.

11.      Mr Hawkes was interviewed the following day. During that interview, he explained
         that he had been SPM for just over 3 years but had been manager of the branch for the
         2 years prior to that and that he had 10 years of Post Office experience in total. He
         confirmed that he was solely responsible for the running of the branch office,
         including the completion of the weekly balance and cash account. When asked to
         comment on the shortage revealed by the audit, Mr Hawkes replied:
                                                                                                              RLIT0000039
                                                                                                        RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                          Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




                   "Towards the end of last week I decided that I couldn't keep
                   concealing this discrepancy and that I needed to do something
                   about it. Having made an error some time ago and covering it
                   up ever since, I hold my hands up, I've been doing that, but I
                   got to the situation and I decided after the weekend I'd come in
                   first thing Monday morning and make the phone call and get
                   the auditors in".

12.      Mr Hawkes went on to confirm that he was aware of the shortage and that he had
         been inflating the figure for cash on hand in his weekly cash accounts every week
         since 21 April 2004 (week 4), when a shortage of £3,120 had appeared. He added that
         he had searched for the £3,120 cash shortfall but that he could not find it. He said that
         he had checked the branch fully and also checked that the shortage was cash and not
         stock. Mr Hawkes indicated that the shortage continued to grow, explaining that he
         would inflate the cash on hand figure each week by the amount of the shortage, and
         that this exceeded £10,000 by week 30. He produced his diary in which he had
         recorded the escalating shortfall.

13.      Asked to explain the shortage, Mr Hawkes's response was that the shortage had been
         getting bigger and bigger and that he expected it to decrease but he could not figure it
         out. Mr Hawkes said that he had not previously told anyone about the shortfalls
         "because of feelings of embarrassment and inadequacy".

14.      POL accepted that this was a case in which the reliability of Horizon was essential to
         Mr Hawkes's prosecution and conviction. Mr Hawkes had maintained from the outset
         that he did not know the cause of the shortfall. It was Mr Hawkes who notified POL
         of the existence of the shortfall and who appears to have requested POL's assistance
         in identifying where the shortage was. Mr Hawkes denied having taken any money,
         explaining that he did not know the source of the shortfall and thereby impliedly
         querying whether there was a shortfall at all. Notwithstanding this, it does not appear
         that POL obtained any evidence to prove the shortfall other than reliance on the
         Horizon print-outs which had been obtained at the audit. It follows that the evidence
         to prove the existence of a shortfall was wholly dependent on Horizon reliability.

15.      In these circumstances, POL accepts that the prosecution of Mr Hawkes was unfair
         and an affront to justice. POL is right to do so. In our judgement, notwithstanding his
         guilty pleas, Mr Hawkes's convictions are unsafe.

         Grant Ian Allen:

16.      On 24 January 2013, in the Crown Court at Chester before HHJ Hale, Mr Allen
         pleaded guilty to a single count of fraud. The particulars of the count were that
         between 1 April 2010 and 7 February 2012 he falsely represented that his branch had
         more cash on the premises than was actually the case resulting in a shortfall of
         £11,705. Mr Allen entered a guilty plea on the basis (accepted by POL and the court)
         that he could not account for the loss but admitted covering it up. He was sentenced
         to a 12-month community order with a requirement to undertake 200 hours of unpaid
         work.

17.      On 2 February 2012, Mr Allen's branch had been audited. He told the auditors that
         his stock unit would be around £10,000 short. He said that he had had financial
                                                                                                           RLIT0000039
                                                                                                     RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                       Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




         difficulties running the branch and had been unable to repay the large losses that had
         accrued. He had been inflating the cash on hand figures in the hope that he would
         receive an "overscale payment" from POL from which he would make good the
         losses. The audit found a shortage of £13,076.25, the majority of which was a cash
         shortage of £11,705 in Mr Allen's stock unit.

18.      Mr Allen was interviewed on 19 April 2012. He confirmed the record of the
         conversation with the auditors. He gave a detailed description of his financial
         difficulties which had been caused in the main by the relocation and refitting of his
         branch. He described inexplicable small losses as well as some large losses which
         had been attributed to one member of staff. He denied that he had stolen any money.
         He expressed a willingness to repay the losses but disputed that the sums represented
         actual loss to POL and maintained that they had been caused by issues with the
         system.

19.      A number of logs retained by POL demonstrate that Mr Allen reported the relocation
         problems and his concerns about faults with Horizon.

20.      During the course of the criminal proceedings, on 2 November 2012, Mr Allen's
         solicitors requested disclosure of an independent review of the Horizon system
         (believed to be a reference to the Second Sight report which we have mentioned in
         previous judgments). POL's agents, Cartwright King, responded by indicating that
         the review was still pending. Cartwright King stated that, on receipt of the report,
         POL would consider their continuing duty of disclosure and provide a copy if
         appropriate.

21.      POL served a witness statement from Gareth Jenkins dated 17 December 2012. Mr
         Jenkins stated that he had been shown extracts from Horizon reports for 8-17 March
         2010 from which he had concluded that there were communication difficulties with
         Horizon. He stated that, provided all operational processes were properly followed,
         no data should be lost. Mr Jenkins made clear that he had not seen detailed logs to
         see whether Horizon could be responsible for the losses at Mr Allen's branch. He
         concluded that Horizon "will accurately record all data that is submitted to it and
         correctly account for it." Correspondence between Cartwright King and Mr Jenkins
         indicates that Cartwright King instructed Mr Jenkins not to analyse the detailed logs,
         in order to avoid incurring additional costs.

22.      POL accepts that the reliability of Horizon was essential to the prosecution and
         conviction of Mr Allen. At the audit and in interview, he admitted falsifying the
         branch accounts to cover up unexplained shortfalls. The basis of plea also made plain
         that he could not explain how the losses arose. There was and is no independent
         evidence of actual shortfalls in the accounts.

23.      POL is bound to accept that Mr Jenkins' statement was not based on an actual
         analysis of the branch data. None of the evidence that is now available suggests that
         POL made any disclosure relating to Horizon reliability or that it provided Mr Allen
         with branch data. The evidence to prove the existence of a shortfall was wholly
         dependent on Horizon reliability.
                                                                                                               RLIT0000039
                                                                                                         RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                           Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




24.      In these circumstances, POL accepts that the prosecution of Mr Allen was unfair and
         an affront to justice. Again, POL is right to do so. In our judgement, notwithstanding
         his guilty plea, Mr Allen's conviction is unsafe.

         Jack Smith:

25.      On 29 October 2004, in the Crown Court at Manchester Crown Square before HHJ
         Ensor, Mr Smith (then aged 61) pleaded guilty to four counts of false accounting. On
         19 November 2004, he was sentenced by way of concurrent community punishment
         orders of 60 hours' unpaid work.

26.      As demonstrated by Mr Smith's job application form, which we have seen, he had
         started work as a SPM in 1974. An audit of Mr Smith's branch in January 2004 had
         identified a cash discrepancy of £6,731.50. The auditors informed Mr Smith's area
         manager, who spoke to Mr Smith in private. It appears that, during that conversation,
         Mr Smith admitted "inflating the cash to cover cash account losses."

27.      On 5 March 2004, Mr Smith was interviewed. He said that he had "actually openly
         admitted to bad balances" but that he had "never ever taken a penny" from POL. He
         had re-mortgaged his house in an attempt to make good the shortfall. Shortages had
         started to occur in October 2002 and had continued to increase. He had covered up
         the shortages by inflating cash figures while always intending to make good the
         losses. He could not work out what had happened. He had put money into the
         business and had not taken money out. He said:

                   "1 am not a thief and I have never taken a penny out... in thirty
                   odd years."

28.      At a subsequent meeting with POL on 15 April 2004, he repeated his explanation that
         he had simply falsified the figures because he did not have the means to make good
         the losses at the time. Owing to the generosity of his brother in law, who loaned him
         the money, Mr Smith promptly repaid the entire alleged shortfall.

29.      POL accepts that the reliability of Horizon was essential to the prosecution and
         conviction of Mr Smith.        He had denied having taken any money and had
         consistently maintained that he did not know the source of the shortfall. There was
         no evidence that would have proved the fact of the shortfall other than Horizon
         evidence. The evidence to prove the existence of a shortfall was wholly dependent on
         Horizon reliability.

30.      In these circumstances, POL accepts that the prosecution of Mr Smith was unfair and
         an affront to justice. Again, POL is right to do so. In our judgement, notwithstanding
         his guilty pleas, Mr Smith's convictions are unsafe.

         Duranda Clarke:

31.      On 31 January 2009, in the Crown Court at Chelmsford, Ms Clarke pleaded guilty to
         an offence of fraud. The particulars of the charge were that she had been "recording
         greater amounts of cash in hand than were in fact present when completing the Final
         Balances for cash in hand for Thaxted Post Office" between 4 August 2009 and 12
         November 2009.
                                                                                                              RLIT0000039
                                                                                                        RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                          Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




32.      Ms Clarke's plea was tendered on the basis (accepted by the court, though not by
         POL) —

                   "that I used my position as a Post Office employee to make
                   returns that I knew were false so as to make the figures balance
                   but without taking any money and without any intention to take
                   money ... in order to protect myself from the suggestion that I
                   had made any mistake that might lead to disciplinary action
                   against me knowing that a reasonable person considering that
                   which I did would consider that it was dishonest."

33.      Ms Clarke was subsequently sentenced, on 4 March 2011, to 6 months'
         imprisonment, suspended for 12 months with a requirement to complete 150 hours of
         unpaid work.

34.      Ms Clarke was the branch manager of the Thaxted Post Office, employed by the
         SPM, Mr Robert Hubbard. Prior to taking up this position in July 2007, she had been
         the manager at the Walden Post Office.

35.      On 16 November 2009, POL conducted an audit at the Thaxted Post Office. The
         auditors identified a shortfall of £46,148.20 from the Horizon records, including a
         £45,994.06 cash discrepancy. Ms Clarke had not been present during the audit, but
         she was contacted and asked to attend by the SPM. When she arrived, Ms Clarke told
         the auditor that during balancing in July/August a large discrepancy in the region of
         £40,000.00 had been found. She felt that there was no way they could have made
         such a substantial error. She failed to inform Mr and Mrs Hubbard, and inflated the
         cash on hand declarations, in the hope a transaction correction would be received in
         due course.

36.      Ms Clarke subsequently identified that £5,000 of the shortfall was due to an error with
         a National Savings Easy Access account deposit on 12 November 2009 which had
         been reported to the relevant body. This resulted in a transaction correction and a
         reduction in the shortfall from £46,148.20 to £41,148.20.

37.      Ms Clarke was interviewed on 23 November 2011. Asked about her knowledge of the
         shortfall, she replied by saying that she did not know what the problem was but that
         she "assumed that we had done something stupid, like you do like". Shown certain
         Horizon records, she accepted that they must be right, and, asked if she knew where
         the money had gone, her answer was: "No, if I did 1 would have sorted it ... You can't
         lose £40,000 ... it's got to be somewhere". Ms Clarke, then, described how she had
         recounted all of the cash and checked that she had not made a mistake in keying in
         figures. She had also checked the Horizon snapshots but could not see what had
         happened, observing that she was at a loss as to what to do given that she "had put the
         right amount onto Horizon" and had checked that everything was in order.

38.      A defence statement was served on behalf of Ms Clarke in September 2010. This
         denied dishonesty and made certain disclosure requests, including a request for
         "details of any other large discrepancies in any other branch of the Post Office" and
         specifically "details of a loss reported by another Subpostmaster in the
         October/November Subpostmaster magazine".
                                                                                                             RLIT0000039
                                                                                                       RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                         Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




39.      The evidence of a shortfall served as part of the prosecution case consisted of the
         Horizon print-outs obtained during the audit, further Horizon print-outs from the
         branch produced by Mrs Hubbard and a schedule prepared by the investigator which
         was based on the Horizon print-outs and ARQ data obtained. There does not appear to
         have been any analysis or investigation undertaken in relation to the reliability of
         those Horizon records. Nor does it appear that the disclosure requested in the defence
         statement was ever provided.

40.      POL accepts that this is a case in which the reliability of Horizon was essential to the
         prosecution and conviction of Ms Clarke. She had made clear to the auditors from the
         outset, and then again in her interview, that the shortfall was unexplained, and that she
         believed that the shortfall was the result of an error. Ms Clarke's defence statement
         reiterated that she did not know the cause of the discrepancy. There was no evidence
         other than the Horizon records to prove the existence of an actual shortfall, despite the
         fact that Ms Clarke's defence statement had explicitly requested disclosure of
         instances of unexplained losses experienced at other branches. Given the account that
         she had previously provided, and the issues identified in her defence statement, she
         was entitled to disclosure of Horizon issues. This disclosure does not appear to have
         been provided.

41.      In these circumstances, POL rightly accepts that the prosecution of Ms Clarke was
         unfair and an affront to justice. In our judgement, notwithstanding her guilty plea, her
         conviction is unsafe.

       Robert John Boyle:

42.      On 29 November 2011, in the Crown Court at Nottingham before HHJ Milmo, Mr
         Boyle (then aged 60) pleaded guilty to an offence of theft. The particulars of the
         charge were that between 1 September 2010 and 16 April 2011 he had stolen
         £11,790.54 in cash. A count of fraud was not proceeded with and was left to lie on
         the file.

43.      On 6 January 2012, Mr Boyle was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment, suspended
         for 2 years. The judge imposed requirements of 2 years' supervision, 100 hours of
         unpaid work and an electronically monitored curfew.

44.      On 1 March 2012, Mr Boyle was ordered to pay £2,900 under a confiscation order.
         After he was forced to sell his property at an undervalue, the confiscation order was
         reduced to £269.20.

45.      Mr Boyle's branch had been audited on 15 April 2011. The audit identified a shortfall
         of £11,790.54. Mr Boyle approached the "Field Support Adviser" and informed him
         that the branch accounts would be in the region of £11,750 short. He said that he
         could provide no explanation of the shortage but that it had appeared on Horizon. He
         had been inflating his cash on hand to cover it up. A handwritten note of the
         conversation was made which stated (among other things) that Mr Boyle had
         "overdeclared cash in the hope that it would rectify itself as it has done in the past."

46.      On the same day, Mr Boyle was interviewed. He confirmed the accuracy of the
         handwritten note. He accepted that he had been inflating the cash on hand for some
         months. He thought that the "system" was causing discrepancies. He said that
                                                                                                           RLIT0000039
                                                                                                     RLIT0000039



Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.                       Hawkes & Others v Post Office Ltd




         something had been "going wrong." He did not believe that his staff had been
         handing extra cash to customers or that they were responsible for losses. He denied
         taking cash. He explained that he had put his property on the market as he realised
         that the loss was not going to be rectified. He intended to use the proceeds of sale to
         make good the shortfall.

47.      In a defence statement served in November 2011, Mr Boyle denied that any money
         had been stolen, and expressly raised the reliability of Horizon.

48.      POL accepts that the reliability of Horizon was essential to the prosecution and
         conviction of Mr Boyle. In interview, and to some extent at the audit itself, he had
         made clear that he had been falsifying the accounts to cover up unexplained losses.
         There is no independent evidence of actual shortfalls and POL did not attempt to
         investigate Mr Boyle's assertions that these unexplained shortfalls must have been
         caused by Horizon. Although Mr Boyle's defence statement did not contain specific
         disclosure requests relating to Horizon, it did place Horizon's reliability in issue.
         POL was therefore under a duty to disclose any material which might have assisted
         Mr Boyle to advance that case. On the evidence now available, there is nothing to
         suggest that that happened.

49.      In these circumstances, POL rightly accepts that the prosecution of Mr Boyle was
         unfair and an affront to justice. In our judgment, notwithstanding his guilty plea, his
         conviction is unsafe.

50.      It was for those reasons that we announced, at the conclusion of the hearing, that in
         each of the cases of Mr Hawkes, Mr Allen, Mr Smith, Ms Clarke and Mr Boyle we
         granted the necessary long extension of time; we granted leave to appeal; we received
         the fresh evidence; we allowed the appeal; and we quashed the convictions.
