                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




 Telecon with POL team plus Paula, after Arbuthnot call
                    on 2 July 2013

IAN HENDERSON:  ... to lock this down close of play
    Thursday, issue it to you for information only, not
    on a, you know, sort of a consultation basis on
    Friday and, interestingly, he said he felt it was
    important that it was done on that basis. He is
    adamant or he feels quite strongly that this must
    remain Second Sight's report not, you know,
    something that is, you know, sort of produced with,
    you know, too much alteration from yourselves. But
    obviously we do welcome your feedback on factual
    matters.

RON WARMINGTON: We have also stressed how fast moving
    some of the four spot reviews still are and, as
    a consequence of that, it is quite conceivable
    therefore that the interim report will contain what
    a week later will be found to be errors, as well as
    matters on which we might agree to disagree.

IAN HENDERSON: Yes. I mean, I think the way I put it
    is, you know, new information is coming to light.
    You know, it's important that we get to the bottom
    of these sort of issues and he seems to, you know,
    to support that view. So we talked him through his
    structure report, and he's happy that we give him
    the proposed final version on Monday, and Janet will
    take on the role of printing it. What was a bit of
    a surprise to me was I asked the question: what is
    the status of the report? At the moment we see it
    as a confidential report to him and his office, you
    know, for use by sort of MPs and so on. His
    response was, "Well, I don't think that's
    sustainable. There's a huge amount of interest from
    the press, media and so on." I think we've got to
    accept the fact that this is going to be in the
    public domain.

SIMON:   Just to let you know, Paula has now joined us.
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




PAULA VENNELLS:   Hi, Ian.


IAN HENDERSON:    Hi, Paula.

        So perhaps the most important issues are really
    James' sort of feedback to us. That is clearly an
    important sort of point, you know, particularly for
    the --

PAULA VENNELLS: Can I just stop you there. So he says
    there's an enormous amount of interest. Has he
    generated that or is this --

IAN HENDERSON: Well, that's -- you know, between us
    girls, I mean, that was the view that was forming in
    my mind. He seems to be pushing this. You know, he
    pretty well confirmed he's going to prerecord issues
    with the BBC and so on. The other thing which you
    need to be aware of and consider the consequences:
    later today he's planning to have another meeting
    with the Post Office minister. Is it Jo Swinson;
    have I got the right name?

PAULA VENNELLS:    Yeah.

IAN HENDERSON: He's pushing that very hard. He said
    that he's already spoken to the Speaker of the House
    of Commons but has asked for some Parliamentary time
    next week. He initially said or suggested that
    Second Sight should issue a press release, and
    I said I don't think that's appropriate, and he's
    agreed with that. We will issue the report. We
    will issue probably an executive summary but, as far
    as we're concerned, the report is between us and
    James Arbuthnot's office.

SIMON:  Hang on a second. Pause there. So he's got
    interviews that BBC, but he has not seen any
    information about what the report contains?

IAN HENDERSON: No, but he's booking time next week. He
    says that he's booked time for a statement in the
    House. So again this theme seems to fit in with
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




   this, you know, hidden agenda or whatever it is of
   him driving this forward. I mean, he's using words
   like, "There is a huge amount of interest in this",
   "It's important that this is out in the public
   domain" and so on, and he's talking about
   a statement in the House possibly as early as sort
   of Tuesday or Wednesday next week.

FEMALE SPEAKER 1:   Okay.   So a statement saying what?

IAN HENDERSON:    Who knows.

MALE SPEAKER 1:   Any sense at all of what he --

RON WARMINGTON: His main theme continues to be the
    possibility, whether there exists the possibility of
    wrongful prosecution or, for that matter, wrongful
    civil action, but he's less concerned about that.

IAN HENDERSON: He's certainly referring to miscarriages
    of justice. We've obviously briefed him on the
    defect issue, and I don't know to what extent he has
    been previous sort of briefed on that, but he seemed
    very concerned about that. He didn't, you know,
    suggest that it was a cover-up, but he said, "I find
    it quite astonishing that it is only now that that
    information is coming to light, bearing in mind that
    these were, you know, events and so on that occurred
    you know up to three years ago."

SIMON:  Okay. Just for the record, before the room can
    be clear (unclear) written to the subpostmasters
    about that and how many court cases we had mentioned
    (unclear) if we (unclear) for information only --

LESLEY:  -- (unclear) in terms of responding to that,
    can we make it quite clear that that is all in the
    public domain? So there's certainly no cover-up,
    but it's absolutely in the public domain and there's
    certainly been other (unclear) have been through
    court cases.

IAN HENDERSON: Well, I think his point was, you know,
    until the last sort of few days, he was certainly
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




    unaware of that, and I think there was a feeling,
    you know, bearing in mind that this investigation
    was set up 12 months ago, there was a lengthy and
    protracted build-up to that, you know, why is it
    only now that he is hearing about this? Now, you
    know that may be a valid point.

RON WARMINGTON: Yes, he said something like, "They
    haven't told me about it", or, "They hadn't told me
    about it."

SIMON:  I think we ought to register that point.
    I think us discussing it is probably not going to --
    okay, can we just keep going then. What else
    transpired at the meeting?

IAN HENDERSON: Well, as I say, it was largely us sort of
    just briefing him on the structure, you know, the
    timing, the logistics, and so on, and then right at
    the end -- I mean, he, you know, gave us a bit more
    of an insight into, you know, his thoughts, his
    plans, and so on, and that's what I've told you
    about his meetings with the Post Office minister,
    you know, and the fact that he thinks it's very
    important that this is out there in the public
    domain and is reported to the House. Quite what,
    you know, he's going to say, I think, you know, is
    speculation to a certain extent.

LESLEY: Coming back to the point that was covered
    yesterday in terms of, you know, be clear -- there
    are some process opportunities, for instance,
    (unclear: interference) and things that we need to
    fix. But the other point around the system itself
    in terms of the cases, there's nothing material been
    found in terms of Horizon. Was that made clear to
    James?

IAN HENDERSON:Well, no, because he like us he is using
   this broader definition of Horizon, and I think like
   us -- and I know, Simon, you said yesterday we've
   just got to agree to differ. I think, if you look
   that wider definition of Horizon, if you look the
   totality of the user experience, you know, what you,
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




    I think, collectively sort of identified as sort of,
    you know, process changes, opportunities, and so on,
    you know, he is putting more into the category of,
    you know, these are, using that definition, sort of
    defects in Horizon.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes, I mean --

LESLEY: Sorry to jump in but that's not what we talked
    about yesterday. So we were absolutely clear
    yesterday in terms of how we carve up each element
    of the process so (unclear) the system so that we
    are absolutely clear where we've got the issues
    which we do need to address.

RON WARMINGTON:Lesley, we are crystal clear on that.
   However, I don't think you'll find that he cares.
   From his viewpoint, it doesn't matter whether it's
   the software code or the procedures. Take the
   example of spot review 22 and the scratch cards.
   The fact that £744,000 worth of TCs were generated
   as a result of the procedure, that 20 branches were
   audited and £144,000 worth of differences were
   attributed to the situation where there existed, as
   it were, an air-gap between the Horizon System and
   its driver, the scratch card system. You know,
   that's -- it doesn't really matter whether we regard
   that as a software defect, which it wasn't, or
   a Horizon -- sort of narrow Horizon process
   deficiency, which it possibly could be defined as,
   or whether it's a broad Horizon issue, which it most
   clearly was otherwise we wouldn't have changed the
   procedure, improved the procedure quite dramatically
   by reducing the -- by illuminating the air-gap
   between Camelot and Horizon, and thereby sort of
   eliminating all that source of enormous quantity and
   value of TCs.

       As far as he's concerned, if somebody committed
   false accounting as a result of that particular
   problem, because they had such a huge difference
   that they couldn't get to the bottom of it, that
   would represent a miscarriage of justice, and that's
   what he's trying to get to.
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




SIMON:  So in that case I don't think there's any
    evidence, certainly not in the spot review.

RON WARMINGTON: We haven't investigated that, Simon,
    have we? We haven't investigated the 20 branches or
    for that matter the £744,000 worth of TCs, because
    it doesn't fall within our sample.

SIMON:    There's no evidence that there was.

IAN HENDERSON: Simon, the message is: don't rely on this
    narrow definition of Horizon. I think, frankly, any
    references to software and so on are not going to
    helped your case. James is operating well beyond
    that. He, you know, like us is looking at the
    totality of the user experience when he's talking
    about Horizon.

RON WARMINGTON:  To alleviate your concerns, Lesley, we
    are making abundantly clear where we have
    encountered software issues and, frankly, in the
    four spot reviews so far. The nearest you will
    get -- and you've conceded this -- is that the
    screen and printed messages in the event of the
    system dropping to recovery mode and using a mobile
    link, and failing to execute in this case half of
    the transaction -- the banking transaction went
    through, the Horizon transaction did not, but as far
    as the customer's concerned it is one transaction.
    In that instance, is that a software bug? No, it's
    not a bug, but it does, as you've conceded, give an
    indication that there could be a better way of
    handling it.

LESLEY:   A better way of communicating it.

RON WARMINGTON: Yes. I mean, here the person did
    something wrong, gave out the receipt when he
    shouldn't have, before he should have, but the
    customer had gone by time the system printed out all
    the instructions as to what he should do, and even
    if he didn't know how to interpret them -- they're
    not very easy to interpret. Trust me, I've tried.
                                                              SSL0000128
                                                            SSL0000128




SIMON:    Would you describe that as a systemic error?

RON WARMINGTON: It doesn't matter. What we're saying,
    Simon, is it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter how we
    describe it. We will describe it accurately, and we
    have described it accurately. But in James' eyes it
    doesn't matter a damn.

SIMON:  For our eyes though, we need to put something
    out. We can't conflict with you. So would it be
    accurate to say: no systemic errors in --

IAN HENDERSON: Simon, I don't think we can be categoric
    like that. Trying to compartmentalise frankly is
    going to back-fire on you. That's the message we're
    picking up from James' office. He has got no time
    whatsoever for these semantic definitions and
    distinctions. You know, he wants all of us to stand
    back and actually, you know, think about the bigger
    picture and the totality of the user experience.

SIMON:  I was thinking that maybe what he wants to do.
    Is that what we want to do as the Post Office?

RON WARMINGTON: We're the meat in the sandwich on that,
    Simon. You know, that may require more than the
    planned meeting between your Chairman and James,
    which I think is scheduled for tomorrow?

LESLEY:   It's Paula and Alwen, I think.

RON WARMINGTON:   Oh, is it Paula and Alwen?   Okay.

PAULA VENNELLS: I think we need -- I mean, I understand
    the message you're giving us. I've (unclear:
    interference) semantics. I think there are very
    different things here between -- you know,
    a systemic problem with Horizon System that brings
    into question all the transactions, and the fact
    that it is not a user-friendly experience for user
    subpostmasters and we need to (unclear:
    interference) you know, and I said this yesterday,
    the number of transactions we do, the number of
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




    branches that run and the number of complaints that
    we've had, even though we've been out and advertised
    and been very open about them.

IAN HENDERSON: That's something that's not in our
    report, and we want to put in there upfront, as part
    of sort of context -- and, Simon, thank you for
    those numbers that I think came through this
    morning. So we will even open on that basis which,
    you know, hopefully will help demonstrate and
    explain that what we're talking about is a very
    small, you know, proportion of, you know,
    transactions and -- you know, that flow through the
    Horizon sort of system.

RON WARMINGTON: Yes. We're not going to put pictures in
    the report, of course, but, you know, one can't help
    viewing this pictorially as a whacking great pyramid
    with masses and masses of satisfied people and
    transactions executed at the base and right up to
    the peak, and then a layer of people stealing from
    you, and then a layer of people making mistakes, and
    then a small layer of that of people who have made
    mistakes which they would not have made if the
    system had been designed differently. I'm afraid --

SUSAN:   Okay, I get that.

RON WARMINGTON: We're dealing with that top of the
    pyramid, tiny.

SUSAN:  Can I just ask a question which you may wish to
    reflect on.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

SUSAN: Are you happy that James uses your report in
    this way, because I think he's using it in a way we
    didn't anticipate.

RON WARMINGTON:   He is taking --

SUSAN:  We anticipated that he would use the report, use
    your report and -- I mean, I've not seen the report
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




    but as I believe it will be written, (unclear)
    a balanced view that these four spot reviews and the
    use of narrow (unclear) computer, it doesn't -- this
    doesn't indicate a systemic problem with our
    computer systems, it indicates, and we talked about
    it yesterday, a lack of willingness to get
    (unclear), a lack of willingness to get feedback,
    and to act on it it and a lot of it is historical.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

SUSAN: So, I mean, are you not concerned that your
    report is going to be used in a way that actually
    you haven't written it to be used in this way, and
    it goes to do a lot of damage to our organisation in
    a way that's probably not justified(?).

RON WARMINGTON: Well, of course we're concerned about
    all those things, Susan, and there does seem to be
    a touch -- what I was picking up in the call with
    James was a legalistic, cold interpretation of
    things. For example, Simon, the agonising work that
    you are having to do on spot review 5 in connection
    with -- sorry, spot review -- yes, sorry, the
    defects issue, where you are trying to say
    essentially, "Look, don't worry. We wrote off the
    differences and they were tiny in most cases anyway
    and some of them didn't affect SPMRs. They affected
    people that, you know, weren't going to be hurt."
    He brushed that aside, absolutely kicked it into the
    long grass, and just said, "It's not relevant."
    Okay?

SUSAN:   He's not really interested in the facts.


RON WARMINGTON: He's interested in the cold issue of
    whether there have been system defects, bugs -- we
    haven't used that term -- that have generated
    shortfalls which could, during a moment of stress,
    in fact, at the end of a trading period, have
    brought about a panic-stricken decision to falsely
    account. That's where it's coming from. It doesn't
    matter whether two weeks later, two hours later, it
    was corrected. If somebody was forced by such a bug
                                                              SSL0000128
                                                            SSL0000128




    or one that has yet to be disclosed, the unknown
    unknowns that Ian's referred to, to make
    a life-changing decision, then that's what's
    relevant.

IAN HENDERSON: He also seems to be focusing on what
    I call the human element, something that, you know,
    hadn't been mentioned since the March meeting. He
    asked us, for example, did we know how many suicides
    were linked to, you know, sort of Post Office cases,
    and so on (unclear: interference) clue. But I just
    mention that, you know, in case that also gives an
    insight into his thinking.

SIMON:  So, if we were to ask you the question, what
    would you suggest so -- to me it sounds like he's
    got an agenda, right? That's clear now. What would
    you suggest is the best course action for Post
    Office to take right now?

RON WARMINGTON:   I think you need that, you know, really
   important meeting with him really quickly. You
   know, the fact that, Susan, you came out of the
   meeting with the thought that those defects should
   be disclosed to him straight away -- I entirely
   endorsed that in the meeting yesterday and I
   entirely endorse it again -- but I think you would
   be ill-advised to do anything other than to paint
   that as black a picture as you can; in other words,
   to say, "Look, this is it, this is it." But not to
   in any way try and sort of minimise the apparent
   impact or seriousness, I would say, of the
   disclosure that's got to be made. Because he's
   questioning, "If you know about it all that time
   ago, why didn't you tell me about it?" That's what
   he's saying.

SIMON:   So I guess the answer is: why would we?


RON WARMINGTON:   Well ...

SIMON:   But (unclear).

IAN HENDERSON:    I think that is part of his concern.
                                                            SSL0000128
                                                          SSL0000128




    I think he feels that, you know, you've not got the
    right attitude, the right approach, the right, you
    know, sort of internal processes for dealing with
    this. I think he's concerned this is a bit of
    a five-minute wonder. If it wasn't for the pressure
    from, you know, JFSA, if it wasn't from the
    pressure, you know, dare I say, even from this
    investigation, you know, how would you be behaving
    and, you know, when this is all over, whenever that
    is, are you going to revert to type?

        I mean, I think he is looking for evidence of
    real fundamental change within the Post Office.
    That is the closest I can get to identifying his
    hidden agenda. I think he feels that the Post
    Office is not well suited to coping with these sort
    of issues. I may be sticking my neck out, but
    that's the feeling I was left with this morning.

RON WARMINGTON:By the way, we have stressed that how
   from the outset we have been -- and it's in the
   report -- that, you know, we've been impressed by
   the desire to seek the truth. However, we have to
   give caution that, you know, we mentioned to your
   faces, we do sense also, or we have experienced also
   this tendency to try and force narrow definitions
   onto things. You know, yeah, this did impact on
   people, but you asked if it impacted on SPMRs, and
   the answer is: well, it didn't because it impacted
   on multiples. That sort of, what might be
   interpreted in the press the weasel wording is
   extremely dangerous. You know, we haven't used that
   phraseology, we haven't referred in the report to
   that point, but it came up on spot review 5 also in
   answer to the Rudkin issue. You know, we're not
   just asking whether people in that basement had
   access to live systems, even if your answer is they
   did have access to what they called the live system
   but it wasn't live, which itself -- you know, we're
   having to word carefully to make it sound under than
   stupid and, you know, when you say, "They didn't
   have access to the Horizon system but they actually
   were passing entries to the live data, but you
   didn't ask that", that really is dangerous ground.
                                                            SSL0000128
                                                          SSL0000128




IAN HENDERSON:The other thing that I sensed is he's
   been talking to other people about some of these
   cases. Now whether that's MPs, whether it's, you
   know, direct to some of the SPMRs, but on a number
   of occasions this morning he had a level of detail
   that frankly surprised me and, you know, seemed to
   indicate that he is getting information, he is being
   fed information either directly from SPMRs or from
   somewhere else.

SIMON:   So what sort of information did he --

IAN HENDERSON:Well, for example, we talked about Rudkin
   straight sort of Bracknell, and he said, "Well,
   I understand that they have got access to, you know,
   sort of live data in Bracknell." Now, that's not
   the sort of comment that I would have expected, you
   know, based on certainly any of the conversations
   that we've had with him. We've not gone into that
   sort of detail.

SIMON:   Do you think that might be from Alan Bates?


RON WARMINGTON:No, because we've never said to Alan
   that we think they've got access to the live data
   from Bracknell. So unless he's making that up --
   I don't know. That's what I warned you about
   yesterday, that the last thing you want is a spot
   review response that says categorically: there was
   no access to live data from Bracknell or, you know,
   if you narrow it down from the boiler room in
   Bracknell, for somebody -- or from the second floor
   which is where the person that we've now identified,
   thanks to Rudkin, because it didn't come from your
   records, even though we asked you to disclose the
   emails, the email that gave the name came from
   Rudkin. That's a bit serious.

       But what I'm getting at is it's no good having
   a response that says: nobody could have had access
   to data from that basement because there was no
   access to the system, if in a week's time some
   bloody whistle-blower pipes up to say, "Well,
                                                              SSL0000128
                                                            SSL0000128




    actually I was working on the second floor and we
    routinely did X."

LESLEY:  We've been through this I don't know how many
    times. The basement has tech systems in it. We're
    about to interview the (unclear).

RON WARMINGTON:   Martin Rolf, yes.

LESLEY:  We got that name this week and we're going to
    interview him, and he was absolutely clear in the
    statement that he's given to us, before we put him
    in front of one of the lawyers, to say that there's
    no access to the data. We are -- as of yesterday,
    so another action from yesterday -- (unclear) a
    check who has access throughout that whole Bracknell
    building.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

LESLEY:  We spoke to (unclear) Fujitsu this morning on
    that, so we've taken that away to look at.

RON WARMINGTON:  Well, yeah. I mean, we've got --
    unfortunately it's more difficult even than you could
    have feared, because we've got to wind back the clock
    to what the situation was in 2000 -- you know, when
    Rudkin visited in November 2008, yes.

SIMON:    Okay, right.

RON WARMINGTON:   It's not easy.

SIMON:  So we've got some actions to take from that
    (unclear). Is there anything else?

SUSAN: Did James give you any impression about what he
   thought (unclear)?

IAN HENDERSON:I think I outlined -- I mean, I asked him
   that question, and he responded briefing the Post
   Office minister, possibly sort of multiple, you
   know, sort of meetings to discuss this, both this
   week and next week. The surprise to me was that he
                                                              SSL0000128
                                                            SSL0000128




    has already spoken to the Speaker in terms of
    booking time in Parliament, and I think, yeah, he,
    you know, wants to push this forward (interference)
    quite quickly. Right at the end, I said, "How do
    you see this sort of progressing", and, I mean, in
    a nutshell, you know, he said he thinks it's very
    important that, you know, in some shape or form --
    and we don't know what that means -- he thinks it's
    important that these enquiries continue.

LESLEY:  Just one question: when is he going to be
    interviewed by the BBC?

IAN HENDERSON:    Probably Friday.

LESLEY:   Friday.    So that's before he gets the report?

IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah.

SIMON:  (Unclear) I think we're going down old ground.
    We as a team need to sit down and think about this.
    You've done what we asked you to do, is relay the
    information. Is there anything else you think --

IAN HENDERSON: Simon, one thing you might want to think
    about -- I mean, I was planning to deal with the
    report sequentially, serially. In other words, as
    we discussed, we're going to release bits of it to
    you probably today that, you know, we don't think
    will materially change. The first full copy of the
    proposed final report we'll release to you on
    Friday. I wasn't proposing to release that to
    Arbuthnot at that point because, you know, obviously
    we need to give time for us to sort of consider any
    further changes and so on. But it does raise the
    question whether we should also release it to
    Arbuthnot on Friday so that he's in a more informed
    position than he would be otherwise. So I might ask
    a question have you got any views on that.

SUSAN:    I think we'll get to you on that one, Ron.


RON WARMINGTON:     Yes, we can.
                                                                SSL0000128
                                                              SSL0000128




SUSAN:  (Unclear) go out and say you could write
    whatever you like in that report, I'm afraid, and
    I just don't think it's going to make an iota of
    difference to what he says, which is my point to you
    about how do you feel about that, because I think
    what he says will bear little resemblance to what
    you write in your report. How can it be otherwise
    if he's going out to talk to the BBC on Friday?

SIMON:   Yeah.

RON WARMINGTON: I think we were both struck by the fact
    that he was taking a tougher line on this than
    I would have expected.

IAN HENDERSON: Bearing in mind the row that we had back
    in March over my sort of comments on the meeting,
    I mean, if anything, he's taking a far sort of
    tougher line than the one that I reported back then,
    you know, that I got a bit of a caning for.

SUSAN: Very inconsistent with that approach.     He's
    changed his position.

SIMON:   Okay.    Anything else, Ron and Ian?

PAULA VENNELLS: Before that, I think the only question
    in my mind at the moment is to try to understand
    what might have changed his position. Have you had
    any thoughts on that?

IAN HENDERSON:    I think it could be this contact with the
    Post Office minister and maybe, you know, the bigger
    picture in terms of, you know, Parliamentary sort of
    discussion vis-a-vis Post Office, and so on, that
    that seems to be much more to the forefront of his
    thinking than has ever been the case previously.

RON WARMINGTON: Well, he didn't mention one other thing,
    Ian, which I hadn't taken a note of and I only just
    now remember. He said he was sort of -- he remarked
    on the fact that prosecutions were still continuing.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah.
                                                              SSL0000128
                                                            SSL0000128




RON WARMINGTON: I think he expected the whole process to
    be kind of frozen while the investigation was going
    on even though it's taken a year. He remarked on
    that.

PAULA VENNELLS:   Okay.

SIMON:   Doesn't explain why he changed his mind.

RON WARMINGTON: I think he's angry about that.      I got
    a sense of a tad of anger from that.

IAN HENDERSON: The other time that I sensed anger was
    the whole sort of defect issue, you know, why am
    I only now hearing about this now? I mean, there
    was a real sense of anger in his voice when he said
    that.

RON WARMINGTON:   Coldness.

SIMON:  Thank you. Does anyone round is the table have
    any other questions?

RON WARMINGTON:One other thing. I'm going to take the
   position -- I haven't discussed this with Ian --
   Ian, we can discuss it out loud here. When it comes
   to the press, my position, really preferable is we
   want to make no comments to the press until the
   final report is issued.

IAN HENDERSON: I'm not even sure at that moment. As far
    as I'm concerned, you know, this is a report that we
    are doing, you know, to MPs and not for us to
    comment.

RON WARMINGTON:Well, it's actually our clients are Post
   Office Limited, Paula particularly, and Arbuthnot.
   You know, therefore, we're bound by confidentiality
   agreements anyway. I'm not thinking that far
   forward, but what I am happy to say to the press is:
   "No comment, you know, you can wait until the final
   report. I'm not guaranteeing I can make a comment
   then. The reports will speak for themselves."
                                                                SSL0000128
                                                              SSL0000128




IAN HENDERSON: I think, Ron, the line we took last time
    was: refer everything to Post Office press team.
    It's not even no comment. It's just --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

IAN HENDERSON:    -- we need to speak to Post Office comms.

RON WARMINGTON:   That's fine with me.

PAULA VENNELLS:   Thanks guys.     Bye.

RON WARMINGTON:   Thank you.

                       (Call finishes)


RON WARMINGTON:   Ron Warmington.

IAN HENDERSON:    Was that Paula Vennells on the meeting?

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes, she walked in late and she spoke to
    us.


IAN HENDERSON:    I missed that.

RON WARMINGTON: No. He said -- I'd sent you a text that
    said she was likely to be coming in. He'd sent me
    one right at the last -- well, he sent me a text
    which I forwarded to you after --

IAN HENDERSON:    As in Simon?


RON WARMINGTON:   Yes, yes.

IAN HENDERSON:    Only I didn't get that at all.

RON WARMINGTON:Sorry. It's all I could do because
   I was on the line at that point. At 10.33 I said:
   "just got this message from Simon. Bit of a snag.
   Will be couple of mins", and then a few minutes
   later I said, and this also from him, "Okay. By the
   way, Paula will join us (probably)."
                                                                SSL0000128
                                                              SSL0000128




IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah.

RON WARMINGTON: And she did. She walked in about five
    minutes after it started and she asked a couple of
    questions.

IAN HENDERSON:    We got the stupid Paula that I don't
    like.

RON WARMINGTON:   Oh, yeah.   No, this was Paula, the chief
    exec.


IAN HENDERSON:    I'm glad we didn't pull any punches then.

RON WARMINGTON: Exactly. All that stuff, you know, has
    come out. They are going to have to really wrestle
    with this, aren't they?

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes.

RON WARMINGTON:   You know, it's -- I think they're --
    once again Lesley was trying to sort of defend her
    own fucking patch.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah.

RON WARMINGTON: And then sacrificing just about the
    whole of everything also, and saying, "I don't give
    a shit about -- you can say what you like about
    everybody else, any other department, but just don't
    criticise the software"

IAN HENDERSON: Which is why I was a bit short with her
    because I'm getting seriously pissed off with her
    approach.

RON WARMINGTON: Well, we've told them that it ain't
    going to work to say that, so that -- it's just
    going to serve them really badly, but she seems to
    be so fucking dim that she's not understanding that.
    I'm sure Paula has taken that point on board
    straight away.

IAN HENDERSON:    No, I'm delighted that Paula, you know,
                                                                SSL0000128
                                                              SSL0000128




    was on that call.

RON WARMINGTON:  This narrowness of interpretation, she
    heard us talk about that too.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah.

RON WARMINGTON:  A lot of it -- she's heard all the good
    stuff. So, okay, well, and I loved the trap you laid
    down in front of Alwen, by saying that he seemed to --
    I thought: I know where this is going -- you said, "You
    seem to be better informed." It wasn't actually
    the point you're making, but she must have been -- her
    arse must have been twitching when you said that.

IAN HENDERSON: Seriously. How the hell did he know that
    there's access to live data in Bracknell?

RON WARMINGTON:   I don't know.

IAN HENDERSON:    He certainly hasn't got that from us.

RON WARMINGTON:I haven't told him that or -- you know,
   I haven't even told him the bit about the -- which
   I said is kind of laughable -- they weren't any live
   systems there even though they said there were.
   Right, okay, yeah. Right, got that. That's going
   to take some fucking explaining, isn't it? Can you
   imagine that, the way the press is going to get all
   over that? There wasn't a live system there, but
   they called it the live system. It's a tester --
   it's just loose terminology.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah, but actually I don't think that is
    the issue.

RON WARMINGTON: No.  i mean, that's going to tie them
    even more in knots. If their story is that that's
    what it was all about, and then it turns out there
    was live data there, it's going to come out.
    I mean, I don't know how much clearer I have to make
    it to them.

IAN HENDERSON:    That's why I was still banging on about
                                                             SSL0000128
                                                           SSL0000128




    this back-office accounting system. I just wonder
    whether that is part of the explanation.

RON WARMINGTON: Yeah, and by the way, as we made the
    point to James, what the SPMRs are telling me is
    that, when those TCs, those automated TCs come out,
    like, right at the last minute in the month, they
    have no option but to accept them.

IAN HENDERSON: Except Post Office is saying something
    different. They say that there is still this
    option.

RON WARMINGTON: There is an option but they can't
    execute it. Armstrong made that point to me. He
    said, "If you get a TC coming out the day the last
    day of the trading period, you cannot get through to
    the Helpdesk, you cannot do anything about
    challenging it. You have to just accept it, because
    otherwise you are going to be unable to open the
    books the following morning."

IAN HENDERSON:    (Unclear) over.

RON WARMINGTON:   And the fucking Helpdesk closes at 8
    o'clock --

IAN HENDERSON:    Yeah.

RON WARMINGTON: -- as far as I understand.     I haven't
    checked that.

IAN HENDERSON:    No, but we mustn't say that level of
    detail on Monday because --

RON WARMINGTON:No, no, no, no. Exactly, I don't know
   that that's true. We won't have time to get off
   piste. So, all right, okay. So --

IAN HENDERSON: Right. Now what we need to do I think
    (a) we need a bit of a break and --

RON WARMINGTON: Yes. Then we go through, clean up the
    report with the stuff that we've got. Then I've
                                                                SSL0000128
                                                              SSL0000128




    got -- on the bottom of one of my two copies, I've
    printed the bits that have got to be added in.

IAN HENDERSON:    When do you want to do that?   Let's pick
    a time.

RON WARMINGTON: As soon as you're ready. I wouldn't
    mind starting at 11.30. It's quarter past 11 now.
    Do it at 12 if you like.

IAN HENDERSON:    Let's aim for 12.

RON WARMINGTON: Great, okay. I'll call you then at 12,
    and we'll get that cracking.

IAN HENDERSON: Yeah, and yes, because take it to the
    next iteration. One thing I did note, that
    paragraph that you read out towards the end, or a
    couple of paragraphs.

RON WARMINGTON: Yes, it was a repeat.    There was
    a duplication in it.

IAN HENDERSON: Those were the paragraphs that you told
    Susan we were going to rewrite, because do you
    remember Susan said, "I'm not comfortable with that.
    I think you're being a bit harsh", and you said ...

RON WARMINGTON: Let me just find the page 7 ... yeah.
    Did I say that we'd rewrite those? Hang on,
    deliberately left out 108BIT. I've actually ringed
    it on my version as exec summary stuff in yellow.
    I've got other bits where I've changed.

IAN HENDERSON: It was 7.3, 7.4, 7.5. We're certainly
    bashing investigations, and Susan said, "I'm
    uncomfortable with that", and you said, "Oh, we'll
    rewrite that."

RON WARMINGTON:  A bit. Okay, we agreed with Susan to
    soften it a bit, soften it at bit. Okay, all right.

IAN HENDERSON:    Anyway.
                                                                SSL0000128
                                                              SSL0000128




RON WARMINGTON:   All right.

PAULA VENNELLS:   Well, call me at 12.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah, will do.    All right then.   Okay.

IAN HENDERSON:    Bye.

                         (Recording ends)
