                                                                                         SSL0000120
                                                                                       SSL0000120




           Telecon IRH RJW BC AP re part 2 August 11, 2014

BELINDA CROWE:Thank you for signing in. I wanted to
   have -- I thought it would be a good idea to have
   a conference call, and this is possibly in advance
   of a meeting where we probably should sit down with
   Angela to go through part 2, but I wanted to set out
   to you where I'm coming from in relation to this.

        So, first off, I am doing this with a Post
    Office hat on.

IAN HENDERSON:       Okay.

BELINDA CROWE:       Just so that you are absolutely clear.

        And the reason that I'm doing it is, as you
    know, .-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.GRO. -...-.-...-.-...-.-.....-...
                                                               -.... although one of
    the reasons it's taking a bit of time to get back to
   .you._.onthis is that I did contact him about this in
         GRO         Ind tracked him down on                                 _GRO-
    doing so. So I just want to be clear that in
    Chris's absence someone has to pick this up for him,
    so that's what I'm doing.

IAN HENDERSON:Belinda, what I would say, and I know you
   and I have got slightly different recollections, but
   the working group -- what the working group had in
   mind was that, sort of, almost as a courtesy to
   Post Office and JFSA, we would give a very short
   period of preliminary exposure to give you an
   opportunity to correct any factual errors. So what
   we had in mind was, you know, the number of branches
   or, you know -- or something like that, not any
   comments of any substance which we would expect to
   see made in the more -- in the formal sort of
   exposure of the document, which is -- which is
   Phase 2.

        So that's point 1. The other thing is, whilst
    obviously we're always very happy to talk to you
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




   guys, because of the potential importance of part 2,
   I think it's absolutely vital that we have an audit
   trail of exactly what comments are made and -- and
   clearly, you know, what our updated report looks
   like having, sort of, considered those comments.

        So whilst I'm happy to have this call, I don't
    want it in any way to be a substitute for a formal
    response from the Post Office.

BELINDA CROWE:I've got no problem with that, Ian, at
   all. The only process point with which I disagreed,
   and that is a distinct recollection, indeed one of
   Tony's -- so when you sit down and talk about it, is
   that there is a con -- there was supposed to be
   a conversation about it prior to going out to the
   working group.

        Now, that conversation which you had with Andy
    and Angela was not on the detail of this report
    because Post Office --

IAN HENDERSON:   No, I don't think it's been provided --
    I agree.

BELINDA CROWE:So, to me, a sit-down conversation is
   still to happen. And so I agree with you about an
   audit trail, got no problem with that at all, but
   the sit-down conversation as -- well, I've got Andy
   here in any event but I've also spoken to Angela --
   was primarily around four questions that you had
   asked us, because Post Office hadn't had a chance to
   look at the -- look at the report. So it wasn't on
   the -- on the report.

        So that is -- to me, that is a process, a part
    of the process that has been missed and
    Post Office's view is we would like that to happen.

        Post Office is very, very happy to set out in
    writing exactly what its comments are, but there's
    a bit that hasn't happened that should have
    happened.
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




IAN HENDERSON: Okay, maybe we've got slightly different,
    sort of, recollections. Certainly the intention of
    our meeting with Andy and Angela was to discuss
    those four questions and incorporate your responses
    into the report.

       I don't recall Tony asking us to then have
   a second meeting to discuss the -- you know, how we
   dealt with those four questions in -- in the report.
   So I feel, and I welcome Ron's comments in a minute,
   that we actually have done what Tony asked us to do,
   which was sit down and meet with you in order to
   get, you know, answers to those four questions.

RON WARMINGTON:   Well, Ian, thanks for that.

        Well, its Elephant Warmington here. I don't
    forget these things. My recollection of this was it
    was Tony's suggestion that we had a sit-down. One
    thing that was not clear to me is whether, and if
    not why not, we would have that sit-down meeting
    with Post Office and not with -- with Alan present.
    What --

BELINDA CROWE: Sorry, Ron, just so -- the original notes
    that went out --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE:    Sorry, Alan did -- sorry, Tony did say to
    Alan --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE: -- it would be good if you could join if
    you want to.

RON WARMINGTON:   Ah, right.

BELINDA CROWE: And Alan said he didn't know that he
    would either be able to or it was --

RON WARMINGTON:   Oh, that was it?
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




BELINDA CROWE:    Sorry.

RON WARMINGTON:   That makes sense.   Yes, that's --

BELINDA CROWE:    And so there's no problem with that at
    all.


RON WARMINGTON:Right, that's good. So what we did
   then, and this will, I'm sure, be what everybody
   else recalls, we said there were four. In the end
   there were five issues that I put in my 29 July
   email, which was the day before the meeting, where
   we said, look, yeah, there were questions, they're
   in various states of answer, but these were always
   intended to be the most -- among the most -- the
   items in the part 2 report that were most in need of
   debate. And were very serious issues.

       So it was always meant to be a big chunk of the
   part 2 issues but I quite -- totally agree that we
   did not put on the table the full part 2 report at
   that point.

BELINDA CROWE: Okay. So -- so we may have different
    views of the process but -- but regardless of that,
    I would still like to -- I'd still like to have the
    conversation and -- but has your report then changed
    in light of the discussion with Andy and Angela?

IAN HENDERSON: Yes, and we told you in the meeting that
    it was going to change and that we already had some
    changes sort of in the pipeline that would also be
    incorporated. So the version I sent --

BELINDA CROWE: Are those the ones -- sorry, are those
    the ones that -- so, at the meeting with Andy and
    Angela, what you said was that you would make some
    amendments to the report and get them out by the
    Thursday evening. We got that -- I got that from
    you, Ian, on 5th August.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes.

BELINDA CROWE:    So is that your latest version?
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




IAN HENDERSON:    Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: Okay. So some of the issues that you
    discussed with Andy and Angela aren't actually in
    the second (unclear)?

IAN HENDERSON: No, they are. To the extent that we felt
    it was appropriate to reflect the comments made in
    the meeting.

BELINDA CROWE:Okay. And does that also include the --
   that also includes the briefing, the written
   briefing, that Post Office has given you?

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE:    Because I think in terms of pensions and
    allowances.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE:    Which is not -- which is not reflected in
    here.

IAN HENDERSON:    I'm just trying to remember --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah, I know the situation on this, Ian.

        The answer is: yes, we did get the paper, which
    largely says, on pensions and allowances, largely it
    says -- or includes in it remarks along the lines
    of, look, you wanted to know why these things
    were -- failed. One of the primary reasons they
    failed is because we were reliant on old people that
    died or -- or, you know, weren't able to come to
    court.

        Have we reflected all of that in the current
    version of part 2? Not completely, because we are
    not -- we are -- and as we have undoubtedly -- I've got
    it next to me, I don't even have to look at it to know
    this, we will have said that investigations on this
    matter are continuing, as indeed they are, because
                                                              SSL0000120
                                                            SSL0000120




    we've got a load of cases that we haven't looked into
    yet that deal with pensions and allowances issues.

IAN HENDERSON: And Ron, that's -- more importantly also,
    in the meeting, Angela and possibly Andy as well
    agreed that they were going to go away and look at
    probably the legal files and establish what gave
    rise to the launching of the prosecutions, sort of,
    relating to pensions and allowances, and my
    question -- my specific question was, you know, was
    it intelligence-led? Was it a tip-off from some
    particular sort of source?

       We need to, sort of, understand the background
   to it, and that was one of the things that was also,
   sort of -- we felt, sort of, missing in terms of the
   overall context.

RON WARMINGTON:   So -- so although -- Andy, although --

ANDY:  Sorry, sorry, can I just correct that, because
    I don't think that was one of the questions, in
    fact, because that question is addressed in the DNA
    notes, and so we would not have taken that one away,
    because we had already addressed it.

IAN HENDERSON: Okay. All I'm saying is that I raised it
    in the meeting and my understanding was that Angela
    was going to look into that but, you know --

ANDY:  We left it that you guys would go away and
    re-review the P & A note and come back with any
    questions, and we haven't had any follow-up
    questions.

IAN HENDERSON: All right. Well, we've obviously got
    a slightly different understanding, which perhaps
    just reinforces why it's so important to, you know,
    maybe rely on, sort of, you know, documents rather
    than meetings with differing recollections.

RON WARMINGTON: And Andy, you know, the key phrase in
    13.2 is "and we have asked Post Office to help us
    gain a deeper understanding of the cases that were
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




    investigated", blah, blah, blah, and -- and of
    course we, in response to receiving the 7-pager,
    said to ourselves -- and said: do we actually say
    there -- and they have since come in with, you know,
    a 7-page report or whatever that says some stuff.
    Frankly, we looked at that and decided not to.
    Now --

BELINDA CROWE:    Sorry, Ron.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: Can I -- if I can just stress here, every
    time Second Sight asks a question, a considerable
    amount of work goes into trying to address that
    question very specifically and (unclear) input into
    that. So it's not a question of said some stuff,
    it's a question of trying to give Second Sight our
    specific questions that they have asked, because
    this is -- you know, these are not matters that we
    take lightly at all.

        So can I -- regardless of the process and
    accepting the need to have a proper audit trail,
    which I entirely am sympathetic of, the reason that
    I wanted to call was to set out what the
    Post Office's concerns are about the part 2 report
    and see if we can come to a way, with a properly
    audited trail, of addressing those, should you so
    choose.

        Now, it's my understanding that part 2, like
    part 1, is -- the reason for its existence is to
    assist applicants during the mediation process.

IAN HENDERSON:  Sorry to interrupt, I just want to make
    sure that what you're proposing is consistent with what
    the working group asked us to do, which was, you know,
    either a 24 or a 48-hour quick exposure to give both
    sides the opportunity to correct any factual errors
    prior to the more detailed exposure where we would be
    inviting sort of comments of substance.

        It just strikes me that what you seem to be
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    proposing now falls more into the latter category
    rather than, you know, the former.

BELINDA CROWE:That may or may not be correct, Ian, and
   we may or may not have a differing understanding of
   what the task was, but surely what we're all
   concerned about is creating a document that
   expresses(?) the applicant. What I'd like to do is
   to have a conversation so that you are aware of
   Post Office's (unclear), and they are considerable,
   and that we seek if we can to address those, in an
   absolutely transparent way, but factual -- it's,
   like, factual inaccuracies are both in terms of
   facts that are in the report and also facts
   omission, and in the view of the Post Office there's
   a lot of information that is missing from this
   which, in the view of the Post Office, will not be
   helpful in terms of helping the mediator, and what
   I want to do is to surface(?) some of those concerns
   with you now -- no, we can surface it before the
   working group but there might be a way that we can
   address that in a way that is satisfactory to you
   before it comes to the working group discussion
   about whether or not this document does actually
   assist the applicant.

IAN HENDERSON: In commenting on that, there's two
    immediate, sort of -- sort of, thoughts.

        Firstly, I think I would regard what you're
    describing as factual omissions as more properly
    falling into the category of substantive, sort of,
    comments on the report rather than corrections to,
    you know, numerical or other facts contained in the
    report.

        You know, if we've got 60 days when it should be
    42 days or the other way round, that's what we
    intended will be a very quick first exposure.

        So my first question is: are you going to, sort
    of, respond to that? And if the answer is no, what
    we will do is quickly move to the more formal stage,
    where we will be inviting that more substantive
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




    comment in accordance with the instructions or
    recommendations from the working group.

BELINDA CROWE:  And the answer to that is yes, we will
    respond, but I would still appreciate the conversation
    around whether or not this report actually helps the
    applicant and whether or not there's anything more
    Post Office needs to be doing, apart from asking the
    specific question -- asking the specific questions,
    some of which are new. But there's some broader issues
    here which -- to be honest, there are issues that
    I don't necessarily feel should be exposed to you first
    into the -- first in relation to the working group, and
    that is -- and if you want me to deal in specifics,
    that is there are a number of areas in the report, four
    that I counted up, where it says "enquiries are
    continuing".

        Now, there are two issues as far as I am
    concerned. One is whether or not that assist the
    applicants. And the other is, Second Sight has been
    investigating these issues since 2012 and one of the
    concerns in the Post Office is that is a long time
    still to have enquiries continuing.

IAN HENDERSON:    I agree, but it shouldn't be any surprise
   because, you know, from a long time ago we said that
   both part 1 and part 2 would be living documents
   that would be updated as we received further CQRs
   and POIRs. So I'm a bit surprised that you're
   raising that as a comment or an observation at this
   stage, because the working group certainly has been
   well aware of that and has been supportive of that
   approach.

BELINDA CROWE: And I don't -- and -- and I absolutely
    accept that, that these are going to be living
    documents, but there are some issues that were dealt
    with in the spot reviews.

RON WARMINGTON:Belinda, one of -- one of the issues
   that was dealt with in the spot reviews, and there
   are many, one of them was the fundamental issue
   raised by Rudkin, the famous Bracknell event, on
   which we asked two years ago nearly now for access
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




   to emails, which have never turned up.     So --

BELINDA CROWE: Excuse me Ron -- Ian, you might have been
    the recipient of this but my understanding was that
    a huge number of emails were provided to you.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah, but they weren't --

IAN HENDERSON:    That's correct, but not from the right
    period.

RON WARMINGTON:   They weren't the right period.

IAN HENDERSON: And I've sent two emails to, sort of,
    Post Office reminding Post Office of that and we've
    never had a response.

RON WARMINGTON:   I mean, that's just one of the issues.


BELINDA CROWE: Sorry, can I -- can I just -- on the
    matter of Rudkin --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE: -- why are you making a comment in
    your -- so the bit that was left hanging was whether
    or not there is evidence of the subpostmaster --
    because I remember when queried in relation to
    Rudkin, as I understand it, about transactions, it
    was whether or not he overheard something --

RON WARMINGTON:   No, he didn't -- it wasn't it was
    overheard, he was told something, yeah.    He says.

BELINDA CROWE:    Whether or not he was, Rudkin claims that
    he was.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE: And the bit that was outstanding was that
    the person who Rudkin is -- maintained that he was
    going to meet.

RON WARMINGTON:   Mr Rolf, yes.
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




BELINDA CROWE:    Couldn't remember.

RON WARMINGTON:   Meeting him?

IAN HENDERSON: Belinda, that's only one aspect of it.
    What had been agreed was that we would be provided
    with the entire email records for the Post Office
    team that potentially would have had some contact
    with whatever was going on in the basement in 2008.
    We've been told that technically it's available but
    for some reason we've never, you know, progressed
    much beyond that point.

BELINDA CROWE:  So, Ian, there is an answer to that
    question, and that is: you have been provided with
    a significant amount of email traffic. However,
    there is --

RON WARMINGTON:   Of the wrong date.

BELINDA CROWE:-- an issue about the extent to which it
   is appropriate for us to send -- wade through
   people's in-boxes which potentially contains all
   sorts of information that Second Sight has no right
   to have access to, so that would be personal
   information, but in no way associated with this. So
   what Post Office has said is that if you -- if you
   ask us a question, we will give you the answer, but
   what we can't do is -- we've provided lots and lots
   of information, but what we can't do is to enable
   you to -- to trawl through masses and masses and
   masses of extraneous emails. I mean, that's just
   not appropriate. That's a fishing expedition.

IAN HENDERSON: Belinda, I mean, we have addressed that,
    sort of, previously. I mean, firstly, your chief
    executive assured us that anything that we asked for
    would be provided, and we've specifically discussed
    emails with -- with Paula.

        The emails that had previously been provided,
    yes, were the entire sort of mailbox for half
    a dozen or so, sort of, individuals for an entire
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




   year. It was agreed, in some detail, the procedures
   that we would follow in order to properly protect
   the privacy rights of individuals, and everybody at
   the time was happy with that. The only thing that
   hasn't been provided is the emails for the relevant,
   sort of, year in question.

        So actually we had previously agreed the
    principle that, yes, we could have it and (b) the
    approach that we were taking that would protect the
    privacy rights of individuals.

RON WARMINGTON: Which, by the way, Belinda, is certainly
    not something we haven't dealt with, like, 150 times
    before on other cases.

BELINDA CROWE:    Okay.

RON WARMINGTON: So we're used to dealing with this
    globally. You know, for example, in Scandinavian
    countries there are really tight --

IAN HENDERSON:    Ron, let's just stick to the specifics --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah, but, I mean, the fact is,
    Belinda --

BELINDA CROWE:    I will --


RON WARMINGTON: -- when you refer to large amounts of
    data being provided, it's irrelevant because the
    data that was provided was not the data that we were
    seeking.

BELINDA CROWE:    So I will respond to you in writing on
   that point.

IAN HENDERSON:It would be helpful to know, you know,
   even now, whether or not we're going to get what
   we've -- what we've asked for, because that will
   ultimately be reflected either in a part 2 report or
   somewhere else.

ANDY:   Ian, sorry, I'm not aware of the history on this
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    particular topic, but just for my benefit can you
    let me know what you're looking for in those emails?
    What's -- what's --

IAN HENDERSON: What we're looking for -- what has been
    agreed was that we would be provided with the entire
    email box for a list of named individuals for
    calendar year 2008 --

BELINDA CROWE:    What are you looking for, Ian?

ANDY:   In those emails, yeah.

        I mean, what I'm trying to get to is -- is
    that -- whether you are aiming for a particular
    target, whether there's a way we can help you get to
    that particular target.

IAN HENDERSON:Yeah, the way you can help, Andy, is
   giving us the emails. We have agreed that we will
   do the searching, we will, you know, decide what
   search terms are appropriate. We are not prepared
   to be sort of limited in terms of the searches that
   we carry out, and all of that has previously been
   agreed.

ANDY: That wasn't what I was proposing. Again, what is
    it that -- what I don't understand is how these
    emails are going help. I'm not trying to be
    facetious and difficult in any way. I genuinely
    don't, I -- and I wasn't in the history, I do not
    know what you're looking for, I don't know how these
    emails --

IAN HENDERSON: We're looking for evidence of, really,
    sort of two or three things. Firstly, was there
    this, you know, alleged secret unit operating in the
    basement of the Fujitsu office in Bracknell? And,
    secondly, did they have in some way the ability to
    alter transaction records at branch level --

RON WARMINGTON:   Or stock levels.

IAN HENDERSON:    -- directly, without the knowledge or
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    authorisation of the subpostmaster.

ANDY: That's useful. Let us take that away and we'll
    respond to you in writing on it.

IAN HENDERSON: Okay. But none of that is new. I mean,
    we've been asking that question for well over a year
    now.

ANDY:  And I don't know the history so I can't comment
    but I know where you are aiming with it now, so
    we can deal with that.

IAN HENDERSON:But Belinda, just stepping back briefly,
   you said that we will be provided with comments on
   the factual sort of inaccuracies of the 5th August,
   sort of, draft. What's the timetable on that?

BELINDA CROWE:So there was some questions that had not
   been raised with us before that we're looking at.
   I would hope to be able to get you something within
   the next few days, but it's -- on some questions
   that are new to us, it might take us a little bit
   longer. I'm saying within the next couple of days.

       But that won't stop me wanting to have
   a conversation with you, because I would still like
   to have an opportunity to set out what my concerns
   are on this.

IAN HENDERSON: Okay. It's just when we spoke last week
    you were hoping to get something to us either by
    close of play Friday or sort of early yesterday or
    whenever it was, or even -- yes.

BELINDA CROWE:   I was.I was. And what you'll
    understand, Ian, I'm sure, is that we have been
    presented with a report we have not previously seen.
    It's light on evidence and fact, and what we're
    having to do is quite a lot of work to try and
    answer some of those points.

IAN HENDERSON:   Okay.
                                                              SSL0000120
                                                            SSL0000120




BELINDA CROWE:And we will do our utmost to get you the
   comments. I realise that it's quite difficult in
   terms of the timing of this, but I would like to
   remind you that this was a report that you said
   could be viewed -- that you had said would be ready
   on 26 March. And you'll remember, I'm sure, our
   conversations about this, because you put it on the
   agenda for the MPs' meeting back in March and said
   to the MPs that it would be ready by 26 March. So
   it's been a long time in the preparation and
   Post Office wants to be -- to make sure that it
   addresses as many of the points as it possibly can.

        What's important is getting this right.

IAN HENDERSON:Right, which is why we were giving you
   the opportunity to go for a quick response. We're
   talking about 24 pages. I think what we hoped was
   that somebody, you know, with quite a lot of
   experience could probably read that in, I don't
   know, an hour or something like that and relatively
   quickly, you know, just address whatever sort of
   factual errors have -- have been made. What you're
   describing sounds much more like the more
   substantive sort of response which is -- which is
   Phase 2.

ANDY: I think -- I think the challenge we have is --
    I think two are entwined, it's quite difficult to
    separate one from the other actually in going
    through it. What one person may call a factual
    error another will call a point of substance, so
    I don't think there's a clear divide as to what
    we're struggling with.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes, I mean --

IAN HENDERSON:    Well, we're only a couple of days away.

RON WARMINGTON: Belinda, you were right in saying that
    there are four points in the report -- and I'm
    surprised there are as few as that, frankly -- where
    we said enquiries --
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




BELINDA CROWE: No, sorry, Ron, what I am saying is there
    are four points in the report --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE:-- where it says "enquiries into this are
   still continuing", and one of our concerns is: how
   could it help the applicant to have that in there?
   So in relation to pensions and allowances, if I take
   that example --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE:-- we have N002, she has a copy of her
   report in draft. She is waiting -- so she has her
   pack. She is waiting for part 2 because -- because
   what you said was that your report needs to be read
   in conjunction with part 2, and she is a pensions
   and allowance case, and it simply says in the report
   that enquiries are continuing. So where it says
   that, I'm not sure how that helps the applicant.

RON WARMINGTON:Well, it may not help the applicant at
   this stage. It may not. If it is sufficiently
   open-ended at this stage it is just a place marker
   that says that the matter is not resolved yet on
   this point.

        And, frankly, you know, we are looking at all of
    the cases -- I think 15 -- where pensions and
    allowances issues have been raised. The only way we
    can accelerate this process of concluding that
    paragraph is to take this 6 and a half pages that
    has been produced and study that in the context of
    all the cases on which we have received the CQR and
    POIR among those 15 and all those that we haven't,
    and only when we've concluded that will we actually
    get to the truth, and even then -- you know, Ian's
    earlier mentioned question of, well, what -- you
    know, how did all this start off and how was this
    triggered exactly?

BELINDA CROWE: Sorry, excuse me -- excuse me, Ron, so we
    don't get into the detail of that, we've answered
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




   that. You asked the question about whether or not
   there was a particular issue that cuts across all of
   this, and -- and what the response said -- and
   I know what it said because I was the one that
   co-ordinated the putting it together -- is there
   wasn't.

        But my question remains: what -- if N002
    (unclear) so if Joy goes into mediation with
    a report that says enquiries are continuing, how
    does that help the mediation of her case?

IAN HENDERSON:  Well, I think the short answer is that that
    is just one out of a number of -- of issues. We don't
    know when that mediation is going to actually occur.
    It's entirely possible we may have an updated report by
    that point.

BELINDA CROWE: So -- okay. And so what we would -- what
    we would do then is just, in advance of mediations,
    send the latest version of the report.

RON WARMINGTON:Well, what you have to -- what we have
   to understand, without -- and I am deeply resisting
   the temptation to get down into the weeds -- on the
   Joy Taylor case, among others, what happened in that
   case is that the evidence that was going to go into
   trial and was presented included all sorts of
   reference to data relating to other branches that
   weren't even the branch in question. Now, that has
   only -- that was -- that triggered in the CQR
   a challenge from, in this case, Howe+Co, that
   said: it doesn't make any sense; why are you raising
   all this stuff rage to other branches?

        Then Angela, in dealing with it thoroughly, came
    back and said, "Yeah, actually that wasn't meant to
    be there, it's just that we printed out stuff -- or
    stuff had been printed out -- reports had been
    printed out that included a lot of extraneous data."
    Okay?

        Now, that work had not been done until the POIR
    effort was carried out and, therefore, it's
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




   unsurprising that, in terms of the applicant and her
   professional adviser, understanding what all this
   stuff was all about was absent. They didn't know
   what it was all about because there was a (unclear)
   in there that was irrelevant to the case, and -- and
   they leapt on that and said --

BELINDA CROWE: -- issues, one is a bit of the (unclear)
    case, which is a Howe+Co case --

RON WARMINGTON:   Okay, but one of the others --

BELINDA CROWE: (Unclear) is that might be specific to
    this -- to that -- that particular case --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: -- but it doesn't -- it doesn't detract
    from my basic issue, and that is -- what we have
    said to this applicant is she needs part 2 and to
    read that in conjunction with her case, and part 2
    just said investigations are continuing --

RON WARMINGTON: Yes, but what -- what's the alternative,
    Belinda? The alternative is either to remove that
    section completely or not issue part 2 at this stage
    or to take her report back and say, "No, you don't
    need to look at that section", or --

ANDY: Or deal with the P & A issue in PRR on the Joy
    Taylor case.

RON WARMINGTON: Or deal with it on a case-by-case basis,
    just in that one. Yeah.

ANDY:  And I think -- I think that's one of the, sort
    of, overarching points we had around this, is that
    the purpose of the part 2 report is assist the
    applicants, and we envisaged that there would be
    these thematic issues where you have a single issue
    impacting on multiple applicants. But I think
    there's a number of topics within the briefing
    report, and at present P & A is one of them, where
    there doesn't seem to be a thematic issue there at
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    all, actually, it seems to be a collection of
    individual points (unclear) on a case-by-case basis.

RON WARMINGTON: But, Andy, this -- this is just
    man-to-man stuff. Look, you know, you're
    a reasonable guy and all the people round these
    telephones are reasonable people. The bottom line
    on this material is that, you know, people like Ian
    and I have dealt with cases like this for decades
    and, ordinarily, foremost in the evidential material
    heap would be computer evidence pointing at the
    frequency of occurrence of reintroduction. It would
    say: last year across the entire network eleven and
    half thousand branches, there were 4,912
    reintroductions, and guess what, 4,900 of them
    occurred in one branch, and guess what, 4,899 were
    carried out by one person. That sort of --

BELINDA CROWE: Excuse me, Ron, isn't that -- so, sorry,
    I thought that's what you were doing.

RON WARMINGTON:   Pardon?   Sorry?

BELINDA CROWE: So -- so when you first came in to look
    at Horizon-associated issues, the whole idea of the
    exercise was for you to identify these (unclear).
    Are you saying -- because Post Office would be very
    happy to do this, and what Post Office is going to
    have to do is to do just that, because if this
    report goes to the mediators as drafted in the
    absence of what Post Office said and what evidence
    Second Sight has found to show that that is wrong,
    then that -- that will be part of a standard pack
    that Post Office will have to give to the mediator.
    I really don't see that -- how that helps. Which is
    why Post Office and Second Sight really needs to be
    addressing those -- those points.

RON WARMINGTON:   Well, first of all --

IAN HENDERSON: Belinda, just standing back a bit,
    I mean, you are putting that proposition, really, to
    the wrong people. It is Tony more than anybody else
    who has been cracking the whip and saying, "Get it
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    out, get it out, get it out", and that's what we're
    trying to do. It's not, you know, a decision that
    was made unilaterally by Second Sight.

       Tony knows that there will be omissions, he
   knows that there will be sections that say, you
   know, enquiries are continuing. But we're not the
   decision-making body relating to this. We are just
   trying to execute an instruction, if I can put it
   that way, that was given to us by the working group.

BELINDA CROWE: But, Ian, that instruction emanated from
    the fact that Second Sight said that this report was
    necessary.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes?

BELINDA CROWE:  And so Tony then said -- but let's not
    banter words about what Tony may or may not have
    said or meant, but the instruction from the working
    group was then: well, then, you need to get on and
    produce it.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes, which is what we've done.

RON WARMINGTON: Actually, Ian -- Ian, Belinda, this --
    this wasn't the point that I was trying to make, and
    obviously I didn't make it very thoroughly.
    Apologies.

        The point that I was making is that -- not that
    this information and data about frequency of
    occurrence and so on would -- should be obtained
    now, and if so by Angela or by us, that isn't the
    point I'm making at all. The point I'm making is,
    having brought these sort of cases myself, you would
    expect that material to have been in the material on
    file at the time that the charges were made; in
    other words, how did we arrive at the certainty that
    these people had carried out this theft when they're
    saying that -- obviously they're saying they didn't
    and the evidential material that we have seen in
    every case so far that we've looked at -- and we
    haven't looked at all of them -- is -- to say it's
                                                               SSL0000120
                                                             SSL0000120




    weak is a raging understatement.    It is just -- it's
    just incomplete.

BELINDA CROWE: So in response to that, what I would say
    is that you are not lawyers and criminal matters are
    outside the scope of this.

RON WARMINGTON:Yes, but it's -- I'm not looking at it
   as a barrister, I'm looking at it from the viewpoint
   of what was it that caused the loss and who brought
   it about, and there's -- it is obviously relevant to
   us to make the determination of whether we think it
   is on the balance of probabilities more likely than
   the individual stole the money than that they --
   which is what was they were charged with up and
   until the time the cases were pulled -- as opposed
   to it being more likely that these were either
   accidentally entered or, in fact, entered by some in
   some the branch, which was what was being suggested,
   and that was -- that argument was quite powerfully
   supported by the fact that other branch material was
   included in the evidence pack.

       So, you know, we're not trying -- we didn't jump
   out of bed and say, "Let's see if we can make life
   difficult for Post Office", we're saying that the
   evidence itself on these cases is so bad and
   confusing that it is -- first of all, it's little
   surprise that we're getting so much ferocity on the
   incoming CQRs, but it's also little surprise that
   none of the cases ever got to prosecution, or if
   they did, they failed.

BELINDA CROWE:    Sorry, Ron, just so that we are clear --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE:    -- that is a case-specific issue.

RON WARMINGTON: Oh, it's case-specific across quite
    a few of the cases we've looked at.

BELINDA CROWE:    How many?
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




RON WARMINGTON: It is the fact that we saw this same
   generic story repeated in at least four occasions so
   far, and we've got 15 on the books, that caused us to
   trigger the question in the first place.

        In fact, I listed 15 in my email and re-listed it
    on 29 June email. So we've specifically drawn
    Post Office's attention to the individual cases, and
    what I've got is a 6 and a half page kind of general
    response to the issue, which is a very good document --
    make no mistake, it's a superb document -- but that
    doesn't, of course,      me the answers, yet, to every
                         give




    case where this has come up.

ANDY: (Unclear) at least every case, it's a -- you
   know, that document that was produced on P & A fraud
   was a general overarching document and then that has
   to be --

RON WARMINGTON:   Which is fine, Andy.

ANDY: -- applied down into the individual circumstances
    of the cases.

RON WARMINGTON:   Correct, and we're -- we will --

ANDY:   Likewise --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

ANDY:  -- the individual findings of the cases and you
    draw up information to create general themes.
    I think where we're -- I think where we're
    struggling with is, is there at the moment any
    general overarching theme relating, for example, to
    P & A cases? And if not, then why are we putting it
    in the part 2 report? It may well be that at the
    outset we go, well, look, 15 cases of P & A, they
    look very similar to (unclear) by those 15 different
    (unclear) a reason for whatever problems occurred.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

ANDY:   And this report wouldn't be the appropriate place
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




   to, sort of, do a recitation of those 15 different
   individual circumstances. It's only if we've got
   a general -- a general topic that goes through
   a number of cases that warrant going in here.
   I guess the concern from our point of view is that
   if you are Joy Taylor and you pick up this report,
   do you then think that there is a general theme
   that's going to affect your case when, in fact,
   there isn't? Because at the moment I can't see that
   there is that common thread running through the
   P & A cases. Actually I think we've only done one
   P & A case, which is the Joy Taylor case.

IAN HENDERSON: Andy, that's a perfectly valid point for
    you to make, but it falls more within either the
    substantive comments that you want to make on the
    report or perhaps a sort of a question that you want
    to put back to the working group and to have
    a debate on whether or not there is any benefit in
    issuing the part 2 report at this stage.

BELINDA CROWE: So I think there is sense in it. I mean,
    you know, this -- the purpose of this call is to see
    if there is any possibility of working together in
    order to get this into a position that helps the
    applicant. So, Ron, you have said that it may not
    help the applicant in relation to the specific cases
    because enquiries are continuing, but there's no
    alternative to that because there is pressure to
    (unclear) to get the part 2 --

RON WARMINGTON:   No, I didn't -- I didn't say that.

       I said -- I said that -- the original concept
   was not that it would be helpful to the applicant or
   that it would be helpful to Post Office but rather
   that it would be helpful to the mediator in getting
   a grasp of what the issues were. That was the
   original purpose. That's why we originally had
   called it the mediator briefing report.

        Now, the point --

BELINDA CROWE:    Ron, you said specifically that it may
                                                            SSL0000120
                                                          SSL0000120




    not be helpful to the applicant.

RON WARMINGTON:   Correct --

BELINDA CROWE: It's got to be helpful to the
    applicant --

RON WARMINGTON:   -- I did say that.


BELINDA CROWE:    -- as well as the mediator hasn't it?

RON WARMINGTON:   No.     Why?

BELINDA CROWE: Well, I'm not asking for this to be
    helpful to Post Office. To be absolutely clear, it
    is perfectly acceptable for Second Sight to produce
    evidence which refutes something that Post Office
    has said.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

BELINDA CROWE: But what is not clear from this is what
    Post Office has said, despite the fact that
    Post Office had attempted to answer all of your
    questions, and it doesn't say then what cases you
    had looked at and what the evidence is which causes
    you to take a different view.

RON WARMINGTON:Okay. Belinda, I tell you what -- how
   we can characterise this discussion. It is the
   antithesis of what I was assured by the chief exec
   and chairman, which is -- our work, we pledge to
   you -- because I said I wouldn't take on the job
   unless they agreed to this -- is to seek the truth
   as to what has happened. All right? The
   characteristics of the conversations we are having
   are one of litigants, one against the other, trying
   to defend their case. It's perfectly acceptable and
   perfectly normal. But a search for the truth would
   have been far less an effort to protect the
   organisation from an attack but more a sort of
   volunteering of what the entire background was.
   We've looked at all the cases, this is what we found
   they did, this is where we went right, this is where
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




   we went wrong. And, you know, that isn't what we've
   got here. We're in an antagonistic situation,
   frankly, and you are asking us to pose questions,
   and they will be carefully answered, rather than
   what I was assured, which is that we would research
   the situation and tell you what we've discovered.

BELINDA CROWE:    And that --

RON WARMINGTON: Without you having to ask individual,
    carefully worded questions which we will very
    carefully answer.

BELINDA CROWE: So, sorry, the -- so if we come back to
    what Ian has just said he thought the working group
    asked, it was for Second Sight to ask the questions
    of Post Office that it wanted the answer to. So
    that's what the working group said. So Second Sight
    is asking those questions and Post Office is
    answering them. It is not about -- this is not
    antagonistic. It's not about not getting to the --
    not getting to the truth of a particular case,
    and -- but I think it's just -- so it's not impeding
    you in any way, it's just trying to come up with
    something that is helpful to the applicant. But
    what you haven't provided is evidence that would
    have allowed Post Office even to get into that
    situation. And so -- and so I suppose the point, as
    far as I'm concerned, is you are perfectly at
    liberty to disagree with anything that Post Office
    has said or shown you, but the Post Office needs to
    see what the evidence for that is, as do the
    applicants to the court(?).

IAN HENDERSON:Belinda, those are all perfectly
   legitimate points for Post Office to make but really
   they fall more into the -- sort of the category of
   substantive, sort of, comments, which is the next
   stage in this process. What you seem to be seeking
   to do at the moment is very substantially, you know,
   move the -- sort of, the goal posts.

        We have been totally transparent about the steps
    leading up to the finalisation of part 2. We've
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    discussed it at the working group on a number of
    occasions. Yes, we did have this face-to-face
    meeting on four/five, sort of, questions. It's
    really very late in the day to start raising
    fundamental, sort of, questions about whether or
    not, you know, this is going to be of benefit to
    applicants that are we doing the right thing.

ANDY: Just (unclear), Ian, is we understood, rightly or
    wrongly, that -- originally this was called
    a thematic issue or that it was to draw up thematic
    issues to assist the applicant, and what we're
    saying is that a number of the topics within the
    (unclear). So we're not trying to change the
    objective, we're not moving the goal posts, we're
    simply saying that that was the objective set at the
    beginning and we're questioning and asking: is there
    a way that we can get the report better that
    actually hits those (unclear). At the moment, on a
    few of the (unclear) -- few sections, it is missing
    the mark. It's not adding anything. There's no
    value in it, most of the sections, and the P & A
    section is a disaster.

IAN HENDERSON:But, Andy, make those points when we get
   to the substantive sort of comment period, and when
   you're -- you know, very seriously, sort of, looked
   at those. And yes, we probably would be prepared
   to, sort of, sit down and have a -- you know,
   a face-to-face, sort of, discussion on those. But
   we want to get to that point -- you know, to use
   Tony's phrase, can we move this forward?

ANDY: (Unclear) need to find -- why can't we have the
    discussion now? It's going to happen --

RON WARMINGTON: Well, Andy, Andy, you're taking the now
    well aired but not resolved yet pensions and
    allowances issue, you know, we know that -- we know
    both the Joy Taylor, the Nalik(?) case and the
    famous Downey(?) and all that stuff, we know that --
    or we've got one or two others that have gone in, so
    we can -- we can look at those, and others that are
    yet to come in, in terms of both the CQR and the --
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




   more seriously, the POIR. We've got to be able
   to -- if you want to help the applicants, what the
   applicants need is an answer to the fundamental
   question: why was I accused of theft, dragged
   away -- in one case literally -- in handcuffs, and
   my life was trashed?

BELINDA CROWE: Ron, can we just keep the language not
    emotional, please.

RON WARMINGTON: I'm saying this is what they are asking.
    I'm relaying with -- through the -- a buffer of
    improving and reducing the language from some of
    what's been said to us to something that's quite
    calm.

        They're saying: you know, my life was then
    thrashed, I was told this was being investigated.
    In many cases months, sometimes a year later, on the
    courtroom steps, the threat to the charge was
    dropped, the entire prosecution was dropped, and
    I don't know why. They just told me it was dropped.
    But in the meantime I'd gone bust and I've lost, you
    know, my livelihood.

ANDY:   This is one of the challenges we have in --

RON WARMINGTON: Yeah, and now, you know, we -- if you
    want to be helpful, we help them answer that
    question.

ANDY: -- in there is a number of -- a number of legal
    issues around -- around the contract and the process
    of (unclear) contracts --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

ANDY: -- the contractual obligations that have been
    missed, prosecution processes. There's -- there's
    a number of quite technical (unclear) legal issues
    there, which is --

RON WARMINGTON:   And some of those are off --
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




ANDY:   -- it's dangerous to --

RON WARMINGTON: -- some of those are off piste for us.
    I perfectly understand that, Andy. But I've had
    a conversation with --

ANDY: -- as you can imagine why you terminate someone's
    contract is a very case-specific (unclear) the
    reason you will stop the prosecution.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

ANDY:  You know, and we would -- as I say, we will
    address it on a case-by-case basis, but can you go
    back to the point is there a genuine overarching
    issue here that needs to come out in the report?

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes, exactly.

ANDY:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: So I think -- so this is not an attempt
    to get you to anything out of the report.
    Absolutely. And it's not an attempt --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah, right.

BELINDA CROWE: -- to fetter your findings in any way,
    it's an attempt to assist in making this as useful
    a document as it can be, bearing in mind where we
    are in the process, but --

RON WARMINGTON: Right, Belinda, thank you for that. We
    understand that. But let me get the sort of
    objective clear. We, as investigators, are driven
    by one objective above all else, in fact overrides
    everything, and that is to get truth. And we report
    the truth.

        I don't care whether it helps the applicant, the
    mediator, Post Office, Alan Bates, Uncle bloody Tom
    Cobley. I don't care who it helps. Our job is to
    report what we have found and put it as fairly and
    precisely as we can, being the truth.
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




       Now, I have no objective to help the applicants
   on this or, for that matter, really, the mediators.
   The purpose of this is to cover the points that have
   been raised by, you know, several people -- and,
   sort of, several in our mind means, like, ten or
   more, which is why we were on the borderline when it
   came to motor vehicle licence issues, on which very
   few people have complained. But the point is to try
   and get to the truth of what's happening. And where
   we don't yet know, as on some of these issues that
   are -- have got the four -- you know, the four items
   -- the enquiries are continuing, which includes ATMs
   of course, we -- you know, the alternative is to not
   put anything in there at all. And we do not think
   that is the truth. The truth is enquiries are
   continuing.

BELINDA CROWE:So on the question of what the report is
   for, that -- as far as I'm concerned, that's an
   issue for the working group, because I can't answer
   that. I have a view and I think it's to assist the
   applicant and mediator. You clearly have
   a different view.

        The -- I think the -- getting to the truth is an
    interesting point, but I'm not sure that actually --

RON WARMINGTON:   Interesting?

BELINDA CROWE: -- the lack of facts and evidence and the
    lack of findings in here actually takes us very much
    further. So that's, in part, my concern.

       There are a number of areas where Second Sight
   has said many subpostmasters -- so we can deal with
   -- with questions about -- what we're talking about
   here is -- is a number of applicants and a number of
   applicants within the -- within the scheme, as
   opposed to subpostmasters -- well, not all of them
   are existing subpostmasters, but I think that's
   probably a (unclear) of detail -- have raised these
   issues with us, but there's no indication of whether
   or not they have been investigated, whether or not
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




   they have been fully reviewed and, therefore, from
   the point of view of the applicants reading this,
   they may feel that the issues are far more
   widespread than they really are and, again, with my
   "Does this help the applicant?" distinction,
   I wonder whether or not it is --

RON WARMINGTON:   I don't care if it helps.


BELINDA CROWE: -- because it's not currently clear to me
    actually what the findings are.

IAN HENDERSON:But, Belinda, again, all valid points,
   very happy to, sort of, consider those when we get
   to the substantive comment phase, but, you know,
   what we're trying to do is move this forward in
   accordance with the instructions from the working
   group. And we're happy to be flexible in terms of
   that but, I mean, what we had in mind was: receive
   your comments on simple sort of factual errors, we
        then update the report, issue it -- re-issue it
    will




   and invite comments from both you and JFSA. And we
   want to be -- we need to be very careful that we're
   not seen to be preferring one against the other.

        So, you know, that's another potential issue
    regarding, sort of --

ANDY: No, no, no, no, no, sorry, can I jump in there.
    That is a terrible statement to make. You must in
    some cases prefer one against the other. Your job
    is to assess the relative strength of the comments
    and go with whichever one you think is correct. And
    if you believe that one party is correct, you should
    go with it. There should be no preference as to
    where the comments come from, you should make
    decisions based on facts there.

IAN HENDERSON: Andy, I agree. What I meant by
    preferring one against the other is, for example,
    agreeing to a face-to-face meeting. Now, you know,
    you will be aware that there have been a number of,
    sort of, tribunals and -- and other similar sort of
    bodies that have come unstuck for exactly that
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    reason.

ANDY:   Yeah, you --

RON WARMINGTON: Andy, I understood what Ian meant, that
    he was not --

ANDY:   Maybe I misunderstood him.

RON WARMINGTON:Yeah, he was not talking to the
   substance, it was in terms of the process, that
   we've got to be even-handed in terms of listening
   with both ears for the same amount of time to both
   parties and then making our decision. We understand
   that completely, Andy. But thank you for pointing
   it out.

BELINDA CROWE: So there is no difficulty with Alan
    attending a meeting and that was -- so -- so Tony
    suggested to you that you invited him along, and
    I understand it was an open invitation to him.

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: And that's a very sensible way to
    proceed, in my view. So it's not a question of
    preferring one against the other.

        And also, you know, I understand your process,
    Ian, but there are, in the view of the Post Office,
    in the view of Post Office, a number of issues that,
    as Andy said previously, are inextricably linked.
    It's quite difficult just to say, "Oh, well, you
    said five and we think it's six", because in actual
    fact it's more substantive than that.

        And also there are a number of issues that --
    there are two issues specifically that are just out
    of scope. The issue of the contract is not within
    scope. It's not (unclear) an associated issue.
    It's only relevant to the extent that it provides
    the benchmark against which the actions of the
    Post Office and applicant should be assessed.
                                                              SSL0000120
                                                            SSL0000120




IAN HENDERSON: But, again, Belinda, that's a substantive
    point which Post Office is perfectly entitled to
    make. When we get to that stage --

RON WARMINGTON:   That's a trap.

IAN HENDERSON: -- we will consider it and we will update
    our report, you know --

RON WARMINGTON:   Put that in writing and see what
    happens.

IAN HENDERSON:    -- as we see fit.

        I mean, what we want to do is just move this
    forward as quickly as possible, ideally following
    the -- sort of the linear process that we have been
    asked to do by the working group.

BELINDA CROWE:    Which was to sit down with Post Office.

IAN HENDERSON:    Which we have already done.

BELINDA CROWE: Yes, but not to discuss the report,
    because the Post Office didn't have sight of it, so
    it's -- and it was our right --

IAN HENDERSON:    That was not the requirement, Belinda.

       Belinda, the requirement was to discuss the
   outstanding questions that had been on the table for
   some months and it was an attempt I think by Tony
   to, you know, bring closure to those outstanding
   items which were perceived as holding up the report.

ANDY:  So what you're saying, Ian, and not going to go
    through the history, but what you're saying is now
    is not the right time for Post Office to make
    comments on what you call substance and you won't
    take those comments at this time?

IAN HENDERSON:  Well, what I would like to do is move to
    the next -- I mean, we have -- we have gone public to
    the extent of, you know, agreeing with the working
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




    group what process we will follow. We're already
    behind that sort of timetable, you know, which
    disappoints me, but it's maybe not a big surprise
    bearing    mind the complexity of the issues and so on.

            in
        What I'd like to do is very quickly, or as
    quickly as possible, receive what I am still calling
    your factual comments. We will then issue an
    updated version take account of those comments.
    That is when both yourselves and JFSA will have an
    opportunity to make substantive sort of comments and
    we will then move towards finalising the report.

        What we had envisaged is that all of those
    comments would be in writing for the reasons that
    we've touched on. We are certainly not ruling out
    the possibility of a face-to-face sort of meeting,
    and I think that's something that we would like to
    think about, sort of, offline. But I'm certainly
    not rejecting it.

RON WARMINGTON:   No, exactly.

ANDY: That sounds fair. However, just to be clear
    then, you're saying that you won't take substantive
    comments from us at this stage?

RON WARMINGTON: Well, not on the phone, Andy, will we,
    obviously? Matters of huge principle, like whether
    the contract -- the comments on the contract are out
    of scope are very minor. They have been on the
    thematic spreadsheet as T16 for the last two years.
    That is something that -- clearly we're not going to
    remove it based on a phone call. Why would we?

IAN HENDERSON:I don't know if this helps. I mean, if
   we want to call it something else, you know, rather
   than "factual comments", if you want to call it,
   say, "preliminary comments" or something like that,
   we would be happy -- you know, we would be prepared
   to accept that. All we want is something to happen
   that enables us to at least move to the next stage
   with an updated report and we can then sort of feel
   that at least we've delivered on our part of the
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




    bargain rather than it all falling into a rather --
    I don't want call it a black hole but a rather
    unclear pot in terms of what the status is and
    what's happening and -- and so on.

RON WARMINGTON: Belinda, what was the second out of
    scope issue that you alluded to? You said there
    were two.

BELINDA CROWE:    Criminal matters.

RON WARMINGTON:   Pardon?

BELINDA CROWE:    Criminal --

RON WARMINGTON: Oh, criminal.    Oh, criminal.   Yeah,
    okay, okay, okay.

IAN HENDERSON:On that point, what we're differentiating
   between is the criminal process, or even the
   prosecution sort of process, and the underlying,
   sort of, evidence. It's a bit like, you know, the
   concept that there is no property in a witness. We
   are looking at the underlying, sort of, evidence
   that can, of course, be used by either party for
   a variety of, sort of, purposes, and we are most
   definitely, sort of, commenting on that, sort of,
   evidence. What we are not doing is trying to, sort
   of, put ourselves in place of, you know, the courts
   or even the decision-maker within Post Office, you
   know, relating to the decision to prosecute. We are
   focusing primarily -- exclusively on the underlying,
   sort of, evidence and forming views based on that.

ANDY: That's unfair, Ian, on that line then. I don't
    really see where section 22 would fit which is
    a question on -- which is a whole section dedicated
    to the investigation process but perhaps we can
    (unclear) seems to out of scope on that --

IAN HENDERSON: Well, again, happy to, you know, have
    a dialogue sort of on that.

BELINDA CROWE:    So can I just ask you a general question.
                                                               SSL0000120
                                                             SSL0000120




    In these areas where you are -- not a comment on the
    report but in these areas where you are commenting
    on legal matters, are you taking legal advice?

IAN HENDERSON:   No.

BELINDA CROWE:   Right.   Okay.

IAN HENDERSON:We're attempting to comment on the
   evidence. I mean, you may be characterising them as
   sort of legal sort of matters --

BELINDA CROWE: So the subpostmasters' contract and the
    balance of risk is entirely a legal matter but not
    only it's legal, but it's commercially legal.

IAN HENDERSON: Well, I certainly agree that it's
    a commercial sort of matter but it's an issue that
    has been raised by a number, in fact quite
    a significant number, of SPMRs.

       And why do you think that is out of scope?

BELINDA CROWE:Because the matter of -- and Chris has
   made this point to you on numerous occasions and you
   may or may not agree with it. But the contractual
   relationship between the Post Office and an agent is
   based on -- a relationship between a principal and
   the agent is a legal matter. The contract, as you
   say, is quite long. It's a balanced legal document
   and just to pick out various bits of it and comment
   on it seems to me to be not a legal approach and nor
   does it contain any analysis as to why the
   apportionment of obligations which are on both
   parties are not appropriate or unlawful.

IAN HENDERSON:  Well, if I can answer that question in
    a slightly sort of different way. I mean, the way that
    is the first sort of came up as raised by a number of
    subpostmasters was actually, "I've never seen the
    contract". You know, I signed a four-page sort of
    document and that was the most that I was ever sort of
    provided with. Now, we know what Post Office's
    position on that is but that, you know, is the
                                                                SSL0000120
                                                              SSL0000120




    information being provided to us by a large number of
    SPRs. So that, I think, I hope you would agree, is
    a perfectly legitimate sort of issue, you know, to deal
    with in our part 2 report.

ANDY: That's a fair point, Ian. Again, I don't know
    whether that's a general issue. It seems to be on
    a case-by-case basis whether they signed the
    contract or not. I think we have to be very -- this
    is the risk of straying into the legal field here,
    is that -- I'm sorry, this is with my lawyer(?) hat
    which I try not to do. But because it's
    a principal/agency relationship, it actually doesn't
    really matter whether they sign the contract not
    because most of the principals are defined by the
    common law anyway and, in a sense, the postmaster
    contract simply codifies all those rules. This is
    the problem if we start going down this rabbit hole,
    there are layers upon layers of legal arguments.

RON WARMINGTON: Yeah. Andy, one of the sections of
    course we address is the famous section dealing with
    the -- in which instances the POID (the Post Office
    Investigation Department) is deployed, which ties
    together both the first and last sections of the
    report, both of which you're challenging.

        The point that we made there, and it has been
    made multiple to us by, in some cases, some of the
    more experienced and sophisticated applicants,
    particularly those that have -- you know, we've got
    airline pilots, chartered accountants among the
    population of 150 -- particularly those that have
    worked in big companies that had in their own mind
    an expectation of an availability of an
    investigation support function which, under the
    contract, which they had not seen, was never to be
    made available. Now, is that not relevant to the
    cases? They think it is.

ANDY: I think there is room in the part 2 report to
    (unclear) about the various parts of the contract
    and some (unclear) --
                                                                 SSL0000120
                                                               SSL0000120




RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah.

ANDY: -- I'm not trying to -- you know, in our
    experience, having read the CQRs, the cases change
    their focus on the following bits of the
    subpostmasters' contract (unclear) your point.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yeah, yeah.

ANDY: Then it's going to go on then to commenting about
   and this is fair or not reasonable or not lawful or
   not, because I think we're in a dangerous ground
   there, especially because -- and this is probably
   self-preservation for you guys -- is that you might
   find some of the applicants then start taking that
   as scripture and relying on what you said as legal
   advice and that's -- well, you don't want to go
   there.

        So that's why we just -- there's a line to be
    drawn and these are the legal provisions that are
    engaged in the matters we've seen in a neutral
    fashion. It's a step further we can go back to but
    then you're dealing with a Horizon Issues, you're
    actually doing a legal analysis which (unclear) for
    reasons we've already gone through.

IAN HENDERSON: Again, all fair points, Andy, and we're
    happy to take them on board, you know, if you make
    them a part of the substantive comments.

ANDY: Sorry, I'm unclear.       I said when do you want them
    because, you know --

IAN HENDERSON: Well, if we're moving away from the quick
   response on  factual sort of errors, are you inclined
   to move towards what I've described as, you know,
   preliminary headline sort of comments just to help
   us sort of move forward to exposing an updated
   report for more formal sort of comments? Then
   obviously the sooner we get to that point, you know,
   the happier I can imagine everybody will be.

BELINDA CROWE:    So what we will do is let you have our
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    comments in response to the request of this --

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: If we stray into matters that you
    consider to be substantive that we consider them to
    be (unclear) because our comments would be -- our
    comments, they will be preliminary comments, to take
    your term, Ian, and you will have them -- we will
    attempt to get them to you within the next couple of
    days.

IAN HENDERSON:    Very happy with that, Belinda.   Thank
    you.


BELINDA CROWE:Okay. The points that I just want to
   make sure that I'm not leaving this call without you
   being clear on the point that our concern is that,
   as drafted at the moment, this falls short of what
   we think is helpful for the applicants and therefore
   what we were expecting, and that was reason that we
   wanted to have the -- that was the reason that we
   wanted to have the call because what we didn't want
   to do was to send some comments and then afterwards,
   in a conversation with the working group, make those
   points. I wanted to have that conversation with
   you, and also just make the point that there are
   a number of issues, absolutely accepting what you
   say, Ian, about the fact that you haven't finished
   doing all of this work yet, there are a number of
   issues that had been previously dealt with and, in
   view of the that Second Sight have been engaged for
   a considerable period of time and has been paid
   a considerable amount of money, there are some areas
   where we would expected your thinking and your
   evidence and your investigations to be more advanced
   than they are.

IAN HENDERSON: Fine. And, again, perfectly legitimate
    points to make and, you know, we will try to address
    them.

RON WARMINGTON: One final point, Belinda. When you say,
    and you've used the phrase a lot in this telephone
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    call, really coming from the position of is this
    helpful to the applicant, I think I'm clear on
    whether you are distinguishing between the entirety
    of the document, which is I would hope helpful to
    somebody but I haven't -- we haven't put a big label
    in front of our desk saying with regard to every
    sentence: "is this particular sentence helpful to
    the applicant?" Have we done that? No. Would we
    propose to do that? No.

        Again, our purpose is to summarise where we are
    on each of the -- certainly the thematic issues,
    with the exception of the thematic issues which we
    have seen lots of comments on but which we are
    regarding as out of scope and one of those hasn't
    even been mentioned yet. One is the criminal
    matters, criminal prosecution process issue, and the
    other is the several number of comments have been
    made about what people are clearly referring to as
    the sort of black ops team of peculiar practice in
    terms of the selling of their branches. Pardon?

BELINDA CROWE:    Sorry, that's the Rudkin case.

RON WARMINGTON: No, no, no, that's a separate black ops
    matter. That was where people are saying there was
    some skullduggery going on in connection with the
    closure of my branch and doing me out of my
    compensation payment. Now, we have not dealt --

ANDY:   That is out of scope, isn't it?

BELINDA CROWE: That is absolutely out of -- absolutely
    out of scope.

RON WARMINGTON: Of course it is, and that's why it's not
    in the report.

BELINDA CROWE: I think the -- I think what would be
    helpful is to understand, but we will make this
    point in writing is --

RON WARMINGTON: By the way, sorry, in that I readily
    agreed to it being out of scope, that does conflict
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    with the mission which was that we were to
    investigate every issue raised by the applicants
    and --

IAN HENDERSON: And, Ron, probably more important is what
    comes after that with a view to achieving, sort of,
    closure, you know, between applicants and the
    Post Office. So I think we need to be very careful
    about overusing out of scope --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

IAN HENDERSON: -- sort of, concerns because we're
    potentially sort of shooting ourselves in the foot.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.


BELINDA CROWE:So I think my understanding was that it
   was the mediation that was supposed to achieve
   closure. If the mediation doesn't achieve closure,
   then if there is an issue to be decided but also
   I think one of the reasons that there is a (unclear)
   here, and it's an important one too, that if there
   are areas that are areas that Second Sight are not
   qualified to investigate, then that might be an
   issue that Post Office needs to consider, but
   Post Office needs to consider how those matters are
   investigated because -- you know, had the (unclear)
   seen to look at criminal process and procedure,
   then, with the best will in the world, I'm not sure
   the Post Office would have engaged a firm of
   forensic accountants to do that, likewise, with the
   contract and anything else that might be potentially
   out of scope.

        So this was -- this whole thing came about as
    a result of subpostmasters considering that there
    was a problem with Horizon. The Horizon and
    associated issues that we've defined, you defined it
    with input from the Post Office, and that was the
    definition in your interim report. The application
    form specifically requires you to say whether or not
    the issues they are raising are Horizon-related
    issues and so, if there are any issues that are
                                                            SSL0000120
                                                          SSL0000120




   outside of that, then Post Office, I am sure, would
   be very happy to look at them and consider them.
   But they do not fall within the scope of this which
   is one of the reasons why Horizon was specifically
   mentioned on the application form, to ensure that
   the subsequent investigation remained within scope.
   Otherwise, it would have been "is there anything
   about the Post Office that you would like to
   complain about?" but it wasn't.

IAN HENDERSON:Belinda, I mean, this is probably no more
   than an observation at this stage. It does seem
   very late in the day to start raising out of scope
   sort of issues bearing in mind the number of
   meetings that we've had; the number of sort of draft
   reports; you know, the CQRs that have been sort of
   reviewed. You know, I don't recall anyone raising
   in a substantive way, you know, this applicant is
   touching on issues that are out of scope. What we
   consistently have been asked to do is take the CQR
   and deal with it. In the formal appointment letter,
   yes, there were -- there was at least one matter
   that was specifically identified as being out of
   scope and that was in a criminal prosecution, and so
   on.

       But it's the first time, as far as I can recall,
   that there has been any serious attempt to extend
   out of scope to include all these other topics.

BELINDA CROWE: I think this has never come up before,
    Ian, because the scheme was set up to investigate
    allegations related to Horizon and associated
    issues.

IAN HENDERSON:But if you think back to some of the
   face-to-face meetings, you know, we spent a lot of
   time sort of talking about the contract, whether or
   not people sort of, you know, sort of received that,
   whether or not there was investigative support being
   sort of provided, and so on. Nobody has previously
   sort of cried foul in relation to any of those sort
   of discussions and even suggested that we shouldn't
   be looking into those matters.
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




ANDY: We're not crying foul now. We're (unclear)
    raised a inside the scope and just too many
    additional signed the contract (unclear).

IAN HENDERSON:    Yes.

ANDY:  It's the questions around (unclear) community
    closure programme, the lawfulness or not or
    reasonableness of the contract and the prosecution
    process are the three key areas which we say are out
    of scope. As far as I'm aware, I don't think we've
    ever discussed those in a detailed working group.
    Yes, they have been raised in some of the CQRs, but
    they've also been raised on a sort of whole host of
    (unclear) in scope, and your CRRs have, quite
    rightly I think, stayed off those out-of-scope
    issues so far. I think the reason we're raising it
    now is this is the first time out-of-scope issues
    have appeared in the report because a few of them
    are in the part 2 report and that's the only reason.

RON WARMINGTON:   I mean, Andy, you can believe that we,
   as a team in Second Sight, have agonised over some
   of this stuff, you know, really seriously trying to
   get to the right course of action and, yes, there
   will be one or two mediators who will be puzzled
   when faced with an applicant screaming blue murder
   about the black ops closure of his lovely beloved
   branch and we said, "Well, what's Second Sight got
   to be about that?" The answer is nothing. We
   didn't even mention it.

ANDY:  That's fine because potentially, Ron, what we're
    saying is the (unclear) burden on us --

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

ANDY:  -- because ultimately it would be slightly
    foolish of Post Office to go into a mediation
    unprepared for an EQA like the one you just had.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes, exactly.
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




ANDY: You could hold the mediation below the waterline
    before you can --

RON WARMINGTON:   Exactly.

ANDY:   -- leave that one with us, we'll deal with it.

RON WARMINGTON: Exactly, and equally -- and Belinda and
    I have had this conversation before, it predates the
    involvement of any of you, and that is that I'm
    crystal clear about job 1, if you like, pre-dating
    the mediation scheme entirely which was that the
    MPs, in hiring us, shortlisted firms they said they
    wanted -- you know, they were looking for firms that
    had dealt with matters where people had been wrongly
    accused.

       They said that their primary concern -- and this
   was voiced principally by James Arbuthnot but echoed
   by others like Letwin and Andrew Bridgen, Mike Wood
   and others. Their communication with us was: the
   most important thing that we want to find out is
   have there been any miscarriages of justice. Now,
   obviously one can take that to mean in civil cases
   or criminal, and we have made it abundantly clear
   that we are accountants, not lawyers, and that we
   would consider it contemptuous of the court process
   of England to say, "Well, Ian Henderson thinks this
   was a wrongful prosecution". There's no way we're
   going to do that. We would be -- we're too modest
   to do that.

IAN HENDERSON:    Ron, just to --

RON WARMINGTON:   And we're not qualified to do that.

IAN HENDERSON:    -- you're potentially muddling job 1
    with --

RON WARMINGTON: Yes, I am but I want -- exactly. I'm
    not muddling it but, yes, I'm potentially muddling
    it, Ian, because it must be clear to you that we
    have clarified in our own minds the serious
    distinction between the part 1 job or, sorry, the
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




    job 1 and the mediation job where it is not relevant
    and it is out of scope.

BELINDA CROWE: So, Ron, what you said to me was that job
    1 was in the cupboard. MPs haven't engaged you.
    Let's be clear on that.

RON WARMINGTON:   Pardon?

BELINDA CROWE:    You have not been engaged by MPs.

RON WARMINGTON: No, I know. Exactly. We were
    interviewed by MPs and Post Office.

BELINDA CROWE: You have said in the cupboard. As I said
    to you, if you are doing any additional work that is
    outside of that letter of engagement, then
    Post Office do need to have visibility of that,
    unless you're charging somebody else for it.

RON WARMINGTON: No, we're not charging anybody else for
    it. In using the analogy I did, I said that hat is
    in the wardrobe and is gathering dust. But, you
    know, clearly, as we go through in juggling and
    taking decisions on what is in scope and out of
    scope in regard to the mediation job, we can't
    forget the other hat that's in the cupboard. That's
    all.

BELINDA CROWE:So -- and I think my point in relation tc
   that is there has to be -- we talked about
   transparency and there has to be transparency in
   relation to that. What you said to me, Ron (because
   I don't forget much either), what you said to me was
   that what you were doing for MPs was in the
   cupboard, but also there were things that you that
   were said in meetings between -- meetings with you
   and them and meetings that Post Office didn't
   attend. Now, Post Office needs to have transparency
   of whether or not you are doing anything else and,
   if you are, whether or not you're charging the
   Post Office for it. That's my only point. If you
   do start to have an issue where hat 1 comes out of
   the cupboard --
                                                             SSL0000120
                                                           SSL0000120




RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE:-- then Post Office needs to be aware of
   that and also, if there is any lack of clarification
   about what that actually involves, and whether or
   not that involves you -- Post Office did not engage
   you to look at criminal matters.

RON WARMINGTON:   Yes.

BELINDA CROWE: And so if you start to look at those
    things, then we do need to have a conversation about
    whether or not that is appropriate and whether or
    not you're doing that for Post Office or you're
    doing that for somebody else. So I think we can
    park that one for the moment.

RON WARMINGTON:Well, the fact is that until the
   mediation scheme was launched, Belinda, the work
   that we were doing was job 1 and Post Office was
   paying for it because my understanding is it had
   been instructed to do so by the minister.

ANDY:   Yes, and we referred to the scheme.

RON WARMINGTON:   Correct, and that point we took --

IAN HENDERSON: Belinda, I'm very sorry -- it's Ian --
    I did tell you that I would have to leave roundabout
    now.

BELINDA CROWE:    You did.

IAN HENDERSON:    I've got another appointment.

BELINDA CROWE: You did, and I'm sorry that we've kept
    you so long, Ian. We will -- just so for absolute
    transparency and clarity, Post Office will send you
    its preliminary comments within the next couple of
    days and, if they are beyond what you consider in
    terms of the process that you're thinking of, beyond
    factual, then they are there and on the table as
    part of the next stage of the process in terms of
                                                                 SSL0000120
                                                               SSL0000120




    the way that you describe it, Ian.       Does that work?

IAN HENDERSON: That's helpful, Belinda, and I'm happy to
    proceed on that basis.

BELINDA CROWE:Okay. So everything that we have
   discussed will come to you, either by way of our
   preliminary comments -- so there's no question about
   this being not transparent. It will come to you by
   way of our preliminary comments and any subsequent
   comments that we make. So you don't -- don't feel
   that you need to do anything in terms of -- you
   know, we will set this out in writing -- there's
   absolutely no problem with that -- so you don't feel
   in any way compromised. Is that okay?

IAN HENDERSON: Yes.        Happy with that, Belinda.   Thank
    you very much.

BELINDA CROWE: Okay. Excellent. Sorry that's taken
    rather longer than I would have hoped but we will do
    that.

IAN HENDERSON:    Great.

RON WARMINGTON:   Superb.

BELINDA CROWE:    Okay.

RON WARMINGTON:   Okay.

BELINDA CROWE:    Thank you very much.

ANDY:   Thanks everyone.

RON WARMINGTON:   Thank you.     Bye.

                          (Recording ends)
