WITN04810100
WITN04810100

Witness Name: Mark Joseph Jarosz
Statement No.: WITN0481_01

Exhibits: WITN0481_01/1 — WITN0481_01/6
Dated: 9 August 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF MARK JOSEPH JAROSZ

|, MR MARK JOSEPH JAROSZ, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION

1. | am currently a Lead Domain Architect at Fujitsu Services Limited (“Fujitsu”), a
position that | have held since August 2017. | am not involved in the Horizon project
at present, and have had no involvement in it since 2012.

2. This witness statement is made on behaif of Fujitsu to assist the Post Office Horizon
IT Inquiry with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request provided to Fujitsu on 11
March 2022 and a series of follow-up questions provided to me by the Inquiry on 1
July 2022 (the “Request’). It is based on my direct knowledge of relevant matters.

3. The topics set out in the Inquiry’s Request that | am able to respond to relate to events
that took place a long time ago, and more than 22 years ago in many cases. | have
addressed, in particular, my involvement in the design and development of the
network aspects of the Legacy Horizon system in the period prior to the national

rollout, as well as my role as a security architect on Horizon Online in the period 2010

Page 1 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

to 2012. | have tried to remember these events as best | can, but have not always
been able to do so.

4. Where | have seen documents relevant to the Inquiry’s Request for the purpose of
preparing this statement or where | have referred to documents, these documents
are referred to using references WITN0481_01/1 — WITN0481_01/6 and are listed in
the index accompanying this statement. To the extent that these documents have not
already been provided to the Inquiry, they are exhibited to this statement.

BACKGROUND

5. | joined the ICL group in January 1983 and eventually became employed by ICL
Pathway Limited (“ICL Pathway’). Prior to that, | worked for a customer of ICL
Pathway as a computer programmer for four years. | joined the ICL group as a
customer support executive for a range of computers that ICL Pathway sold at the
time, though ended up learning about networks from a more experienced colleague
on one of the projects that | was working on.

6. In most IT systems, there is typically a need for a network solution to provide
connectivity between computer systems (servers / workstations) and appliances
within and across multiple locations. In the network context, performance modelling
predicts a range of network measures informing the selection of components and
technology to meet the IT system’s required service levels.

7. My involvement in the Horizon project began in around 1995, and | remained involved
until around 2012. My roles during this period were:

a. 1995 — 1996: Sizing & Performance Consultant

b. 1996 — 2010: Solution Architect — Networking

Page 2 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

c. 2010 — 2012: Solution Architect — Security

8. | reviewed a slide deck titled ‘HNG-X Network Architecture’ dated 23 March 2007
(WITN0481_ 01/1) that | prepared in order to refresh my memory about my roles on
the Horizon project.

9. For the entire period that | worked on the Horizon project, | was involved in the
network aspects of the Horizon system, including those applications that directly
utilised the network, with my role changing to mainly cover security from 2010 to 2012.
This statement is given on that basis.

THE BID FOR THE HORIZON PROJECT

10.As | stated above, my involvement with the Horizon project began in around 1995,
around the time the project team was bidding for the project. At the time, people with
my background were generally made available to projects on assignment. Once my
work completed on a project, my team lead or | would find another assignment for
me. | was in the final few weeks of my role on my previous project, and | heard that
some colleagues in the same team were starting work on a bid for the Post Office
and they needed someone who could do performance modelling.

11.1 went to ICL Pathway’s office in Feltham to meet with the Horizon bid team. My
recollection is that the team was Liam Foley, Tony Oppenheim, Dave Cooke, Dave
Hollingsworth, and Tony Hayward. Liam Foley was the Sales Director and he
managed the team. Tony Oppenheim dealt with the commercials. Dave Hollingsworth
was the Chief Architect. | recall that he, Dave Cooke and Tony Hayward were the

main people working on the bid documentation.

Page 3 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

12.When | joined the project, a number of decisions on the Horizon project's networking
solution had already been made. | was not involved in these decisions.

a. First, it had been decided that the network supporting Horizon would run on
ISDN. ISDN is a form of “dial-on-demand” technology. With a “dial on demand”
network, a connection is established only when needed. if the Data Centre
Router tries to send out data destined for a branch and the connection is off,
then the router will automatically establish (hence dial) a connection, send the
information, and close the connection when no more data is flowing (an “idle
timeout’). Similarly, an appropriate Horizon counter in a branch (specifically,
the ISDN card in that counter) will behave in a similar manner in terms of
sending traffic. The key advantage of ISDN was its cost effectiveness. The
alternative, at the time, was to use “always-on” leased lines, which could cost
several thousand pounds a year each.

b. Second, it had been decided that a messaging product called Riposte, which
had been developed by the Escher Group (“Escher”) would be used. A
messaging product ensures that information is synchronised across an IT
system. In Horizon’s case, Riposte carried messages both between Horizon
branch counters in the same branch (for instance, about transactions) and
between the branch counters and the central data centres in Wigan and

Bootle.

Page 4 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

13.In my first few weeks on the Horizon project, | formed a number of views about the
decisions that had been made prior to me joining the Horizon project:

a. Afundamental aspect of ISDN technology is that it relies on phone calls as the
means of transferring data between the branch and the data centre. This
means there could be a risk of too many phone calls occurring at once, causing
an overload. However, since most Post Office branch counter transactions
were Offline (in the sense that they did not require network connectivity to the
data centre at the time of being carried out), there would be significantly
reduced call volumes and, therefore, lower risk with an ISDN solution.

b. The ISDN service was not universal, therefore an alternative network solution
was needed for Post Office branches that could not get ISDN service (e.g. in
rural areas).

c. Comprehensive capacity modelling, which entails analysis of the volume of
use that the network may receive (for example, in terms of the number of ISDN
calls that might be made, the duration of calls, or the number of concurrent
calls), was needed to specify solution components for ISDN call handing to
support business volumes and to validate whether ISDN provided sufficient
bandwidth for the busiest branches to synchronise transactions. This formed
part of my role as a sizing and performance consultant, as | explain at
paragraph 15 below.

14.Liam Foley generally managed the relationship with Escher. Early in my involvement

with the bid, he and | went to a meeting near Gatwick airport to meet Michael Murphy,

Page 5 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

the President of Escher at the time. This was really an interview for Escher to decide
if they were happy to work with me on the network performance modelling.

15.1 was brought onto the bid team as a Sizing and Performance Consultant. Dave
Hollingsworth was the Chief Architect of the solution at the time, and | effectively
reported into him. The role of a Sizing and Performance Consultant is to do the
following:

a. Analyse business volumes to determine the capacity and performance
requirements that IT services and infrastructure needed to meet (in my case
this was in relation to the network aspects of Horizon)

b. Create models that predict the performance and capacity of the operational
service based on the proposed solution design and the requirements the
solution needed to meet, which enables those involved in solution design to
test their designs.

c. Influence solution component selection and the quantity of equipment required
based on the results of modelling, so as to ensure that the predicted
performance and capacity of the solution meets the defined targets.

16. My initial role was to work with Escher to do performance modelling on Riposte. At
the time of the bid, we expected the Horizon solution would be in about 20,000
branches, with an average of two counters per branch, ranging from one counter to
25 counters per branch. All branches had to connect to the Riposte Servers in the
data centres to replicate messages. The performance modelling | carried out included
working out the number of ISDN circuits each data centre required to operate Riposte

effectively. | have reviewed certain documents identified by the Inquiry with URNs

Page 6 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

FUJ00077839, FUJ00077838, FUJ00077942, FUJ00077850, FUJ00077848 and
FUJ00058148, however these did not substantively assist me in improving my
recollections of this period.

17.From my perspective, ICL Pathway had a good and productive working relationship
with Escher. We had regular face-to-face meetings with key Escher staff such as
Michael Murphy (Escher’s Chief Executive Officer) and Andrew Sutherland (Escher’s
Chief Architect). However, | note that | did not attend all the meetings with Escher,
only those that concerned Riposte and that were relevant to my performance
modelling work.

18.At this initial stage, | did have some concerns about whether the Riposte messaging
solution would effectively scale to approximately 20,000 branches, as it had not been
proven to work at that scale before. This was not a concern that was unique to me,
but was a known issue that was actively discussed within the bid team and with
Escher.

19.Managing the issue of scaling Riposte was not within my area of responsibility.
However, | do recall, from my general involvement on the architecture team, that this
concern was eventually addressed in the deployment phase (during and prior to the
pilots and rollout of Horizon). Alan Ward, who was the Chief Architect, decided to
divide the Post Office branch estate into four equal parts (each having a similar
number of branches), with the Gateway counters in each part connected to their own
set of Riposte correspondence servers at the data centre. Each of the four parts was
known as a “Riposte cluster”. This splitting of the Post Office estate therefore

addressed the scaling concerns with Riposte. My recollection is that it was decided

Page 7 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

that four clusters was suitable, following testing at ICL Pathway’s offices in Bracknell.
A performance test rig, known as the Riposte Counter Simulator and which simulated
traffic from the estate, was used.

20.My role subsequently started to evolve on the project. Instead of just performance
modelling, | worked on making sure the network solution we intended to put forward
in the bid was actually viable, in the context of meeting performance and capacity
requirements (which | had conducted analysis in relation to as explained at paragraph
15(a) above). As | explain in greater detail at paragraphs 20(a) and 20(b) below,
instead of only focusing on performance modelling, this entailed also working with
vendors and network designers towards the objective of designing a solution that
delivered the required performance measures. This work was necessary to
demonstrate that the proposed network solution could meet capacity and
performance requirements, and that it was capable of delivery and being supported.
In my experience, it was standard for work of this nature to be conducted on large
scale and bespoke IT project. This work was not carried out because of concerns that
the network solution would not be viable. This work involved:

a. Working with vendors supplying the network components such as Cisco,
Eicon Technology, BT, and Energis.

b. Understanding the protocols and communication patterns for applications
communicating over the network. The main two applications (that is customers
for the network) during this period were the Riposte Message Server and
Tivoli. | have explained the role of Riposte above. Tivoli was an IBM product

used to provide systems management for the overall solution. In the context

Page 8 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

of branch networking, Tivoli carried out the following operations on branch

counters: software distribution, collection of events / logs and script execution.

21.Prior to me joining the bid team, the approach to how Riposte would be used on
Horizon had also been decided and this operated as follows:

a. There would be a Riposte message server on every Horizon counter. The
Riposte message server participates in replication and stores messages
locally in a message store.

b. In most Post Office branches, there were multiple Horizon counters. If a
Riposte message was created on one counter (for instance, because a
transaction had occurred on that counter), that message was forwarded to
every other counter in the branch. Sometimes, a counter would forward a
message but not every other counter might receive it. The counters exchanged
“markers” every five or ten seconds. Those markers enabled the counters to
detect if another counter has a message on it that it did not have, triggering
the relevant message to be resent. In Riposte’s terminology, the counters
within a single branch were known as “permanent neighbours”.

c. Ina single counter branch, there were two Riposte message servers built into
a single Horizon counter. One Riposte message server would write its
messages to a permanent hard disk, and the other to a removable hard disk.
While | mention this feature here, it was not a part of the design at the time of
the bid. This was a later change to the solution (post bid) to address the
potential issue of a workstation failure resulting in the potential loss of

messages in the event that the Riposte message store on that workstation

Page 9 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

contained messages that had not been replicated elsewhere. We referred to
this as a single point of failure problem. | note that this solution was not
developed in response to an incident at a branch, but rather was identified as
a potential issue that needed to be accounted for.

. The purpose of this approach was to build resilience. By replicating messages,
the system created multiple copies of a message on each message store. In
other words, even if one counter was down, all other counters would “know”
the messages on the counter that was not functioning.

. One of the counters in every branch would be a “gateway node”. This was the
only counter configured to interact with the central Riposte message servers
located in the data centres. The “gateway node” would transfer messages to a
server in the data centre. The “gateway node” was fitted with an ISDN network
card. This enabled it to access the ISDN network and call the data centre. The
card and the software drivers required for it to operate on the Horizon counter
were made and developed by a German company called Eicon. The “gateway
node” and the data centre were known as “non-permanent neighbours”.
Within the “gateway node”, there was a parameter called an unconnected
broadcast interval. This was set to 15 minutes. Every 15 minutes, the “gateway
node” would compare its current “marker” with what it last received from the
data centre server. If its marker was different from the last one received from
the data centre server, it would then try and connect to the server. In other
words, the “gateway node” would determine if it was out of sync with the data

centre server and then try to synchronise itself. Additionally, any priority

Page 10 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

message created in the branch would result in an attempt to forward the
message to all message servers in the specified group, including message
servers which must be reached via non-permanent connections (such as the
data centre’s servers). Priority messages provided a mechanism for enabling
online transactions (this would include, for example, foreign benefit payments).
The sending of priority messages is immediate to all neighbours, including
unconnected non-permanent neighbours, and ahead of replication traffic. This
enables counter applications and data centre applications to exchange
sequences of messages comprising an online transaction. This would also
result in an attempt at synchronisation of the gateway message store.

g. The same mechanisms (unconnected broadcast interval and_ priority
messages) mentioned above enabled the option to push information down
from the data centre to individual branches. This functionality was required to
disseminate information available centrally at the data centre but not held at a
branch. For example, this functionality supported foreign benefit encashments
(where the relevant branch would not hold any data locally about the person
claiming the benefit) and enabled reference date distribution (e.g. an update
to stamp prices).

22.1 did not have any concerns about the use of Riposte in this manner.

23.|n order to recollect how Riposte operated (as described above), | reviewed a draft
Horizon Architecture Overview dated 16 June 2006 (WITN0481_01/2) and extracts
of various Riposte AP] documentation that was included in software releases of

Riposte from Escher over the period of my involvement in Horizon (specifically (i) a

Page 11 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

“RiposteCreateMessageEx” function summary (WITN0481_01/3), (ii) a
“RiposteDefineNode” function summary (WITN0481_ 01/4), (iif) a
“RiposteCreatePriorityMessage” function summary (WITN0481_01/5), and (iv) a
“ConfigUnconnectedBroadcastinterval” function summary (WITN0481_01/6)).

24.\n order for this design to function on the Horizon system, Escher needed to develop
new software for use on Riposte.

a. At the time, Riposte had only been deployed on “always-on” networks, like the
ANPOST one in Ireland. To support the use of the ISDN network, it was
necessary for the message server on the “gateway node” to stop
communicating for periods, allowing the ISDN line to go idle. It was also
necessary to provide a mechanism for restarting communication either to
support priority messages or to periodically synchronise message stores with
the servers at the central data centre. Escher needed to develop the software
to support “non-permanent neighbours” on Riposte. My recollection is that it
took about four weeks for Escher to develop the software required. | do not
recall when the need for the software was noticed but | do recall it had been
discussed for several months before it was developed.

b. Escher also needed to develop a binary message store (implemented as one
or more disk files) to support the much higher message rates that were
expected on Horizon compared to ANPOST. The message store used
previously in the ANPOST system was a text file.

25.Eicon also needed to develop new software to support the ISDN aspects of the

solution. My recollection is that these developments took about six months and the

Page 12 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

need for them was noticed during the bid preparation stage. The specific
developments required were:

a. The development of a new “dial on demand” driver. The Horizon counters
operated on Windows NT4, which required a desktop icon to be manually
clicked for dial-up to the ISDN network to occur. In contrast, with the “dial-on-
demand” driver, if the gateway counter tries to send out data destined for the
data centres and the ISDN connection is off, the driver will automatically
establish a connection, send the information, and close the connection when
no more data is flowing (triggering an idle timeout).

b, The development of a configurable dial plan that would enable the “gateway”
Horizon counter to call multiple numbers in sequence to connect to the data
centre, in case of the failure of a line at the data centre.

c. The development of a system for logging all ISDN calls, which would provide
development and support staff a full record of all ISDN call attempts, whether
they succeeded, and their duration.

26.As part of the bid process, | also had to undertake work to determine whether the
ISDN network solution we were proposing was sufficient to support Riposte. This
work was for a similar purpose as that described at paragraph 18 above and entailed
the following:

a. | prepared a network sizing model. Post Office provided the workload
definition for the model. This meant providing us with data on counter
transactions per unit of time, by branch size. From Escher, we also got some

estimates, based on live data from ANPOST, as to how many messages were

Page 13 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

exchanged on the Riposte system there and their sizes. This allowed the
model to predict the likely duration of ISDN calls, the number of ISDN lines the
data centres would require, and also predict that a single 64 kilobits per second
ISDN line was sufficient bandwidth for branches of all sizes. This provided
reassurance that the peak hour utilisation of the ISDN lines would be within
the thresholds being proposed by the bid team.

b. | spent some time speaking to staff at BT to determine how reliable ISDN calls
were, though | do not recall the individuals that | spoke to.

c. We also had to ensure we had the right technology in place at the data centres
so that ISDN calls were answered and terminated successfully. Eicon’s initial
solutions involved putting ISDN primary rate cards in the data centre servers.
| suggested using an alternative CISCO technology. The Eicon solution was
very bespoke, whereas the CISCO one was an industry standard which would
be scalable and supportable.

27.As a result of this work, the bid team internally convinced ourselves that the ISDN
solution was sufficient.

Bid documentation

28.1 did not directly work on any bid documentation. | provided input on the proposed
networking solution to Dave Hollingsworth and he included it in the bid documentation
as he thought appropriate. | am aware that in the bid documentation there were

sections about the use of ISDN in the solution.

Page 14 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

THE INITIAL GO LIVE PILOT

29.1 recall the initial go live pilot scheme started in Stroud with about ten branches. | do
not recall the date this started or the functions that were trialled, save for those that
fell within my area of responsibility (and for which | provide more detail on at
paragraphs 30 to 32 below).

30.During this pilot, the network infrastructure to support the pilot (such as compact
servers, network switches and ISDN routers) was deployed at ICL Pathway’s facility
in Feltham.

31.Riposte messaging did occur over an ISDN network during this pilot. However, the
Horizon counters at the branches were always permanently connected to the ISDN
network. This was because Escher had not yet developed the “non-permanent
neighbour” functionality. Escher was only able to develop either the binary message
store or the “non-permanent neighbour” functionality by the time of this pilot, and they
were asked to prioritise the “binary message store” development (though | was not
involved in making that decision). This was a limitation in the pilot, as Riposte
communication was occurring over permanent ISDN calls, which was different from
the target solution where intermittent ISDN calls would be used to establish
communication between branches and the date centre. However, this was a limitation
that was expected.

32.1 do not recollect any specific problems, whether in my area of expertise or otherwise,

that arose during this pilot.

Page 15 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

THE 200 —- 300 BRANCH PILOTS

33.When the project moved into the next phase of pilots, we deployed the “non-
permanent neighbours” technology.

34.1 do not recall the date this pilot started or the functions that were trialled outside my
area of expertise. | do not recall any problems occurring, whether in my area of
expertise or otherwise, during this pilot.

THE PILOT AND ROLLOUT OF NEW RELEASE 2

35.My involvement during the period of the New Release 2 pilot (‘NR2 pilot”) was in
scaling the network solution so we could achieve rollout. | do not recall the date on
which this pilot started or the functions that were trialled outside my area of expertise.

36.Alan Ward became the Chief Architect for the solution around that time and Terry
Austin became Programme Director. They scaled up the team to prepare for the
national rollout. | recall a number of people joined my team, including James
Stinchcombe and Ben Thornton.

37.1 recall reporting into Alan Ward, Richard Long (who led Applications) and lan Honor
around the time of the NR2 pilot. | do not recall lan’s role.

38. During the pilot, we observed a number of issues as we worked towards scaling the
Horizon solution:

a. We became concerned about how we were going to back up all the message
stores in the data centre, given the volume of messages, and decided to move
to EMC external storage. Rather than servers having their own data storage,
we connected large storage arrays to the servers. | recall that one of the

reasons external storage was selected was because EMC, the vendor which

Page 16 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

provided the storage, provided a backup/recover solution. However, there may
have been other reasons as well.

b. There was a recognition, as was contemplated during the bid stage, that
although ISDN was the preferred network solution, ISDN was not available
everywhere across the Post Office estate. ISDN had been selected as the
preferred network as, in the case of most branches, it would meet Post Office’s
requirements at the lowest cost. It was cheaper than the alternatives available
at the time (which included BT kilo-stream leased lines and the use of the “very
small aperture terminal” (‘VSAT”)) but was predicted to be available and
sufficiently reliable at most branches.’ | recall that there were about 140
branches where we could not use ISDN as the branches were very remote. In
those cases, as ISDN was not available, we used VSAT as an alternate means
of connection. VSAT is, effectively, a satellite connection and, as with any
network solution, its reliability depends on the context in which it is deployed.
For instance, VSAT reliability can be affected by inclement weather.

c. We had concerns around how many outbound calls were made from the data
centre by Tivoli, which caused Tivoli to overload the network. Tivoli provided a
solution for software distribution and remote command execution — effectively
an orchestration system. As part of its system management functions, Tivoli
needed to communicate with branches. Sometimes, if Tivoli was required to
carry out a software distribution to all Post Office branches, it would attempt to
make concurrent ISDN calls to every branch in the estate. This exceeded the

1 While | recall that ISDN was generally cheaper than VSAT or leased lines, | am not abie to particularise
the specific cost differences between the networks at the time of the Horizon bid.

Page 17 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

concurrent call capacity of the ISDN network. Post Office did not require
software updates to be delivered simultaneously to all branches and so we
developed approaches to configure and control Tivoli. We would schedule
Tivoli to run over a number of days or limit the number of branches that would
receive an update at once.

39.1 recall that there was testing in relation to the network solution during this period at
ICL Pathway’s Feltham offices, but | do not recall any details about it.

40.Beyond the points above, | do not recall the issues that arose during the NR2 pilot.
However, | believe they were very typical of large scale IT projects of the time. | do
not recall any particular issues that contributed to the delay of the NR2 pilot or the
rollout of the Horizon system.

HORIZON ONLINE

41.1 had an ongoing role providing support on various network issues that arose on the
Horizon project until around 2010. In 2010, my role changed to “Solution Architect —
Security”, and | focused less on networks and more on the security aspects of the
solution.

42. As a Security Architect, | recall | primarily supported the Security team (which included
Howard Pritchard and Donna Munro) on Payment Card Industry (“PCI”) audits. | am
and was not an expert on PCI standards. However, my recollection is that these were
independent audits of Post Office’s payment systems that were required by payment
providers (for example, Visa or Mastercard). My role was to support the audit,

including by providing material to the third party auditor about the Horizon system’s

Page 18 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

security processes. These audits did not directly relate to the design, piloting or rollout
of Horizon Online.

43.Prior to 2010 and my role as a Security Architect, | was involved in the rollout of new
branch routers to Post Office branches (save for those branches where an ISDN
connection was not reliably available, which continued to rely on VSAT technology).
Slide 7 of WITN0481_01/1 sets out a planned timeline for this rollout. My recollection
is that this rollout was a broader refresh of the network technology at Post Office
branches and it was not done specifically to enable or support Horizon Online.

44. | did not have responsibility for testing the network aspects of the Horizon Online
solution, though | am aware, from my general involvement in the project, that testing
was carried out prior to the pilots and rollout of Horizon Online to assess the impact
of poor quality connections or connectivity failure. | recall there being several test rigs
set up which used the same network technology as in the live environment. This
would enable testing against characteristics similar to that in place in live service.
Given this was not my area of responsibility, | am not aware of the results of these
tests or any steps taken as a result of them.

45.| do not have any specific recollection about my involvement in the pilots, acceptance

and rollout of Horizon Online.

Page 19 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

ASSESSMENT OF CERTAIN ASPECTS OF THE HORIZON SYSTEM AND

DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

Robustness

46.| am aware of the Inquiry’s definition of “robustness”.? | am only able to evaluate the
Horizon system’s robustness from the perspective of my roles on networking and
security, and | note that | had a much more limited involvement in relation to Horizon
Online than its predecessor. It was also not my role to design or develop the
applications that would have recorded/processed data on Horizon, including in
relation to branch accounts. From that perspective, | did not have concerns about the
robustness of Horizon, nor was | aware of any.

47.While | may occasionally have attended meetings with representatives of the Post
Office, it was not generally my role or responsibility, throughout my involvement in the
Horizon project, to communicate with the Post Office or the government. As such, |
am unable to comment on Post Office's or the government's awareness of any of the
issues discussed in my statement.

interaction between teams

48.| moved from my initial role on the bid team into roles in the Solution Architecture
team, which was responsible for defining the high-level solution and changes, taking

account of new requirements.

? Defined by the Inquiry as including: “(a) the accuracy and integrity of the data recorded and processed
by the Horizon IT System (b) the extent to which deficiencies in the Horizon IT System were capable of
causing and / or caused apparent discrepancies or shortfalls in the branch accounts (c) the ability of the
Horizon IT System to identify errors in data and discrepancies or shortfalls in branch accounts and the
cause of the same and (d) the ability of the Horizon IT System to continue to operate satisfactorily in the
presence of adverse conditions.”

Page 20 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

49. As noted at paragraph 11 above, the bid team was a single small group of individuals
and there was limited need for us to routinely interact with a wider set of teams.

50. My overall recollection from my involvement on the Solution Architecture team was
of regular and productive interaction with the other teams working on the project (e.g.
the Design, Development, Test, and Operational teams), and that our interaction
between teams was generally sufficient to resolve any issues that arose. This was
helped by a number of the teams being located in the same building, initially at ICL
Pathway’s office in Feltham, and then Bracknell.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Page 21 of 22
WITN04810100
WITN04810100

INDEX TO FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF MARK JOSEPH JAROSZ

Exhibit Description Date Control Number | URN
Number

WITN0481 | Slide deck titled “HNG- | 23 March | POINQ0104389F | FUJ00098218
01/1 X Network 2007
Architecture”

WITN0481 | Horizon Architecture [16 June | POINQ0104388F | FUJ00098217 —
01/2 Overview 2006

WITNO0481 | “RiposteCreateMessag | Undated | POINQ0104391F | FUJ00098220
01/3 eEx’” function summary

WITN0481 | “RiposteDefineNode” Undated | POINQ0104393F | FUJ00098222
01/4 function summary

WITNO0481 | “RiposteCreatePriority | Undated | POINQ0104392F | FUJ00098221
01/5 Message” function
summary

WITNO481  “UnconnectedBroadca | Undated | POINQ0104390F FUJ00098219
01/6 _ stInterval” function
ummary

Page 22 of 22
