                                                                                                           W I TNO9090100
                                                                                                        WITN09090100




                                                                                         1~AYJI10[S11&INIDI$]


                                                                              Witness Name: Andrew Wise



                                                                          Dated:       31st of May 2023




III~~,~'~~~~~~i#.~■„[il.A~7lUi~.l:.T'S~~
                                       \x   ~`   lsl~.I'~




    1. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry

          (the "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 28 April




    2. I have been assisted by DAC Beachcroft LLP in the preparation and drafting

          of my statement.




    3. I joined Post Office Ltd (POL) in 1991 where I worked as a Postal Officer

          counter clerk in a Directly Managed Branch. A Directly Managed Branch (or

          Crown Post Office as it used to be known) is a branch run by employees of

          POL with a branch manager and team of counter clerks. I worked in that

          branch for eight years at which point I joined the Horizon Project in 1999 as a

          Horizon Field Support Officer (HFSO). The role of the HFSO entailed

          migrating Post Office branches from a manual accounting system onto the

                                                            Page lot 33
                                                                                      W I TN09090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100



                                                                   1~AYJI10[S1II!ISJDI$]


   Horizon computer system. Following a branch migration, I would spend the

   next two days in branch providing support to the Sub Postmaster and their

   staff. I would also provide balance support to the branch on their first balance

   day to assist balancing for the first time on the Horizon system.



4. 1 worked as a HFSO until 2001 when I joined the Network Business Support

   Centre (NBSC) as a Service Support Advisor working on Tier 2. The role of a

   Service Support Advisor was a non-managerial role equivalent to a counter

   clerk working in a Directly Managed Branch. This role entailed providing

   support to Post Office branches and their staff when contacting NBSC with a

   business-related query. I worked in NBSC until 2004.



5. From 2004 to 2007 1 worked in the Training Delivery Team where I was a

   Training Manger which entailed providing classroom training to new Sub

   Postmasters and their staff. I also had line management responsibility for a

   team of four trainers and four schedulers.



6. In 2007 I joined the sales team as a Business Development Manager (BDM).

   This role entailed providing sales support to several Post Office Branches in a

   geographical area.



7. In 2008, due to business restructure, my role as a BDM no longer existed and

   I became a Transitional Manager, this meant I had no specific designated

   role. While being transitional I worked on several Business projects, the main

   one being the Horizon Online Project in 2010. On this project I was


                                  Page 2 of 33
                                                                                      W ITN09090100
                                                                                    WITNO9090100




                                                                    1NII0D011I!ISJ II$]


   responsible for the line management of a team of five schedulers who would

   schedule the POL manpower resource to ensure Post Office Branches had

   support when they migrated onto Horizon Online.



8. In 2011 I joined the Security Team where I was a Security Manager which

   entailed the investigation of Sub Postmasters and branch staff. In 2015 1

   moved roles into the Security Intelligence Team, this was still part of the

   Security Operation Team but focussed more on the physical security of Post

   Office Branches and the potential threats from outside sources. I currently

   remain in this role as a Security Intelligence Analyst.




9, The Inquiry has asked me to give an overview of the NBSC. NBSC was the

   internal helpline and support function for Post Office branches. NBSC

   consisted of several teams, although I do not recall all the specific teams, I

   can remember there was Tier 1 and Tier 2 Service Support teams (this was

   the helpline where I worked), the Service Support Training Team, the

   Knowledge Base Team, the Call Analysts Team, Business Service

   Management (BSM) Team, and the Problem Management Team. The Service

   Support Team was the contact point within NBSC for branches who had

   queries / issues relating to the day to day running of their Post Office branch.

   This service was available for anyone who worked in Post Office branches,

   this included Sub Postmasters, their staff, directly managed branch staff and

   internal teams such as area managers, trainers, and auditors.




                                   Page 3 of 33
                                                                                       W I TNO9090100
                                                                                     WITNO9090100




                                                                     1~AYJI10[S11MIIDI$]


10. The type of queries which NBSC would deal with ranged vastly from simple

   questions such as requesting a telephone number for a particular person to

   more complicated questions such as the process for accepting a Passport

   Application, or questions around how to balance.


11. The helpline part of NBSC was split into two tiers of support, Tier 1 was first

   line support and Tier 2 second line support. Any contact made with NBSC

   would initially get through to Tier 1 who would try to resolve the callers query,

   and if they were unable to answer the question the call would be passed over

   to Tier 2. Tier 2 consisted of around fifty to sixty service support advisors who

   were split across eight teams, each with their own Team Leader.


12. NBSC used a case management system called Remedy to log and record

   calls from branches. When a call was made into NBSC the advisor would

   create a new case in this system and enter the branch and caller details along

   with a brief description of the question being asked, further information would

   be added in the detailed description field to give a better overview of the

   reason for the call.



13. Within the NBSC there was a Knowledge Base (KB) Team who were

   responsible for maintaining and keeping the Knowledge Base articles

   updated, these were used by Tier 1 and Tier 2 advisors as information

   sources to enable them to answer queries for branches who had rang in.



14. The Remedy system had a function where the advisor could put in different

   levels of criteria (there were 4 classification levels) to search the KB for an


                                   Page 4 of 33
                                                                                       W I TNO9090100
                                                                                    WITNO9090100




                                                                    1~AYJI10[S1II!ISJDI$]


   answer to the question being asked. Using the 4 levels of classification,

   Remedy would then search on the KB and provide the advisor with the KB

   article relating to the classifications requested.


15. An example of this could be a caller asking whether a customer is able to tax

   their motor vehicle with an insurance schedule. In this example the four levels

   of classification could be as follows — Classification 1 = DVLA — Classification

   2 = Car Tax — Classification 3 = Insurance Documents — Classification 4 =

   Acceptable Documents. In this example the KB would present an article

   explaining what the acceptable insurance documents were when taxing a

   motor vehicle.



16. Predominantly Tier 1 could only answer questions that were straight forward

   and where an answer could be found on the Knowledge Base. Tier 1 could

   not make outbound calls to branches and were restricted to the amount of

   time they were on a call and were restricted to only giving answers from the

   KB. If the answer could not be found quickly by the Tier 1 advisor on the KB

   the call would be transferred through to Tier 2.


17. Normally calls would be transferred live through to Tier 2 from Tier 1 but at

   busy periods where there were no Tier 2 advisor available the case would be

   assigned to the Tier 2 case stack in Remedy and the caller would get a call

   back when that case was picked up by a Tier 2 advisor. Tier 2 had an

   allocator role each day, this was a Tier 2 advisor who would monitor the Tier 2

   case stack and allocate cases to the next available advisor. This ensured that




                                    Page 5 of 33
                                                                                       W ITN09090100
                                                                                    WITNO9090100




                                                                    1A II0[1011&I SJ II$]


   calls in the case stack were not missed, and branches got a call back as soon

   as possible.



18. Tier 2 advisors had more experience than at Tier 1, a lot of the advisors had a

   background with the Post Office with some coming from Directly Managed

   Branches and others from the old Regional Helplines. When I joined NBSC in

   2001 I joined with several other people who had just left the Horizon Project

   like myself.


19.Once a call had been concluded the resolution field in the Remedy system

   would be completed and the case in Remedy would be closed down and the

   advisor would then be ready to take the next call. I remember that on Tier 2

   the average calls per hour would be around four or five, whereas on Tier 1 it

   would be a lot higher as their calls were a lot quicker.


20. The Service Support teams within NBSC (both Tier 1 and Tier 2) used a

   telephone system to monitor all activity undertaken by the advisor. Your duty

   started when you put a code in to log on. Each activity had a separate code to

   input to demonstrate what activity you were doing. I do not recall the specific

   codes used now but I do remember that they covered things like wrap up time

   following a call, admin time, and training time. You also input a code when on

   a break and when on lunch and a code for comfort breaks (break and lunch

   tomes were monitored to ensure you only had your allocated time). On a

   monthly basis each advisor would get statistics based on the activity of that

   month, each activity was measured against the number of calls as an average

   per call . This meant that if you spent too much time in an activity such as


                                   Page 6 of 33
                                                                                    W ITNO9090100
                                                                                  WITN09090100




                                                                     1NII0[S11&*11DI$]


   admin you would be challenged by your Team Leader. Each month the Team

   Leader would dip sample around ten calls ensuring the appropriate

   behaviours were adhered while on calls and they would quality assure the

   information provided. All of this was fed back in monthly 121's



21. The Horizon System Helpline (HSH) was the technical support team for Post

   Office branches to contact with issues relating to the Horizon computer

   system. Advisors at HSH were not employees of POL they were employed by

   ICL Pathway / Fujitsu and were based at a separate location. The team at

   HSH would deal with technical issues such as equipment faults or faults

   relating to the Horizon System. I am aware there was a team called SSC

   which I believe is the System Support Centre, but I am not familiar with their

   specific role. I am aware that there were several Tiers of support at HSH, and

   I assumed SSC was one of those Tiers of support.


22. My role at NBSC was such that I do not know the full inter-relationship

   between NBSC and HSH. I believe that senior management within NBSC and

   the wider teams such as BSM would have knowledge of this relationship.



23. On a day-to-day BAU perspective NBSC would interact with HSH and often

   callers would transfer through to HSH, this could be because the caller had

   pressed the incorrect option on the IVR message when ringing up, or their

   query could be appropriate for HSH. If a caller claimed, he was experiencing

   issues with their Horizon System we would transfer that through to the HSH.

   Likewise, we would often get calls transferred through to NBSC from HSH

   where HSH deemed NBSC was the appropriate contact point. I do recall that

                                  Page 7 of 33
                                                                                      W ITNO9090100
                                                                                  WITNO9090100




   sometimes callers would get passed backwards and forwards between NBSC

   and HSH, particularly where a branch had losses and queried whether there

   was an issue with the Horizon System. I do recall that it was often difficult to

   get HSH to take ownership of calls where branches were experiencing losses

   as their main criteria for investigating a system issue for a branch was

   whether they had a receipts and payments mismatch when the branch

   balanced. From memory i do not recall any branches I dealt with having

   receipt and payment mismatch. In situations where callers were passed back

   and forth, the NBSC advisor would speak to their Team Leader who may in

   turn speak to their counterpart at HSH to try and get an agreement on who

   should have ownership of the call.



24. As a Tier 2 Service Support Advisor we had access to the KB and access to

   all counter operations manuals and Horizon user and balancing guides.

   However, we did not have access to any branch Horizon transactional

   information. This meant that when assisting branches with their balancing

   issues we were reliant on information given to us by the branch while on the

   telephone. In some situations where branches had experienced a loss, we

   would ask the branch to post or fax paperwork through to us. This paperwork

   included things like Cash Accounts, balance reports, cash and stock

   declaration and transaction logs.
                                  ,




                                      s
        •




25. I have been asked by the Inquiry to describe the daily reporting and weekly

   balancing procedures that Sub Postmasters were expected to adhere to. The

                                      Page 8 of 33
                                                                                       W I TN09090100
                                                                                    WITNO9090100



                                                                    1~AYJI10[S1II!ISJDI$]


   balancing process has changed quite drastically over the duration Horizon

   has been in branches and the explanation I give is based on how branches

   balanced when Horizon was first used in branches, and it was the same

   process in use in 2004.


26. In the early years of Horizon every receipt or payment transaction still had a

   counterfoil which was retained by the branch and required despatching either

   on a daily or weekly basis (the only exception to this was Automated Payment

   Transactions). As Horizon developed over the years things became more

   automated meaning there was less paperwork in branches to despatch but in

   2004 it was still predominantly a very manual paper-based process.



27. Branches had a set of procedures they had to complete daily which involved

   the account and dispatch of various documentation. This included reports

   such as the daily cheque listing, Giro bank deposits and withdrawals, National

   Savings deposits and withdrawals, TV licences, Personal banking, and

   Automated Payment transactions. For each of these products the branch

   would produce a daily report, check the counterfoils, which they have kept in

   the counter till, agrees with the number and value on the report and then

   despatch in the relevant envelope. The actual procedure on Horizon would be

   to go into the counter daily report screen, select the report they wish to look at

   and then select print. Once the branch was satisfied that they had a

   counterfoil for each transaction they would select the cut off option on the

   Horizon screen. Cutting off the report just meant that it would reset to zero for

   the next day.



                                   Page 9 of 33
                                                                                      W I TNO9090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100



                                                                   1~AYJI10[S11&INI II1]


28. The cheques listing report was a little more complicated. After checking the

   initial report and agreeing the physical cheques agree with what the report

   says the branch would have to do a remittance out to the value of cheques.

   Once the remittance out is completed the cheque list report is printed again,

   this time showing the remittance at the bottom, at this point the cheques

   listing report would be cut off.



29. The only other difference to the above is the Automated Payment report. This

   is printed and cut off in the same way as the other reports but there is nothing

   to despatch. Following an Automated Payment transaction (this was barcoded

   bills and magnetic payment cards) an officer copy receipt is printed, and it is

   this receipt which is reconciled against the report, and nothing is despatched.

   As transactions changed over the years more bill payments became

   automated to the point at today, we have very few if any actual bills where we

   retain the counterfoil.



30. Another daily procedure was the daily cash declaration. Each branch was

   required to complete an accurate daily cash declaration each day on the

   Horizon system as close to closing as possible. This was a mandatory

   process and enabled the Post Office Cash Management teams to track how

   much cash was in the network and request excess cash back.


31. The weekly balance procedure was a little more involved than the daily

   procedures. When undertaking the weekly balance, the first step would be to

   print, despatch and cut off all the daily reports as described. They would then

   follow a similar process for what are classed as weekly reports, these include


                                      Page 10 of 33
                                                                                      W I TNO9090100
                                                                                   WITN09090100




                                                                   1~AYJI10B01II!ISJDI17


   Pension and Allowance dockets, Green Giro cheques, Postal Orders, Car Tax

   transactions, and redeemed saving stamps. There were other mandatory

   weekly reports that were produced such as suspense account report and

   rejected postage label report, these were kept in branch for reference.



32.Once all daily and weekly reports were printed and reconciled the branch

   would move onto the actual balance process. The next step would be to

   check the physical stock on hand (this check at this point did not include the

   other postage stamps) and check that what physical stock was on hand

   agreed with the figures on Horizon. This could be done several ways; the

   branch could produce a stock report or a balance snapshot and check the

   figures against one of those. They could also go directly into the adjust stock

   screen and scroll down on the screen checking the figures. Any differences

   found in either of these ways should be corrected by either adjusting their

   stock in the adjust stock screen or making a sale or completing a reversal

   against the stock item. Making the sale would reduce the system held stock

   figure (this is where the branch physically has less stock than Horizon shows)

   and completing a reversal would increase the system held stock figure (this is

   where the branch physically has more stock that Horizon shows). The last

   way a branch could check their stock against Horizon would be to make a

   stock declaration, the branch would type in the value of every stock item they

   have, and Horizon overwrites the existing stock figures with the newly

   declared stock figures. The declare stock option was rarely recommended for

   branches to do as it could often cause confusion and leave the branch

   struggling to balance.


                                  Page 11 of 33
                                                                                    W ITNO9090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100




33. The next step in the balance process would be to make a stamp declaration

   for other stamps, this was postage stamps with a set value of 1 p to £5 (this

   did not include first class and second-class stamps and stamp books). This is

   done by going into the declare stamps screen and entering the number of

   stamps for each denomination. The reason other stamps are treated

   differently than the rest of the stock items is because Horizon just gives one

   total value figure for all these stamps, this is to make the sales process easier

   when customers are sending mail items and many different denominations of

   stamps are affixed.


34. Following on from the stamp declaration the branch would declare the foreign

   currency on hand figure (this is only for branches who sold foreign currency).

   This consists of counting each type of currency on hand and declaring the

   value of that currency.



35. The final declaration to be made as part of the balance process was to

   declare the cash, this is done twice on balance day, once as part of the daily

   process making the daily cash declaration, and then once as part of the

   weekly balance process. When declaring the cash, the branch would enter

   the value of each denomination of note and coin. It was important that the

   balance cash declaration was the last thing to be done as making changes in

   any of the steps before this could alter the system derived cash figure and a

   new declaration would have to be made.




                                  Page 12 of 33
                                                                                      W I TN09090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100



                                                                    1~AYJI10[S11ORI II1]


36 Once the cash declaration is made the branch would make a variance check

   which would show any discrepancies (this is for shared stock units only,

   individual stock units would get a message after declaring the cash informing

   them of any discrepancies). The branch would then proceed to printing the

   trial balance report, it is at this point that the Horizon system commits any

   discrepancies, and the loss or gain would show at the top of the trial balance

   report. The branch would then roll the stock unit over into the next cash

   account period and a final balance report would be produced.



37. This same process was required to be carried out for each stock unit in the

   branch. Normally a branch would have a separate stock unit for their lottery

   and ATM cash. Once all stock units have been rolled over into the next cash

   account period the branch would then produce the cash account report which

   would produce a trial cash account and then the final report.




NSBC initial involvement

38. I have been asked by the Inquiry to explain my involvement with Mr Castleton

   of Marine Drive Post Office and the calls he made into NBSC between

   December 2003 and April 2004 relating to losses at his branch.



39. Prior to working at NBSC I had worked as HFSO. For this role I received two

   weeks training on the Horizon IT system, this training included the same

   training Sub Postmasters received along with additional training on the


                                  Page 13 of 33
                                                                                      W I TN09090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100




                                                                    1~AYJI10[S11&INIDI1]


   migration aspect of the role. From 1999 to 2001 I held the role of HFSO, over

   this period I gained a very good knowledge of Horizon including the balancing

   procedures.



40. When I joined NBSC 2001 I received one week training, this involved the

   Remedy case management system and telephone systems along with

   examples of calls that would come into NBSC and a background on the KB.

   My personal Knowledge of Horizon was excellent, and I kept my level of

   knowledge during my time at NBSC. Tier 2 advisors had training twice weekly

   and were kept up to date with Horizon and any changes. At Dearne House

   where NBSC Tier 2 was located there was a training room with a dozen or so

   Horizon training kits for advisors to use during training sessions.


41. I do not have any recollection of any interactions with myself and Mr Castleton

   or Marine Drive Post Office during my time at NBSC. I can see from

   documents provided by the Inquiry, specifically from a statement (Witness

   Statement of Andrew Wise (LCAS00001 10)) I provided in the case against Mr

   Castleton in 2006 and an email from my then line manager Andrew Price

   (Witness Statement of Andrew Wise, Exhibit AW1 Page 30 (LCAS00001 10))

   that I helped a colleague, Ms Sarah Pennington.



42. Due to my Post Office experience and knowledge of the Horizon System it

   was not uncommon for colleagues to ask me questions if they were unsure

   themselves. Ms Pennington worked on Tier 2 as a Service Support Advisor in

   the same team as me within Service Support and we were both managed by

   Andrew Price. Ms Pennington asked me to look at Cash Accounts reports

                                  Page 14 of 33
                                                                                      W I TN09090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100




                                                                   1~AYJI10[S11&INI II1]


   from Marine Drive Post Office Branch to see if I could help her identify the

   cause of losses that the branch had been experiencing. I believe it was Ms

   Pennington who was the Tier 2 advisor who was dealing with Mr Castleton at

   Marine Drive Post Office at the time she asked me to assist.


43.Other than the information I have read in the documentation from the Inquiry I

   do not recall any of the calls made to NBSC or the HSH helplines by Mr

   Castleton or Marine Drive Post Office and I am unable to recall any thoughts I

   might have had at that time on what attributed the loss while reviewing the

   Cash Accounts. I do not recall what documents I considered while looking at

   the losses at Marine Drive Post Office, but normal practice was to review the

   Cash Accounts, The Balance Reports and Transaction logs.



44. I know from the documentation provided by the Inquiry that my Team Leader,

   Mr Andrew Price, wrote an email to a Ms Cath Oglesby setting out the support

   NBSC had provided to Marine Drive Post Office (Witness Statement of

   Andrew Wise, Exhibit AW1 Page 30 (LCAS0000110)). Cath Oglesby was the

   Area Manager for Marine Drive Post Office; I am unaware of the

   circumstances of her contacting NBSC, and I do not recall any direct

   communication between myself and Cath Oglesby.



45. I do not personally recall any of the suggestions made in the email to Cath

   Oglesby from Andrew Price (Witness Statement of Andrew Wise, Exhibit AW1

   Page 30 (LCAS0000110)) and I do not know whether those suggestions came

   from myself or not. In this email I can see that it was suggested that Mr

   Castleton works a manual system alongside the Horizon System. This was

                                  Page 15 of 33
                                                                                       W ITN09090100
                                                                                      WITNO9090100




   something that NBSC did suggest to branches as although transactions went

   through the Horizon System, they were still mainly manual based with a piece

   of paper or counterfoil for every transaction processed so it was relatively

   easy to run a manual system alongside Horizon. What this would do was

   either reassure the Postmaster that everything in Horizon was correct

   because they could check the manual figures against what Horizon said, or it

   could potentially identify any anomalies assisting HSH in pinpointing an issue.

   The second suggestion in this email was to take a snapshot before and after

   doing a remittance. This would satisfy the Postmaster that remittances were

   not doubling up as they could check the figures on both snapshots.


46. 1 do not recall whether at the time I thought the investigations set out in the

   email to Cath Oglesby (Witness Statement of Andrew Wise, Exhibit AW1

   Page 30 (LCAS0000110)) were sufficient or not. From my memory of working

   in NBSC the investigations detailed were what I would have expected at that

   time given the scope of what a Tier 2 Service Support advisor at NBSC was

   able to do.


47. In the email from Andrew Price dated the 20/04/2004 (Witness Statement of

   Andrew Wise, Exhibit AW1 Page 30 (LCAS0000110)) he writes that `Andrew

   Wise and myself both feel that the Horizon system is working properly and we

   are unable to help the PM further'. In my witness statement from 2006

   (Witness Statement of Andrew Wise, (LCAS00001 1 0)) I comment that I did

   not recall saying that and I still do not recall a conversation with Andrew Price

   where this was discussed. Generally, when NBSC looked at branch Cash

   Accounts to assist a Postmaster we were looking to see if any mistakes


                                   Page 16 of 33
                                                                                     W I TN09090100
                                                                                  WITNO9090100




                                                                  1~AYJI10[S11&INI II1]


   become apparent. NBSC would not have been able to identify if there were

   any issues caused by the Horizon system, this would have to be investigated

   by HSH. The only indication for NBSC to establish whether there was an

   issue with the Horizon system would be a Receipts and Payments mismatch

   when the branch tries to balance. From reviewing the documentation provided

   I cannot see any evidence of a receipts and payments mismatch occurring at

   Marine Drive Post Office, my assumption now would be the lack of a receipt

   and payment mismatch would be the basis of the comment in Andrew Prices

   email (Witness Statement of Andrew Wise, Exhibit AW1 Page 30

   (LCAS0000110)).



48. In my statement from 2006 (Witness Statement of Andrew Wise

   (LCAS0000110)) 1 make the comment there is nothing more NBSC could do. I

   have no recollection of making that comment or what led me to that

   conclusion at the time. However, thinking back there was always a point

   where there were no more checks that could be done, this was usually once

   the Service Support advisor had exhausted all the checks and suggestions

   they could. At that point the resolution would be to move to next steps. Those

   steps could include escalating to the Suspense Account Team, advising the

   branch to contact HSH if the branch deem there is an issue with Horizon.

   advise the branch to escalate to the Area Manager for further support. NBSC

   was not set up as a dedicated investigation team specifically to help

   Postmasters identify the cause of losses, it was a general helpline which was

   there to support branches across a vast range of issues.




                                 Page 17 of 33
                                                                                           W I TN09090100
                                                                                         WITNO9090100



                                                                        1~AYJI10[S11&INI II1]


NBSC Call Logs and Post Office Limited v Lee Castleton

   49. 1 have been asked by the Inquiry to describe the circumstances in which I was

      asked to provide an overview of NBSC call logs from Marine Drive Post Office

      branch from December 2003 to April 2004 and the reason I provided a

      witness statement in the case against Mr Castleton. I can confirm that the

      case involving Mr Castleton was the first time I had been involved with

      proceedings against Sub Postmasters involving the Horizon IT System.




Post Office Limited v Lee Castleton - Witness Statement

   50, In 2006 I was approached by Bond Pearce; POL's legal team solicitors, and I

      was asked to provide a statement in the civil case against Mr Castleton of the

      Marine Drive Post Office Branch. This was initially done via email and

      although I do not recall the specifics of who contacted me, I can see from the

      information provided by the inquiry that it was a Stephen Dilley of Bond

      Pearce solicitors (Email from Stephen Dilley (Bond Pearce LLP) to Andrew

      Wise Re: Post Office Limited -v- Mr L Castleton (POL00070822)). This was

      the first contact with Bond Pearce, I do remember that representatives from

      Bond Pearce attended my work location in Salford to discuss the statement

      and following that there were several emails back and forth tweaking my

      statement.



   51. I can see from the information provided by the Inquiry that the initial email I

      received from Bond Pearce set out the assertions Mr Castleton made about

      the Horizon computer system (Email from Stephen Dilley - POL00070822),

      but I do not recall any further detail or conversations around them or Mr

                                      Page 18 of 33
                                                                                    W I TN09090100
                                                                                 WITNO9090100



                                                                  1~AYJI10[1011MIIDI1]


   Castleton's defence and counterclaim. All conversations with Bond Pearce

   were around my evidence and witness statement and information on

   attending court. At no point during the proceedings in the case against Mr

   Castleton was I involved in any disclosure process; my role was simply as a

   witness.



52. 1 was specifically asked to provide a witness statement because Bond Pearce

   had identified that my name was mentioned in the email from Andrew Price to

   Cath Oglesby dated 20104/2004 (Email from Stephen Dilley - POL00070822).

   The request to produce a statement was initially relating to my involvement

   with Mr Castleton and the call into NBSC, specifically my assistance to Ms

   Pennington. However, due to my knowledge of the workings of NBSC and my

   understanding of POL daily and weekly balancing procedures Bond Pearce

   provided me with a list of NBSC call logs and asked me to review and provide

   an overview (Email from Stephen Dilley (Bond Pearce LLP) to Andrew Wise

   Re: First draft witness statement of Andrew Wise (POL001 13492)).



53. Part of the evidence provided in my witness statement was a training record

   for Mr Castleton. As at that point when I was asked to provide the witness

   statement, I worked in the Training Delivery Team, and I was able to access

   the training record and provide that as evidence. I did not personally have any

   involvement in the training of Mr Castleton.



54. 1 do remember that on the day I gave evidence in court I was sat waiting for

   the full day and I believe was eventually called to give evidence at around


                                  Page 19 of 33
                                                                                    W ITNO9090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100




                                                                    1NII0[S11&INI II$]


   16:00. 1 remember that I was kept updated throughout the day on what time

   they thought I would give evidence, but that time kept slipping back, I

   assumed it was POL lawyers who kept me informed. When giving evidence I

   found it strange that Mr Castleton was the person asking me questions, I

   believe it was explained to me that Mr Castleton was representing himself.

   There were several other witnesses waiting to give evidence, and I remember

   some were required to return on the next day, but I do not recall who they

   were. As I had never given evidence before or been involved in court

   proceedings it felt quite overwhelming. I cannot comment on how I thought

   proceeding went as I saw very little of what went on.




NSBC Call Loas

55. 1 do not recall personally dealing with any of the calls into NBSC from Mr

   Castleton or Marine Drive Post Office. However, I can see from the

   information provided by the inquiry that I dealt with a call on the 22/01/2004

   which related to a loss of £4000 (NBSC call reference H12987919 — see Trial

   Bundle Index (LCAS0000365)). I can see from this information that I tried to

   assist in identifying the reason for the loss and I created a second call and

   assigned that to the suspense account team (NBSC call reference

   H12987957 — see Trial Bundle Index (LCAS0000365)). When reviewing these

   calls at this time I do not recall whether I had any concerns or not.



56.At NBSC on a Wednesday afternoon / evening and Thursday morning it was

   not unusual dealing with branches relating to balancing issues or

   discrepancies. Although I do not recall specific branches or details, I do know

                                  Page 20 of 33
                                                                                    W ITNO9090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100




   I dealt with numerous branches who had balancing issues or discrepancies

   although I do not know if they were to the same extent as Mr Castleton.



57. While reviewing the information in the NBSC call logs provided by the Inquiry,

   I can see a call on the 29/0112004 with call reference H21274188 which refers

   to transactional archives (Trial Bundle Index (LCAS0000365)). I can see from

   the resolution field that the Tier 2 advisor states they have followed the KB

   instructions and emailed Adele Kilcoyne for this request. I did not deal with

   this call, and I do not know whether Archived Transactional data was provided

   to Mr Castleton.



58. I have been asked by the inquiry to look at several HSH call logs which they

   have provided (Call Logs referenced in LCAS00001 10 and the following call

   Logs FUJ00146112, FUJ00146115, FUJ00146117, FUJ00146141,

   FUJ00146142, FUJ00146145, FUJ00146147, FUJ00146160, FUJ00146161,

   FUJ00146162, FUJ00146176, FUJ00146179, FUJ00146181, F1JJ00146215,

   FUJ00146248, FUJ00146255, FUJ00146258, FUJ00146261, FUJ00146266,

   FUJ00146267). Although I am not familiar with the layout of these HSH logs,

   and I am not familiar with some of the technical terms and jargon it is clear

   that Mr Castleton made numerous attempts to request HSH look at his

   Horizon system as he was experiencing large and frequent losses.



59.As I mentioned earlier in this statement, broadly speaking the Service Support

   Team in NBSC was responsible for dealing with transaction and process

   related queries, this included the balancing process and supporting with


                                  Page 21 of 33
                                                                                       W ITNO9090100
                                                                                      WITNO9090100




                                                                      1A II0[S1II!ISJDI$]


   losses. HSH was responsible for dealing with technical related issues. My

   memory of my time at NBSC was that it was always difficult to get HSH to

   investigate balancing type issues as they deemed these NBSC responsibility

   and unless there was a receipts and payment mismatch, they deemed it an

   NBSC issue.


60. It is clear from reading through the HSH call logs that the majority were

   deemed by HSH as NBSC issues, and the call was closed, even when it

   stated NBSC had exhausted their checks. In these scenarios where HSH

   repeatedly passed branches back to NBSC our only option was to escalate to

   one of the Tier 2 team leaders and they would contact their counterpart at

   HSH directly via telephone. I do not recall ever making these types of calls to

   HSH, or anyone at ICL Pathway or Fujitsu, and I may not be told to the

   content of the discussion, but my understanding was these were to take a

   decision on ownership and discuss action taken. I can see from reading the

   HSH call logs that as time progressed and more calls were made to HSH they

   did escalate further for investigation (Call Log E-0402251077 (FUJ00146176))

   but reading the log it says there were no software problems found.



61. I have been asked by the Inquiry to consider call reference H1 3137225 and

   any relevance this call log might have (Trial Bundle Index (LCAS0000365)).

   This call was relating to the swap out of a base unit and the call description

   says it was an auditor asking the question. I can see from the call log and the

   classification in the activity field that this call was transferred to HSH which

   would be the appropriate course of action as NBSC would not have this

   information and could not answer Horizon equipment related calls. From the

                                   Page 22 of 33
                                                                                      W ITNO9090100
                                                                                  WITNO9090100




   information in the call log, I am unable to determine whether this request had

   any relevance or not.


62. 1 have been asked by the Inquiry whether I consider that the support provided

   to Mr Castleton by the NSBC was adequate. As I have little to no recollection

   of dealing with Mr Castleton or assisting Ms Pennington or discussing with my

   manager, Andrew Price, I do not know what thoughts (if any) I had at the time

   regarding the support provided.



63. Having familiarised myself with the documents provided to me by the Inquiry

   (importantly the NBSC call logs and Fujitsu call logs) I can see that Mr

   Castleton (or a member of his staff) repeatedly reached out to both helplines

   requesting support regarding his balancing and the losses he was

   experiencing. This was probably on a more frequent level than you would

   expect from branches although this would not been known at the time of

   taking the call as the Service Support Advisor would not have full visibility of

   all the information.



64. 1 do think that NBSC did what they could given that they did not have access

   to any data apart from that provided by the branch. I do think there comes a

   point where there is nothing more that NBSC can check, they were certainly

   not able to check for technical issues such as bugs, that must be HSH, and

   we were reliant on HSH doing that. However, after reviewing the call logs I do

   think that Mr Castleton was left out on a limb and numerous calls were

   concluded by sending him to another team. This meant that Mr Castleton was



                                  Page 23 of 33
                                                                                     W ITN09090100
                                                                                  WITNO9090100




                                                                    1NII0[S11&INI II$]


   bounced between NBSC and HSH, which looking back at that now I do not

   think that was helpful for Mr Castleton.


65. 1 have been asked by the Inquiry what did I consider to be the cause of the

   issues at Marine Drive Post Office. Although I do not recall dealing with

   Marine Drive Post Office or any specific thoughts, I do remember generally

   that I did not really form any conclusions of causes of losses when assisting

   branches as my job was to try and identify any errors in the balancing process

   or account.




66. I have been asked by the Inquiry to describe my involvement in conducting

   investigations at the Post Office. In 2011 1 moved into the role of Security

   Manager within the Security Team. Part of this role was to conduct

   investigations into Post Office branches where there was possible criminality.

   Before this role in 2011 1 had not been involved in any other criminal or civil

   proceeding against Sub Postmasters except for my witness statement in the

   case against Mr Castleton in 2006.



67. The Security Manager role was part of the Security Operations Team. That

   team consisted of the Head of Security Operations who had three Security

   Team leaders report to them, each of the Security Team Leaders managed a

   team of around seven Security Managers. There was also a team of three

   Financial Investigators who also reported to the Head of Security Operations.

   The Head of Security Operations reported into the Head of Security.


                                  Page 24 of 33
                                                                                    W I TN09090100
                                                                                 WITNO9090100



                                                                  1~AYJI10[S11&*11DI$]



68. When I joined the Security Team in 2011 the Head of Security oversaw all

   aspects of Security for POL, and they had 4 heads of department reporting

   into them. The Head of Security Operations (this was the strand I worked in),

   The Head of Physical Security which looked after equipment and premises,

   the Head of Commercial (this later became financial crime) which looked after

   products and the financial crime aspect, and IT Security which looked after IT

   related issues. Although not long after working in the Security Team the IT

   Security aspect split from the wider Security Team and moved into a more IT

   centric function.


69. In around 2016 the remaining 3 strands within the Security Team split with

   Physical Security Team moving under the property function and the now

   Financial Crime Team moving to Legal and Compliance. The Security

   Operations Team moved the Network Function and then later became part of

   the Loss Prevention Team. Currently the Security Operations Team sits under

   the Chief Retail Officer's function.


70. The role of Security Manager had two aspects, the first being an investigator

   role who investigated Sub Postmasters, their staff, Directly Managed Branch

   Employees, supply Chain employees and anyone directly employed by POL

   who had committed possible criminal offences against POL. The second

   aspect of the role would be more a Physical Security Manager providing

   support post Robbery and Burglary type incidents and attacks against out

   Cash vans.




                                   Page 25 of 33
                                                                                     W ITNO9090100
                                                                                    WITN09090100




                                                                    1NII0[S11MIIDI$]


71. In the Security Team we referred to an investigation as a case. A case would

   be raised and passed to the investigator by the Casework Team, this was a

   central admin team who managed the whole casework process. Although the

   case would be allocated by the Casework Team it was the Security

   Operations Team Leader who decided whether a case should be raised. It

   was also the Security Operations Team Leader who decided which

   investigator to allocate the case to, this was based on geography and current

   workload.


72. Cases could be raised for various reason including due to a loss being found

   at audit, analysis from teams who have identified potential criminality with

   specific products; concerns being raised by clients such as the DWP or DVLA,

   information received from Law Enforcement such as the Police.


73. The lead Investigator who was allocated the case would then undertake the

   investigation; this could include interviewing the suspect offender under

   PACE. The interview was a voluntary interview which would be done under

   caution and would be audio recorded. If an interview does take place the Lead

   Investigator would choose another investigator to be second officer, the

   second officer was there to support during the interview.


74. Once the investigation was concluded the lead investigator would submit the

   case to the criminal law team to apply the evidential test and decide on

   whether to prosecute or not. Often the Criminal Law Team would send advice

   asking the investigator to provide additional information or to clarify points

   they felt were missing.



                                  Page 26 of 33
                                                                                      W I TN09090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100



                                                                   1~AYJI10[S11IRINIDI$]


75. Before the split between Royal Mail and POL there was a Royal Mail Group

   Criminal Law Team, however, I do remember that Cartwright King was being

   used to make decisions on some prosecutions. After the split from Royal Mail

   POL retained one internal criminal lawyer (Jarnail Singh). however, it was

   Cartwright King who predominantly made the decisions on prosecutions.


76. If advice from the Criminal Law Team was to prosecute, then the DAM (I am

   not entirely sure, but I believe this stood for Designated Authority Manager)

   gave the final authority to proceed. The DAM was normally the Head of

   Security Operations or the Head of Security.


77. If the decision was to prosecute, then the investigator would arrange a date

   for the case to be heard at a local magistrate court (local to the suspected

   offender) and issue a summons via post. The Criminal Law Team would then

   be responsible for all legal proceedings in the courts.


78. The Conduct of Criminal Investigations Policy (POL00038642) sets out the full

   investigation process.


79. During my role in the security team, I was tasked by the head of Security

   Operations, Rob King, to assist him in pulling together a document detailing

   the investigation process. Rob King was new in the role and new to the

   business and given the split from Royal Mail in 2012 he wanted to produce a

   document detailing the process. This document became the conduct of

   investigation policy. This document did not change the way the security team

   conducted investigations; it solidified the process into one document. My role

   in producing this document was pulling information and processes from


                                  Page 27 of 33
                                                                                       W I TN09090100
                                                                                    WITNO9090100



                                                                    1~AYJI10[S11IRINIDI$]


   existing documents within the team and setting out chronologically. Rob King

   was responsible for all the narrative included in the document, I collated that

   with the process information.


80. In July 2013, at the time of the publication of the report by Second Sight,

   prosecutions were frozen immediately with only a handful of prosecutions

   after this date. Investigations and interviews continued, however when these

   investigations were submitted to Cartwright King (they were the Criminal Law

   Team who advised on prosecutions at that time) they did not provide any

   advice on prosecution, the cases were kept in a `stack', sometimes for up to

   12 months. Feedback coming down from the Head of Security Operations

   (Rob King), the Head of Security (John Scott) and Cartwright King was that

   POL was trying to obtain the services of a new Subject Matter Expert (SME)

   and once we had that in place prosecutions would resume.



81. In 2015 I moved into the newly formed Security Intelligence Team, so I was

   not directly involved in any more investigations. I do remember there were still

   investigations taking place but to a much lesser extent than previous years

   and at that point in 2015 there was still no SME in place. In 2015 Advice on

   prosecutions was made by General Council Jane McCloud (I am not sure at

   what point that decision was moved away from Cartwright King). I am not

   aware of any prosecutions against Postmasters or Branch staff being

   authorised by General Council, but I do believe there was one prosecution

   against an employee who worked in Head Office.




                                   Page 28 of 33
                                                                                     W I TN09090100
                                                                                   WITNO9090100



                                                                    1~AYJI10[S11MIIDI$]


82. 1 do believe that all investigation work undertaken by the Security Team

   stopped during the Group Litigation in 2018 /2019. The Security Manager role

   is now purely a supportive role assisting branches with matters relating to

   physical security and Robbery / Burglary crime prevention and managing risk

   (from an external crip point of view) across the branch and supply chain

   network.



83. 1 have been asked by the inquiry for my recollection of 24 criminal cases. I

   can confirm that I have never been involved with 22 of the 24 criminal cases.

   The two criminal cases that i have been involved with are Grant Allen and

   Khayyam Ishaq.


84. For both cases involving Grant Allen and Khayyam Ishaq my involvement was

   that I attended the interview as second officer in the case. The role of second

   officer was to attend the interview with the lead investigator to assist them

   with the interview on the day. That assistance could include greeting the

   interviewee and their representatives, arranging the layout of the interview

   room, and providing support during the interview. The lead investigator would

   lead in the interview asking most of the questions; however, the second officer

   could interject with appropriate questions if required. Once the interview was

   concluded, as a second officer I would have had limited involvement in the

   case from that point. It would be the lead investigator who then progressed

   the case. From memory I do not recall any of the details of the case or

   interview with Grant Allen and Khayyam Ishaq.




                                  Page 29 of 33
                                                                                   W ITNO9090100
                                                                                 WITNO9090100




                                                                    1NII0[S11MII II$]


85. During my time working in the Security Team, I have been involved in a

   number of criminal cases and i have never had any concerns relating to these

   cases.



86. 1 have been asked by the inquiry my recollection of ten civil cases. I can

   confirm that I have never been involved with any of the 10 civil cases listed by

   the inquiry. Apart from the civil case against Mr Castleton I have not been

   involved in any other civil cases.




Knowledge of bugs, errors and defects in the Horizon system

87. I have been asked by the Inquiry whether I had, or was aware of, any

   concerns regarding the robustness of the Horizon IT system during my time

   working for the Post Office. To my knowledge in all my career working for the

   Post Office I have never witnessed a bug, error or defect while using the

   Horizon System and I have never had any concerns. When I joined the Post

   Office Security Team in 2011, l became aware that a group of Sub

   Postmasters were claiming that Horizon was responsible for the losses they

   had suffered in branch. However, the message from the business was always

   that there were no issues with Horizon and even during the start of the group

   litigation the theme from the business was that POL would be successful in

   proving there was no issue with the system.

Sihriiimi

88. I have been asked if there are any other matters that I wish to bring before the

   inquiry. Since 2020 the Security intelligence Team has worked with the Post


                                   Page 30 of 33
                                                                                           W ITNO9090100
                                                                                      WITNO9090100




                                                                        1A II0[S11&INIDI1]


        Office solicitors Peters and Peters, the purpose of this was to provide historic

        data to them relating to investigations and prosecutions undertaken by the

        Post Office Security Team. Due to my extensive knowledge and experience of

        working for Post Office these interactions with Peters and Peters developed

        into providing information on Post Office and Horizon procedures.



   89. Some of the questions I have been asked are linked to cases that are going

        through the CCRC process. My involvement is to provide general advice on

        how a particular transaction would be processed on Horizon or how the

        accounting and despatch for a transaction would work. For example, i

        provided an explanation on how the Green Giro transaction was processed on

        the Horizon system and when and where the actual Giro Cheques were

        despatched to. I also assist Peters and Peters to help them understand what

        historic forms were used for, or to explain to them what a particular acronym

        or other Post Office Jargon means. The requests I received from Peters and

        Peters sometimes come via email and sometime via telephone call .




Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:         G RO
Dated       31st May 2023




Index to the First Witness Statement of Andrew Wise



                                       Page 31 of 33
                                                                                 W I TNO9090100
                                                                              WITNO9090100



                                                              1~iflI10[S1II!ISJDI$]


No   URN           Document Description                     Control Number

1    LCAS0000110   Witness Statement of Andrew Wise,        VIS00010350

                   including Exhibit AW1 email from Mr

                   Andrew Price to a Ms Cath Oglesby

2    POL00070822   (Email from Stephen Dilley (Bond         POL-0067385

                   Pearce LLP) to Andrew Wise Re: Post

                   Office Limited -v- Mr L Castleton O).

3    POL00113492   Email from Stephen Dilley (Bond          POL-0112643

                   Pearce LLP) to Andrew Wise Re: First

                   draft witness statement of Andrew Wise

4    POL00038642   The Conduct of Criminal Investigations   POL-0027953

                   Policy

5    LCAS0000365   Trial Bundle Index                       VIS00010605

6    FUJ00146112   Call Log Ref E-0401280325                POINQ0152306F



7    FUJ00146115   Call Log Ref E-0401290358                POI NQ0152309F

8    FUJO0146117   Call Log Ref E-0402020111                POI NQ0152311F

9    FUJO0146141   Call Log Ref E-0402130261                POI NQ0152335F

10   FUJO0146142   Call Log Ref E-0402130267                POIN00152336F

11   FUJO0146145   Call Log Ref E-0402160081                POINQ0152339F

12   FUJO0146147   Call Log Ref E-0402160628                POI N00152341 F

13   FUJO0146160   Call Log Ref E-0402250454                POINQ0152354F

14   FUJO0146161   Call Log Ref E-0402250553                POI NQ0152355F

15   FUJO0146162   Call Log Ref E-0402250565                POINQ0152356F

16   FUJ00146176   Call Log Ref E-0402251077                POI NQ015237OF


                                Page 32 of 33
                                                                    W I TNO9090100
                                                                 WITNO9090100




                                                 1A II0B01II!IM7t[$I17

17   FUJO0146179   Call Log Ref E-0403040165   POI NQ0152373F

18   FUJO0146181   Call Log Ref E-0403040524   POI NQ0152375F

19   FUJO0146215   Call Log Ref E-0404010718   POI NQ0152409F

20   FUJ00146248   Call Log Ref E-0404190387   POI NQ0152442F

21   FUJO0146255   Call Log Ref E-0404210187   POI NQ0152449F

22   FUJO0146258   Call Log Ref E-0404230660   POINQ0152452F

23   FUJO0146261   Call Log Ref E-0404260747   POI NQ0152455F
                                                                     1
24   FUJO0146266   Call Log Ref E-0404230510   POINQ015246OF
                                                                     I
25   FUJO0146267   Call Log Ref E-0404210701   POI NQ0152461F




                              Page 33 of 33
