                                                                                       WITNO3850100
                                                                                      WITN03850100




                                                         Witness Name: Mark Burley
                                                         Statement No W ITNO3850100




                                                     •




I, Mark Burley, will say as follows;

   1. I, Mark Richard Burley, can confirm that I was not the HNG-X Programme

       Manager at the Post Office for the period of the development and rollout of

       the system known as HNG-x to replace the original Horizon solution. I was

       the Programme Manager until July 2009 when I moved into a 'Head of

       Delivery' role. This subsequent role did have oversight of HNG-X.


   2. I joined the Post Office in 1985 and held many roles - I believe the ones

       pertinent to this were a) HNGX Programme Manager from November 2005

       to July 2009 and b) Head of Delivery from July 2009 to March 2011 when I




   3. I held various qualifications relevant to the above roles including Prince 2,

       MSP and many other Project Management related qualifications.




       Programme management training.



                                       Page 1 of 7
                                                                                    WITNO3850100
                                                                                   WITN03850100




5. 1 was competent in the use of legacy Horizon and was involved in an

   assurance role over its development.


6. I wasn't aware of any `faults' with legacy Horizon but was aware it was

   essentially a modified EPOS solution and as such errors on data input could

   be made with consequential impacts on weekly accounts. As with any

   technology solution, bugs did occur but these were investigated and fixed -

   appropriately (to the best of my knowledge). On occasions, I was involved

   in agreeing how bugs should be fixed.


7. Subpostmasters received training on Horizon and HNG-x (question unclear

   to which system it refers). Additionally, there was access to a helpline with

   any queries handled through trained operatives. Subpostmasters also had

   access to their Retail Network Manager for any concerns and could gain

   help that way.


8. I cannot comment on the training for Horizon; for HNG-X the training

   included a test which had to be passed before official use of the system was

   approved. The test was developed across multiple parties included the

   National Federation of Subpostmasters representatives (a group were part

   of HNG-X assurance).


9. HNG-X was commissioned for a number of reasons - a) the costs of legacy

   Horizon were increasing and technology had moved on with cheaper

   alternatives available b) the technology was starting to approach end of life

   c) the business mix had changed with much more being on-line thus

   requiring a more tailored solution d) the Post Office wanted to modernise

   and present a more modern image.

                                 Page 2 of 7
                                                                                     WITNO3850100
                                                                                    WITN03850100




10. The development of HNG-x followed a traditional waterfall approach and as

   such the initial focus was on functional and non functional requirements.

   This was primarily a Post Office business led activity but collaboration with

   Fujitsu took place to ensure requirements were a) prioritised b) clear and

   understandable (through for example the use of Acceptance criteria) c)

   open to challenge where Fujitsu had good reason to question e.g. due to

   complexity I cost. This was followed by Design and build and then an

   extended period of test. Finally this concluded with a pilot / trial which

   resulted in further improvements. Collaboration was always part of the

   approach.


11. My role in development of HNGx was Programme Manager for Post Office

   which was essentially accountable for delivery to time, cost and quality.


12. Post Office requirements were numerous and not possible to be recalled -

   requirements numbered in the 100's if not the 1000's.


13. Not clear what this question is getting at - the purpose of migrating to HNG-

   x surely is the same as the answer to q9?


14.The Acceptance of the HNG-x system was through extensive testing -

   system, integration, end to end, user and the trial / pilot. User Acceptance

   testing was against the specific Acceptance criteria. In addition, and I

   believe as a first, we invited Subpostmasters to take part in the testing to

   give their feedback. (We also had a panel of Subpostmasters to provide a

   level of assurance for the Programme as it proceeded)


15.The HNG-x system development was a challenge against the original

   timeline with many delays caused by design clarity as well as system bugs
                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                                       WITNO3850100
                                                                                      WITN03850100




   that had to be fixed. However the focus was on quality first and foremost

   and therefore timelines were extended to ensure it was fit for purpose.

   Testing was extensive and whilst some bugs' made their way into pilot, the

   focus always remained on quality first and foremost.


16.As Programme Manager, the one person who would have been under

   pressure to migrate to HNG-x quickly would have been myself. Through

   demonstrating how we, as a team, were holding Fujitsu to account on

   quality, there was never any pressure to migrate before we had signed off

   readiness. Obviously there was always an interest in time as there was on

   cost but quality was always given to me as the most critical element as one

   of the 3 (time, cost or quality) always has to take precedence. Indeed even

   with the trial / pilot, there were a few'issues' identified that we ensured were

   resolved and re-trialled before starting the full migration. It is worth noting,

   the decision to enter a pilot and extended pilot and ful l rollout was a

   collaborative decisions with all parties in agreement including the NFSP with

   appropriate pauses where any bugs / concerns did arise.


17.This question is again unclear - Horizon Online? is this original Horizon or

   HNG-x. As stated above the original pilot of HNG-x did not proceed to full

   migration immediately to facilitate the resolution of some defects /

   improvement opportunities. As mentioned above the start of any pilot /

   extended pilot / rollout was agreed with all parties including the NFSP and

   this equally applied to pauses in the event of concerns.


18. With any computer system, there is always likely to be bugs and this is the

   purpose of testing. With one as complex as HNG-x that can be used in

   unique situations, there was always a risk that additional bugs could be
                                  Page 4 of 7
                                                                                      WITNO3850100
                                                                                     WITNO3850100




   identified despite completing many thousands of specific tests. The pilot

   aimed to identify this and succeeded. In terms of how it could have been

   avoided, this is a difficult question to given an accurate answer to_ There is

   always an option of more testing but ultimately, it would never be realistic

   to believe all scenarios could be tested.


19. 1 had confidence in HNG-x throughout in terms of the development and

   testing process but we were deploying a system to over 10,000 branches

   and some bugs had been identified and whilst they were fixed, naturally

   there was some noise as we were very open and honest with the NFSP.

   Ultimately their support was a vital part of our roll out.


20. During roll out of HNG-x, inevitably additional bugs / defects were identified

   but as stated above, my view is these were down to specific circumstances

   in how it was being used. It would be impossible to test every possible

   scenario. However all bugs / defects were taken seriously and corrected

   during my tenure


21. I feel unable to answer this question as I have not been provided with the

   relevant documentation on the case. I can reiterate that every bug was

   taken seriously and if needed, a decision to pause any roll out was taken

   until it was fixed and retested.


22.HNG-x was rolled out within agreed parameters and bugs / defects

   identified were fixed and corrected. In addition, as mentioned above, the

   NFSP remained a key part of all decisions to start! pause pilots , rollouts,

   etc.




                                  Page 5 of 7
                                                                                      WITNO3850100
                                                                                     WITN03850100




    23.HNG-x was focussed on quality. The idea to include a Subpostmaster

         `Advisor' group was mine and worked well. Arguably, I could have started

         this earlier.


    24. 1 do not have all the information to comment on who is responsible for the

         Post Office Scandal .


    25. Based on what I have seen and heard, maybe the Post Office could have

         had a dedicated team investigating larger scale discrepancies. However

         again, I do not have all the relevant information.




I believe the content of this statement to be true.




ii inr           1iIr




                                       Page 6 of 7
              WITNO3850100
             WITNO3850100




Page 7 of7
