WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

Witness Name: John Graeme Simpkins
Statement No.: WITN0411_01

Exhibits: WITN0411_01/1 to WITN0411_01/4
Dated: 4 August 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF JOHN GRAEME SIMPKINS

|, MR JOHN GRAEME SIMPKINS, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION

1. |am currently employed by Fujitsu Services Limited (“Fujitsu”) as a Team Leader
within the Software Support Centre for the Horizon IT system. | have held this
position since 2010.

2. This witness statement is made on behalf of Fujitsu to assist the Post Office
Horizon IT Inquiry with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request provided to Fujitsu
on 11 March 2022 and a series of follow-up questions provided to me by the
Inquiry on 1 July 2022 (the “Request”), to the extent | have direct knowledge of
such matters.

3. The topics set out in the Inquiry’s Request relate to events that took place many
years ago. Such topics include the design and development of the Horizon system,
the pilot releases and the robustness of Horizon. | have tried to remember these
events to the best of my ability. However, given the passage of time, there may be

certain matters where my recollection is more limited.

Page 1 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

4. Where | have included information from documents relevant to the Inquiry’s
Request, these documents are referred to using references WITN0411_01/1 to
WITN0411_01/4 and are listed in the index accompanying this statement.

BACKGROUND

5. | joined ICL Pathway Limited (“ICL Pathway”) in July 1996 as an Application
Developer in the European Development and Support Centre (“EDSC”), having
worked previously at |CL Edacom since 1994. The EDSC was the precursor to the
Software Support Centre (“SSC”), as the team is still known today. The
development team became separate units.

6. Shortly after joining ICL Pathway in 1996, | moved away from development work
into a support role. | have remained in this support role ever since, firstly in the
EDSC, then the SSC, working under various managers. During the period prior to
the national rollout, my managers were Raj Aurora in 1996 and then Mik Peach
from 1997 onwards. | then became a SSC Team Leader in 2010. There were three
Team Leaders in the SSC which reported to the SSC Manager, who was Steve
Parker at the time. The Team leader role included:

a. maintaining the support rotas;

b. assigning new projects to staff in the SSC, for example when new
features were introduced, one or more SSC team members were
assigned as the Subject Matter Expert (SME) to learn the details;

c. carrying out personnel appraisals; and

d. ensuring there was enough staff during holiday periods.

7. The EDSC/SSC is the software third line support team. The team does not support
the hardware or operating systems. The team had a good interaction with the

testing teams and development to supply evidence and find possible ways to re-

Page 2 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

create defects on test equipment. We also interacted with sub-postmasters when
gathering evidence or providing support. The EDSC/SSC was not responsible for
reporting to Post Office. My understanding is the Service Management team
reported on certain issues to Post Office. | was not directly involved in raising
issues with Service Management. While | am not sure of the details, my
understanding is the head of the SSC fed certain information to the Service
Management team.

8. Alongside my support work, | have also designed and developed some systems
in use by the support teams and the wider Post Office Account, including the
incident management system known as Peak. The Peak system came about when
looking to replace the aging PinICL system. It was decided that the SSC had the
correct skills to develop the solution. The data was migrated from PinICL into a
newer database platform and we created a web-based front-end. We did some
parallel running with the LST (Live Support Test) team before finally rolling it out
across the account. There were no unresolved issues outstanding from this pilot
and the speed and ease to develop the Peak system has kept it in use for the last
18 years.

DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT

9. While | was initially taken on as an Application Developer, | only remained in this
role for a very short time and did not in fact develop any aspects of the Horizon
system myself. During my time as an Application Developer, | worked with Dai
Jones to learn the coding language being used at the time. This language was
known as Visual Basic. A key role of the development team was to ensure that the
Visual Basic coding being used by the team interfaced properly with Escher’s

software product, Riposte, which | will come on to discuss in more detail later in

Page 3 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

this statement. Access to the Escher source code was only granted to the
development team if absolutely necessary.

PILOT - INITIAL GO LIVE (RELEASE 1A)

10.Once we got to the Initial Go Live in 1996 (also known as Release 1A), we knew
we would need to establish a team to support the system. In anticipation of the
Initial Go Live, | volunteered to leave the development team and join the new
support team. This team was also referred to as second line support. Raj Aurora
was my manager and | recall that Caren Slack was the Team Leader. There were
three lines of support in place during the Initial Go Live (first line, second line and
Development), but this has since evolved to four lines of support. | was not
involved in the decision-making behind the move to four lines of support, nor do |
recall when this happened. The Service Management Centre (“SMC”) was the
extra line of support that was added. They provided continuous monitoring of the
live estate and also took on roles from other support teams via automation,
knowledge bases and training.

11.My team and | worked in a custom configured room in ICL Pathway’s offices in
Feltham. There were three other teams all working from the same room, including
the first line support team who answered calls from sub-postmasters, the EDSC
where | worked, the operations teams and a banking benefits team. These teams
were all from ICL Pathway, except for the banking team who were external - | think
the bank in question may have been GiroBank. This arrangement was possible as
the Initial Go Live was only a small pilot. There was also a back room which
contained hardware.

12.The Initial Go Live involved ten post office branches and involved the rollout and

trial of one main function. This function was the provision of benefits to members

Page 4 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

of the public via a payment card (this was known as the Benefit Encashment
Service (“BES")). Information related to benefit payments was transmitted via the
Oracle database and downloaded to a particular Post Office branch. In most
cases, benefits claimants would go to a nominated branch to collect payments
using their payment card.

13. | was not party to the design or development of the Oracle database but do not
recall any concerns raised about the Oracle database or the system generally.
Had there been any outstanding defects, these would likely have been recorded
in the PinICL archives.

14.To support the BES, Release 1A included certain other functions, including:

a. PoLo (Post Office Log On): A two-factor authentication for the sub-
postmasters to log on to the branch counter using a smart card holding
a key;

b. PUN (Pick up Notice): Letters were sent to benefits claimants telling
them to collect their new benefit card from their nominated branch by
scanning the bar-code contained in the letter;

c. FTMS (File Transfer Management Service): Required to move files
between the ICL Pathway data centres and the external parties’ data
centres;

d. Agents: Required to move data from the BES database to Riposte (and
vice versa);

e. Maestro scheduling software: Required to run the data centre processes

— initially this was manually run by the operations team; and

Page 5 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

f. CAS (CAPS Access Service): The Virtual Machine Environment (“WME”)
interface to the benefits agency (Customer Accounting and Payments
Strategy).

15.PoLo (see paragraph 14a above) was initially implemented for security purposes.
It ensured that if a counter was stolen the messages could not be read. One issue
| recall being present in the system at about this time related to PoLo. Sometimes
the two-factor authentication process failed or the sub-postmaster would lose their
PoLo card and the support team would speak to the sub-postmaster over the
phone to reset the encryption and resolve the issue. When PoLo was first
implemented, the recovery process was time consuming as it involved reading
about 16 lines of 15 characters from the counter and the support team would have
to enter these into the PoLo recovery workstation to generate a recovery key which
was then keyed into the counter. This was later shortened to an automated
process that meant the sub-postmaster only had to type in a single line of 15
characters. | am not sure when this change took place.

16.1 also recall there being issues with the network, which affected the timely
transmission of data to and from the data centres. An application Counter Network
Infrastructure Manager (CNIM) ran on the counter to detect for network outages,
this information was sent to Tivoli for Quality of Service (QoS) monitoring. | believe
the EDSC/SSC (using the NSAT application — Network Service Allocation Tool)
could change the network configuration at a branch to try and improve the service.
For example, by keeping the line open during working hours rather than
connecting each 30 minutes or on demand. There were a number of network

configurations, including Bronze, Silver, ISDN or Satellite.

Page 6 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

17.Regarding rectification of deficiencies in general, during Releases 1A, 1B and 1C
(| cover the latter two releases in more detail below), my recollection is that there
remained three support lines in place. The first line support team received calls
from sub-postmasters regarding problems or issues they might be having. | think
the system we had in place at the time to record these calls was called PowerHelp.
If first line support could not resolve the issue and it was related to the software, it
would be escalated to the second line support team. Matters that came through to
the second line support team would be recorded initially in PowerHelp and then
later in PinICL.
18.|lssues that could not be resolved by second line support would be passed to the
development team, who would use PiniCL to record their work after it was
introduced. At the time of the release, significant individuals that | recall from first
and second line support included:
a. Sandie Bothick, Donna Munro (Horizon Service Helpdesk (HSH));
b. Jan Ambrose, Richard Brunskill, Angela Shaw, Nicole Meredith, Hazel
Salvat (Business Support Unit (“BSU”) / Management Support Unit
MSU’);
c. John Bradley, Mike Conneely, Adrian Chambers (Management System
Support (“MSS”) / Systems Management Group (“SMG’)).
19.Mark Taylor, lain Jannsens, Roy Birkinshaw were some of the development
managers that | have come across.
20.Both first and second line support teams operated out of Feltham during Release
1A but, sometime during 1997, the EDSC (second line support) moved to offices

in Bracknell and first line support moved to Stevenage. The Operations team

Page 7 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

moved to Ireland and the data centres moved to Bootle and Wigan. | think the
development and test teams remained in Feltham.

PILOT - RELEASES 1B AND 1C

21.1 can see that in the Appendix to the Request, certain questions refer to further
software releases at approximately 200-300 branches. | cannot recall the precise
number of branches (or which branches they were), but this seems to me to be
referring to Release 1B and Release 1C. Each of these releases added
functionality to the system. In relation to Release 1B, | recall that the Order Book
Control System (“OBCS’) was added. This functionality allowed benefits claimants
to present their order books with slips to receive cash payments. An Oracle
database was set up to record the details. The order book slips were scanned at
the branch and checked against data from the Oracle database. OBCS data was
sent and received via a VME interface (known as the OAS (OBCS Access
Service)).

22.Release 1C then added EPOSS-type functionality. EROSS means “Electronic
Point of Sale System” and enabled branches to sell stamps and other products,
perform bulk sales and apply discounts. This functionality included:

a. reference data: configuration information such as products available to
sell, the value of the products or the layout of the menu hierarchy; and

b. user roles: different user roles would have permissions to perform
activities such as create new users, create new stock units or reset
passwords.

23.At around this time a reporting function which harvested branch transactions and
passed aggregated totals to Post Office was added in the form of a TPS

(Transaction Processing System). The TPS batched up transactions performed by

Page 8 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

the branches and sent them to Post Office’s TIP (Transaction Information
Processing) system. | think the TPS functionality was introduced as part of
Release 1C but | am not certain of this.

24.1 cannot recall if the Cash Account was incorporated into EPOSS by Release 1C
or if that functionality was introduced later. | will come on to discuss the Cash
Account later in this statement.

25.| have reviewed an Investment and Strategy Committee Meeting document dated
15 December 1997 (WITN0411_01/1), which relates to the roll-out of Release 1C.
| do not recall any defects that were outstanding at the time Releases 1B and 1C
were rolled out. However a manual investigation of the PinICL archive should
identify which (if any) were outstanding at these times. To the extent that there
were any known defects when these releases were rolled out, my understanding
is that this would have been communicated to Post Office, either by the Service
Management team (as noted at paragraph 7 above), or by other ICL Pathway
teams. | was not involved in communications with Post Office in this regard, neither
am | aware of how or if such issues were communicated to sub-postmasters.

26.One issue | recall being present in the system at about the time of Releases 1B
and 1C related to reports that sub-postmasters would print off. Sometimes parts
of these reports were “cut-off’ whilst other transactions were performed in that
review period. A report is cut-off (cleared) once the sub-postmaster has compared
it to their receipts. This may include a list of OBCS foils they were sending back.
Looking at PinICL PC0037808 (WITN0411_01/2), | understand that the issue
arose where the sub-postmaster may have printed a report and stayed on the cut-
off page whilst further transactions were performed on another counter. This would

not have affected the branch account.

Page 9 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

27.Another problem | remember was that sometimes transactions failed to replicate
between branch counters; this could cause confusion and re-keying (in paragraph
51 below | provide some more detail regarding the replication of transaction data
between counters). Re-keying transactions could cause discrepancies in the
branch accounts as sometimes, a sub-postmaster would re-enter a missing
transaction when a transaction on one counter was not replicated on another
counter. As a result, there would be a duplicate transaction when the counters re-
established contact.

28.1 also recall there being issues with the print quality of scanned OBCS foils.

29.| cannot remember how these specific problems were rectified, but | would echo
my earlier comment that PinlCLs from the time may record how these issues were
dealt with. When agreeing to close the call, the support team resolving the ticket
would report the root cause of any ticket to the person that had raised the call. |
cannot comment on how the service management team would then report any of
these matters to Post Office.

DELAY

30.1 do not recall why there was a delay to the project and no specific technical issues
come to mind. However, once the Benefits Agency withdrew from the project,
there was a need to pivot the work being undertaken on the project as, until that
time, much of the work done related to the payment of benefits.

31.In terms of the reason for this change, | believe we were told that the Benefits
Agency had decided that benefits would be distributed directly into people’s bank
accounts and those without an account will have a special account for withdrawal
only known as Post Office Card Account (POCA) or Card Account Post Office

(CAPO). However, Post Office wanted to continue to computerise the branches

Page 10 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

and so the Pathway project would pivot from a PFI initiative to being a Post Office
customer.

32.Having reviewed the Chief Executive’s Report dated 7 May 1997
(WITN0411_ 01/3), it seems as though the test teams identified defects that were
fixed by redirecting developers from working on Release 1C to Release 1B before
it was released, causing a delay in Release 1C. Having also reviewed the Chief
Executive’s Report dated 15 July 1997 (WITN0411_ 01/4), it appears it relates to
defects found in the testing of Release 1C. Such defects apparently caused an 8-
week delay, with a further 7-week delay coming from delayed requirements and
Post Office adding new requirements into a release.

33. | also have no recollection of an internal audit being undertaken in relation to
Release 1B and 1C.

CASH ACCOUNT

34.1 was not involved in the design or development of the Cash Account, but | played
a role in supporting sub-postmasters when completing their Cash Account. |
cannot be sure if my recollections of my work in relation to the Cash Account
include the period prior to the rollout of the Horizon IT system or after the rollout,
but | describe them below nevertheless.

35.When the Cash Account was first introduced, sub-postmasters were required to
complete and balance their Cash Account once a week. This was done on a
Wednesday.

36.The purpose of the Cash Account was to check, for each stock unit, whether the
cash and stock physically held in the branches matched the amount of cash and

stock recorded in Horizon. This was known as balancing.

Page 11 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

37.There would sometimes be discrepancies between the stock unit’s physical
holdings figure (as manually counted by the sub-postmaster) and the figures
calculated by the system. Such discrepancies could have been caused by a
number of issues and were not necessarily system faults. As it relied on a manual
counting process, the discrepancy would only be visible at the point of the sub-
postmaster balancing their accounts. My team made it a practice to stay later on
a Wednesday evening to assist sub-postmasters with balancing their Cash
Accounts over the phone. For example, we would investigate messages in the
branch Message Store, locate particular transaction references and provide
advice on reversals. We also had access to developer support, who also typically
stayed later on Wednesdays to assist.

38.| have no knowledge of whether or how issues relating to the Cash Account were
reported externally. Generally at this time, | think the reporting of issues to Post
Office would have been the responsibility of the Service Management team.

ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA AND TESTING

39.As noted above, my role was in supporting the system. | was not therefore involved
in the testing or acceptance of Horizon prior to the national rollout (or since). My
team did, however, work closely with the test teams. From memory, the test teams
interfaced with Post Office quite a lot. They would also have used the PinICL
system for their defect reporting and analysis, including raising issues to be
addressed/rectified during the test phase.

ROBUSTNESS

40. By way of background, in the Horizon IT system, each branch counter had its own
database known as the Message Store. The individual counter Message Stores

recorded transactions carried out on that particular counter (along with other data).

Page 12 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

The data from the Message Store would be replicated to the other counters in the
branch, meaning that each counter had a complete copy of all the data from the
other counters in that branch.

41.1In addition, the data would also be replicated to the correspondence servers in the
data centre. As data is written to each correspondence server, it is also written to
a file which was securely stored on an Audit Server. At this time, there was one
data centre in Wigan and another in Bootle. To decrease the chances of any data
being lost, there would be two copies of the Message Store in Wigan and two
copies in Bootle. | do not know how these data centres were selected or if there
were any concerns about their locations as it was outside my job role. | am also
unable to comment on the hardware and operating systems running in the data
centre as they were not supported by the EDSC/SSC.

42.|n addition to data replication, other checks were also undertaken to ensure the
accuracy of the data being recorded. These included:

a. Cyclic Redundancy Checks (CRC): These were checks of the Riposte
Message Store which took place each time a message was read and
which stopped the current operation if invalid messages were identified.
In the event that an invalid message was identified, a Windows event
would be raised to alert support. This was more common as the counters
aged and disk errors increased. Windows also creates disk warning
events when it detected signs of corruption and we would run a
‘checkdsk’ to flag parts of the disk as not to be used. This check became
used increasingly to identify hard disk corruption as hard disks aged.

b. Payments and Receipts Checks: The counter software was a dual entry

book keeping system so, for each transaction, an equal and balancing

Page 13 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

transaction must take place (e.g. sell a stamp and receive cash for the
equal and opposite value). If the payments did not match the receipts’
totals then an alert would have been displayed to the sub-postmaster
and it would have been picked up by the data centre report, as
mentioned below.

c. Cash Account Checks: These were performed on transactions at the
data centres, with issues then being reported to the MSU team.

d. Each part of the Riposte software suite has a hash associated with it,
these were also stored in the Message Store and were checked on start-
up. The software hash was recalculated and checked against those in
the Message Store. If they did not match, Riposte would not start up.
This prevents doctored software from being introduced.

43.Because the data from the individual counters was replicated to the
correspondence server, which my team could access, we were able to review the
counter data across the entire estate, identify any problems and potentially rectify
them. For example, in the ‘Dalmellington’ Branch Out Reach issue, we were able
to identify affected branches by searching for duplicate pouch IDs and then create
a report of the affected branches that | believe was sent from the Fujitsu Service
Management team to Post Office.

44.To my knowledge, there would only be a difference between a counter and the
data centre if a counter was replaced and all the messages had not recovered
before Riposte came up or replicated to other neighbours or the counter was out
of communication.

45.Sometimes we would not make the correction ourselves and would instead inform

Post Office of the issue through the MSU team. In terms of who was informed of

Page 14 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

when the ticket was rectified, this was managed on a case-by-case basis and
would depend on who raised the PinlCL/Peak. Any investigation outcome would
be updated on the support call and the closure agreement was required with the
call raiser.

46.At some point, although | do not recall whether this was before or after the national
rollout, ICL Pathway / Fujitsu introduced an event monitoring system, as part of
the Tivoli suite. | cannot comment on the operation of Tivoli in detail as the
MSS/SMG teams were responsible for this. Microsoft Windows NT is the operating
system that was used on the counters. It manages the three logs (security, system
and application) itself, reporting about the operation of Windows. Other
applications, including ours, could also post messages into these logs. Some
events recorded on these logs were harvested by our own application, Tivoli.
These events were then visible to the SMC who monitored the Tivoli event console
and issues were dealt with appropriately by raising a ticket with PowerHelp, which
may then be transferred to PiniCL for progression. These event logs were also
available to the EDSC staff but only in an ad-hoc fashion.

47.\n relation to the accuracy and integrity of the data recorded and processed on the
Horizon system, | believed that the software worked well on the whole. However,
there were a number of issues relating to accuracy and integrity which | discuss
further below. | cannot comment on how general issues would be relayed to Post
Office but, in respect of individual incidents, | believe that information was passed
back to Post Office through the BSU/MSU or Service Management.

48.In terms of deficiencies during this time, there were a number of difficulties arising
from the Riposte product. These included malformed messages (which would be

identified by the data centre checks) and replication issues.

Page 15 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

49.All messages required certain attributes (such as user ID, date, time) to be
harvested and sent to third party systems. Where there was a missing or corrupted
attribute in the message, it would be harvested but flagged as incorrect by TPS
and not sent to third party systems. The TIP Repair Tool was used to repair these
malformed messages. The tool identified and ring-fenced any messages that did
not meet an expected criteria. For example, the message may be missing a user
attribute, the date may be too short or a value may be too large. Following this,
the MSU would raise a support ticket for each exception and the EDSC/SSC team
would investigate and look for the correct information for the message. To my
knowledge, a malformed message could potentially result in a receipts and
payments mismatch but it would have been very unlikely to cause a discrepancy
(i.e. a loss or a gain) as it would probably require two malformed messages, one
for the receipt and one for the payments of equal amount.

50.The main replication issue was that, when a transaction was performed on a
counter which was not communicating to its neighbours, the transaction would not
be replicated. If a report was later produced on another counter, sub-postmasters
sometimes realised the transaction was missing and re-entered it manually
themselves (known as re-key). As a result, when communication between the
counters was later restored, the branch then had two copies of the same
transaction (as the transaction had been entered manually at the branch again).
This may then have led to the sub-postmaster experiencing a loss or gain.

5

=

. There could be many root causes for replication failures between counters. This
could include, network cable faults, hub faults for large branches, hardware faults,
and issues with Riposte. Where it was a hardware and/or network issue, an

appropriate engineer may have been required. Where it was a software issue, the

Page 16 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

events were monitored by second line support who would raise a ticket for first line
support to contact the sub-postmaster to reboot the affected counter.

52.At around 7 pm, each counter sent an “end of day” message. If a counter failed to
send an “end of day” message, any transactions performed during the affected
day would not be harvested into the TPS database (transactions sent to Post
Office’s MIS systems) or the APS database (bill payments sent to multiple client,
such as BT). This would not have a direct effect on the branch account. The
support teams were also notified. Once a counter had failed to send an “end of
day” message for several days, the team would try to recover the outstanding
messages. This could be done by engineers using a special laptop to
replicate/relay the outstanding messages over a branch telephone line or by
retrieval into the secure support centre in Bracknell (BRAO1) with both the PMMC
card & PIN supplied by the sub-postmaster.

53.When Network Banking was introduced, the development team released a
programme to monitor whether the counter became disconnected from the data
centre. If it became disconnected, the software would disable the banking options
and display an alert banner on the counter. If disconnected, the branch would also
not write an “end of day” message.

54. Another issue that | recall at this time related to reference data. One example was
when a product was withdrawn before branches had remitted out all stock from
their system. This may have resulted in a receipts and payments mismatch in the
branch’s account. This would have been visible to the sub-postmaster when
balancing and would also have been captured by monitoring from the data centre.
As reference data was controlled by Post Office, in this case, the fix and

communication of this to sub-postmasters would have been handled by them.

Page 17 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100

55.By way of background, PinlCLs originated from various sources, including
Powerhelp (from branches) and Fujitsu teams including development, test and
release. Generally, | was not involved in development, test and release so can
only comment on PinlCLs that originated from Powerhelp.

56. The volume of PinICLs was manageable for the team. Although it was a long time
ago, | do not recall any particular concerns in relation to the volume of PinlICLs
and my recollection is that all Live raised incidents received into the EDSC/SSC
were addressed effectively. Other teams that should be able to comment on this
are the BSU/MSU team or the Service Management team.

57.My interactions with sub-postmasters focused on resolving specific incidents
raised to help keep counters and branches operating. | was not involved in the
general reporting of issues to Post Office. As noted earlier in this statement, my
understanding is that this would have been the role of the Service Management
team. | do not recall the details of any specific conversations with sub-
postmasters.

CONSULTATION WITH END USERS

58.1 am not aware of any practices or procedures that may have been in place to
obtain input or feedback from sub-postmasters during the pilot and rollout of
Horizon. However, as explained above, as a member of the EDSC and then SSC,
| would sometimes speak to sub-postmasters on the phone to assist with issues

(such as the Cash Account).

Page 18 of 19
WITNO04110100
WITNO4110100_

Statement of Truth
| believe i ment to be true.
Signed:

pated: CY | G& | 2022

Index to the First Witness Statement of John Graeme Simpkins

[ ‘Description | Date | ControlNumber | = URN
WITNO411_01/1 | Investment 20 » POINQ0067424F =| FUJ00077836
| and Strategy | November |
| Committee 1997 |
Meeting |
WITNO4114_01/2 | PCO037808 21 June | POINQO052009F | FUJ00045838
2000 (last
update
status)
WITNO414_01/3 | Chief 7 May POINQO067422F | FUJ00077834
Executive's | 1997 /
Report ~ May
1997
(PLC/97/8) |
WITNO411_01/4 | Chief 15 July POINQ0067423F | FUJ00077835
Executive's 1997
Report — July
1997
{PLC/97/12)

Page 19 of 19
