WITN04830100
WITN04830100

Witness Name: Simon Andrew James Fawkes
Statement No.: WITN0483_01

Exhibits: WITN0483_01/1 — WITN0483_01/4
Dated: 9 August 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF SIMON ANDREW JAMES FAWKES

|, MR SIMON ANDREW JAMES FAWKES, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION

1. | am currently a Principal Solutions Architect at Fujitsu Services Limited (“Fujitsu”),
working on a large government infrastructure outsourcing contract, a position | have
held since around 2006. | was designated as a Fujitsu Distinguished Engineer
in 2013.

2. This witness statement is made on behalf of Fujitsu to assist the Post Office IT Inquiry
(the “Inquiry”) with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request provided to Fujitsu on
11 March 2022 and a series of further questions provided to me by the Inquiry on
1 July 2022 (the “Request”), to the extent | have direct knowledge of such matters.

3. The topics set out in the Inquiry’s Request of which | have knowledge relate to events
that took place more than 17 years ago; namely the design, development and
robustness of the Legacy Horizon system in the period up to the national rollout. In

preparing this witness statement, | have tried to remember these events to the best

Page 1 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

of my ability. However, given the passage of time, there may be certain matters where
my recollection is more limited.

4. Where | have included information from documents relevant to the Inquiry’s Request,
these documents are referred to using references WITNO0483_01/1 —
WITN0483_01/4 and are listed in the index accompanying this statement. Documents
that have not already been provided to the Inquiry are exhibited to this statement.

BACKGROUND

5. | joined ICL Pathway Limited (“ICL Pathway’) in around 1997 as a Solution Architect
in the architecture and design team, focusing on infrastructure design. | continued
working on the Horizon project until around 2005 when | moved to my next
assignment. Prior to joining ICL Pathway, | worked at International Computers Limited
as a VME (Virtual Machine Environment) Design Implementer and then for the ICL
NT Centre of Excellence in Manchester from where | was seconded to ICL Pathway.
| do not recall when my transfer to ICL Pathway became permanent, but it was at
some point in the early 2000s.

6. During my time in the ICL Pathway infrastructure team, my work focused mainly on
disaster recovery and resilience. Disaster recovery is a term used to describe the
failover of service between data centres. Resilience then looks at component
availability within a data centre to ensure service availability. Following my initial work
on disaster recovery and resilience design, | moved into supporting the systems

management design, including service monitoring and support access.

Page 2 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

7. | was not involved in the design or development of applications for Horizon. Nor was
| involved in the testing or acceptance of Horizon. This statement therefore aims to
answer some of the Inquiry’s questions from an infrastructure perspective only.

DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT

8. | joined ICL Pathway during the development of Release 1C, which | understand to
have been rolled out to 200 — 300 Post Office branches. Branches ranged in size
from single counter branches to multiple counters. At that time, the counters used a
piece of software known as Riposte, which worked as a message queue; with each
new transaction added to the back of the queue. Riposte was owned by a company
called Escher and was selected prior to my joining ICL Pathway. My specific area of
specialism in relation to Riposte was the resilience of the message store and how it
was protected against failure. My view in that respect, is that the use of Riposte met
the needs of the solution. | will come on to discuss how data was replicated from
Riposte across the counters and to the data centres later in this statement.

9. The design and development of Horizon followed a classic waterfall methodology.
Design documentation was produced, the solution was then developed, tested and
deployed through releases. There were various test environments, including a
resilience and performance test rig, where the team would attempt to break the
system and validate the resilience design that returned service to operation. | do not
recall whether Post Office provided assurances in relation to the design
documentation produced.

10. In terms of factors that influenced the design and development of Horizon in the early

years, when Horizon was first rolled out, the system used an ISDN (integrated

Page 3 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

Services Digital Network) network. With 20,000 ISDN lines to install, the size and
scale of the system was a challenge. The availability and reliability of the ISDN
network was also not sufficient to respond to Post Office’s reporting requirements —
100% of data from the counter estate needed to be received at the data centres to
support reporting within four days. ICL Pathway therefore had to design a workaround
to enable the necessary reporting to be undertaken. | was not involved in the design
or implementation of this workaround, but | recall that it may have involved the
physical attendance of engineers. As | started working for ICL Pathway after the
contract was awarded, | do not know whether issues with the reliability of the ISDN
network were known before the Horizon was rolled out. However, if issues were
known, | would have expected to see mitigating mechanisms built into the original
solution. | do not recall there being such mechanisms in place.

11. The withdrawal of the Benefits Agency from the project and therefore the benefit card
functionality of the system would also have been a significant influencing factor.

12.1CL Pathway was supported by large delivery teams primarily based in the ICL
Feltham and Bracknell Offices. At the start of the project, | was working in Manchester
and would travel to Feltham or Bracknell each week. The initial ICL Pathway delivery
team was supported by a design and architecture team, numerous development
teams (supporting database application, agent application and counter development),
test teams, covering both functional and non-functional requirement testing, as well
as operations teams including 1°", 2°¢ and 3" line support. From my recollection, there
was good communication between the teams working in the ICL Pathway

organisation.

Page 4 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

13.The ICL Pathway chief architect was Alan Ward who was supported by a deputy,
Mark Jarosz; when Mr Ward left ICL, Peter Wiles replaced him as chief architect. The
design team was initially managed by Dick Long. During my time working for ICL
Pathway, the organisation went through a number of changes as it evolved to meet
the needs of the solution.

14.1 initially reported to Mr Ward, focusing on the resilience and recoverability of the
solution. Mr Ward's team initially included four people who focused on non-functional
aspects across the whole solution.

15. Following a re-organisation where application and infrastructure delivery were moved
into separate teams, | moved into the infrastructure team.

ROBUSTNESS

16.1 understand from the Inquiry that the term “robustness” includes:

a. “the accuracy and integrity of the data recorded and processed by the Horizon IT
System;

b. the extent to which deficiencies in the Horizon IT System were capable of causing
and/or caused apparent discrepancies or shortfalls in the branch accounts;

c. the ability of the Horizon IT System to identify errors in data and discrepancies or
shortfalls in branch accounts and the cause of the same; and

d. the ability of the Horizon IT System to continue to operate satisfactorily in the
presence of adverse conditions.”

17.My involvement in the Horizon solution was limited to the design of the infrastructure
supporting the application hosted in the data centres, as well as how data centre

hosted applications would recover from failure. | was not involved in the design,

Page 5 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

development or testing of the application except in regard to resilience and recovery
following infrastructure failures (including server failure, network failure and data
loss). Neither did my role at this time involve communications with or reporting to Post
Office or the Government on the subject of robustness. In light of my role, the content
of this section of my statement is limited to limbs (a) and (d) of the Inquiry’s definition
of robustness. Due to the way in which messages were recorded in Riposte and then
replicated to other counters in the branch as well as servers within the two data
centres, as well as the audit records described in this statement, | did not have
specific concerns relating to the “robustness” of Horizon in respect of limbs (a) and
(d) of the Inquiry’s definition.

18.As mentioned earlier in this statement, in Legacy Horizon, the Post Office counters
used a software product called Riposte to record transaction data. To ensure a
resilient record of transaction data, messages recorded in Riposte were replicated on
each of the counters within a branch. The messages were then replicated through a
gateway counter to the data centres, which were located in Wigan and Bootle at that
time. The messages were also replicated between the data centres. Replicating the
data in this way ensured that data could be recovered in the event of a disaster
scenario.

19.In terms of the integrity of the data itself, because Riposte worked as a message
store, once transactions (made up of individual messages) were recorded, they could
not be amended or deleted. To amend the effect of a previous transaction or
message, a new message would need to be added to the message store which rolled-

back the effect (or part of the effect) of the original message. The original message

Page 6 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

would remain in place in its entirety; it would not be amended or deleted. | understand
that this method was used by ICL Pathway support staff to make corrections on behalf
of postmasters when support calls were raised. However, as | did not work as part of
the support teams, | cannot comment on the mechanism by which messages were
added to the message store or the processes followed by the support teams.

20.After 2000, with the introduction of Network Banking, a system was introduced to
record the actions taken by support staff when accessing the solution, including the
Riposte message store. This system was based upon an open source Cygwin Secure
Shell product which the team modified to capture the key strokes typed by the support
staff into an audit of actions logs. The audit of actions logs were retained securely in
order that they could not be modified by support staff; they could only view the audit
of actions logs to aid the diagnostic process. The Cygwin Secure Shell system and
audit of actions logs were in addition to the message store audit described at
paragraph 18 above, which had been in place since Go-Live. Much of the above
explanation is set out in more detail in the System Outline Design document for the
relevant Secure Support system (WITN0483_01/1).

21.The modified Secure Shell product was essentially an early example of a Security
Information Event Monitoring system; it provided a record of the actions performed
which was then available to the security and audit manager. This improved the record
of actions taken on Horizon and supported the integrity of the data recorded. This
type of functionality is commonplace in systems now but was not, as far as | was
aware, expressly stipulated as part of the Requirements for the Horizon system in the

early years nor was it a product that was readily available. Requirements for the

Page 7 of 9
WITN04830100
WITN04830100

Horizon solution were determined and provided to ICL Pathway by Post Office. As
noted above, this Secure Support system was put in place following the introduction
Network Banking. This system was not in place at the time of the national rollout.

22. The Horizon solution included an audit of all data written to the Riposte message
stores. This audit data plus other information was stored in the audit service at the
data centres; audit data was initially stored on tapes for up to 7 years. The tape
storage solution was replaced in 2002 by a solution based upon EMC Centera
technology, which allowed more rapid access to the audit data storage by the audit
manager in support of Post Office audit requests. The retrieval process is explained
in detail in the High Level Design document relating to audit data storage and retrieval
(WITN0483_ 01/2), a copy of which is exhibited to this statement.

23. The introduction of the EMC Centera technology improved the time taken to access
information within the audit trail. Unlike the tape based solution where data was
stored on offline tapes (which | recall were stored at a secure offsite storage facility),
the EMC Centera solution provided online access to the audit trail. With the tape
based system, tapes containing relevant information needed to be physically
retrieved from the offsite facility before being loaded onto the audit server where the
data then became available to the audit team in support of retrieval requests. With
the EMC Centera solution, audit data was available online and immediately
accessible to the audit team (using the audit workstation), without requiring tapes to
be retrieved and loaded. | refer to Change Proposal 3240 and the Audit Data Retrieval
High Level Design document dated 26 November 2004 in this regard

(WITNO0483_01/3 and WITN0483_01/4, respectively).

Page 8 of 9
Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:

Dated: 1/3 [2022 |

WITN04830100
WITN04830100

Index to the First Witness Statement of Simon Andrew James Fawkes

escription

Dat

URN

WITN

Secure Support

imine
POINQ0094207F

2 August FUJ00088036

0483_01/1 | System Outline 2002

Design _
WITN High Level Design: | 25 February | POINQ0104382F | FUJ00098211
0483 01/2 | Audit Data Storage | 1999

& Retrieval |
WITN Change Proposal | 3 April2002 | POINQO123678F | FUJ00117507 ~
0483 01/3 | CP3240__ ok |
WITN Audit Retrieval 26 November | POINQ0123679F | FUJO0117508 |
0483 01/4 | High Level Design | 2004

Page 9 of 9
