                                                                                        WITN04120100
                                                                                      WITNO4120100




                                             Witness Name: Mr James Bruce McNiven
                                                        Statement No.: WITN0412 01
                                                        Exhibits: WITN0412 01/01-05
                                                            Dated: 17 September 2022



                         POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY



               FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF JAMES BRUCE McNIVEN



  I, MR JAMES BRUCE MCNIVEN, will say as follows:



  Infrnr6Ir'firn



1. This statement responds to the Rule 9 request dated 8 June 2022. This statement is
   dated 17 September 2022. The statement sets out my involvement with the Horizon
   Project between 1996 and 1999, part of which time I was Deputy Director of the
   Programme Delivery Authority and latterly General Manager, Horizon
   Implementation Team.


2. Because of the passage of time since my last period of employment on anything
   connected with the Horizon Programme between 1999 and now, it is being provided
   to the best of my recollection and with reference to the released documents.



  Professional background

3. I had been employed by the Post Office since 1973. Initially this employment was
   with the Post Office Regions as part of a combined business prior to being divided
   between Post Office Counters Ltd and Royal Mail in 1986. In 1986 I was appointed
   as District Manager for POCL in Newcastle_ This comprised an area from the
   Scottish border to York on the Eastern side of the Pennines. On restructuring in
   1993 I was appointed Head of Retail Network for the NE area


                                       Page 1 of 13
                                                                                        WITNO4120100
                                                                                       WITN04120100




4. In 1996 I was invited to take up the post of Deputy Director at the Programme
   Delivery Authority, leading the team of POCL staff seconded to the Programme and
   working alongside the DSS team as joint customer representatives to the contracted
   Supplier.


5. My responsibilities as the Programme Deputy Director within the Programme
   Delivery Authority were;
    -   To represent the Post Office interests in the management of the relationship
        with Fujitsu ("    Pathway"       ) and DSS (Benefits Agency) through a joint team
        headed up by a BA appointed Programme Director,
    -   To assist in the overall management and coordination of the programme and
        user requirements, leading to eventual sign off,
    -   To manage on a day-to-day basis, the POCL staff assigned to the Programme,
    -   To ensure the Post Office staff were managed in a way consistent with the
        POCL business ethos and to provide a link between the programme and the
        business,
    -   To ensure a purposeful and co-operative working arrangement between the 2
        parties involved in the Programme Authority organisation and beyond into the
        wider BA and Post Office community.


6. During 1996 and 1997 my involvement was primarily through the joint working
   arrangements with BA (as part of the Programme Delivery Authority) and through
   them with Anderson Consulting. We met regularly with Pathway representatives to
   discuss progress towards the various milestones in the development plan and
   reported back to the joint BA/PO Programme Board.


7. As far as I can recall, the only active software release in this period was designated
   as CONGO 4 (Pathway 1(c)) which was introduced in mid - 1997. It was intended to
   support limited functionality at an initial 100 offices in the NE and SW Regions.


8. The offices involved were trained and migrated on to the system. Within the contract
   terms Pathway were responsible for the software. The functionality at the offices
   was monitored and exception reports raised as appropriate. In addition, Model
                                         Page 2 of 13
                                                                                            WITNO4120100
                                                                                        WITN04120100




   Office Testing was set up to undertake the joint testing strategy agreed between
   POL Pathway and BA, using a shared set of tests. Progress and exception reports
   were generated and reviewed.


9. A number of implementation risks to the overall programme were identified around
   the CAPS (BA payment system) and the Pathway software release interfaces. The
   programme plan current at the time required inter-connectivity between the two
   systems and was at the heart of replans as Pathway reported slippage on delivery
   timescales_


10. In this period, a major report was completed by PA Consulting. The report is
   available among the released documents (WITN0412_01/01; POL00028092). They
   identified a raft of issues around implementation of the overall plan and emphasised
   the time spent in the PDA resolving issues with Pathway and the inherent difficulties
   in managing a PFI contract. They also questioned some of the software
   development strategies within the Pathway model and for the first time questioned
   the payment card viability.


11. Early visibility of the training programme raised concerns around effectiveness and
   evaluation. The need for planned remedial training was first identified at this stage.


12. Operational implementation risks identified around the Initial Go Live stage were
   limited to equipment failures and ISDN availability.


13. My involvement with technical issues was limited to their impacts on timescales and
   potential restrictions on functionality available to Post Offices. Business continuity
   status reports at the time included inactive payment cards and temporary loss of
   transactions.


14. Technical difficulties arising at IGL offices were addressed by Pathway with
   oversight by the PDA Testing Team. My understanding of the joint testing
   philosophy was to design a testing regime which would test the functionality of the
   solution designed by Pathway and prove its ability to support the Business
   requirements as detailed in the contract. Changes to these requirements arose and
                                         Page 3 of 13
                                                                                           WITNO4120100
                                                                                       WITNO4120100




   were tracked through a change control system. Overall, the core elements of live
   status were reported as satisfactory, as far as they went at that stage.


15. As I recall, the impact of the PA report began to see the migration of functions and
   staff back into their host organisations and the role of the PDA as a joint body,
   reduced.


16. The testing of functionality, security and end to end processes was increasingly
   undertaken by additional resource within Post Office responsibilities, involving
   contractors and staff diverted from other parts of the business structure.


17. New POL forums were established, such as the Release Authorisation Board and
   the Automation Transformation Steering Group. There was an increasing
   requirement for acceptance to have clear separation of boundaries between BA and
   POL within Pathway systems. I believe functionality testing followed that change.


18. The Horizon implementation team was set up in POL, in which I continued to have a
   general management role. I attended authorisation and development meetings with
   Pathway from a planning and roll out timescale perspective.


19. My understanding of technical difficulties was gained from attendance at progress
   meetings with Pathway. I still retained a relationship management and
   communications role with BA, so understood the implications attendant to the issues
   at the interface of CAPS and Pathway releases, but not at a level of technical
   granularity.


20. The IT development issues and risk were retained by Pathway and, as I recall, not
   visible to Post Office people or in combined risk registers.


21. The forums for addressing technical difficulties set up within the POL Horizon
   hierarchy were the Release Authorisation Board, Transformational Steering Group
   and ongoing progress meeting with Pathway. Horizon testing was on the
   Transformation Steering Group agenda from July 1998. There were reports feeding
   into these bodies providing impact assessment in a traffic light risk format.
                                         Page 4 of 13
                                                                                           WITNO4120100
                                                                                        WITN04120100




22. My engagement with these reports was essentially to assess impact on roll out
   timescales and readiness. I would contribute informed judgement as far as I could to
   agreed resolution actions on functionality issues.


23. Action arising out of these progress meetings mainly comprised directions to those
   in direct contact with Pathway developers to seek resolution and report back.


24. Earlier in 1998, Pathway produced their high level Infrastructure and Roll Out Plan.
   The purpose of the Horizon implementation team at this time was to interface with
   Pathway to provide assurance on the viability of the roll out plan and informed input
   on its construction relative to the Post Office estate.


25. Initially the contract envisioned Pathway as the prime mover in setting dates,
   timescales, processes for migration at offices and staff training.


26. Much of this became integrated with the POL Horizon Implementation team and
   further incorporated required physical changes to offices, liaison with logistics and
   feedback of issues with migration from office-held data to the Horizon platform.
   Importantly it assessed training and communication from initial contact through the
   training episodes themselves and to post-implementation support.


27. 1 had overall responsibility for the POL Horizon Implementation Team and issue
   management with BA and Pathway and was a sign-off authority for the roll out Plan.


28. As I recall, the technical interface provided to support migration did not always
   perform a smooth transfer of data from the existing manual cash account on to the
   Horizon platform. There were also issues around the need to close offices and the
   time taken to complete the migration, sometimes into late hours.


29. Training had been an issue with Pathway throughout the planning stage. There was
   an agreed extension of awareness training pre-installation and reinforcement on the
   day. Pathway eventually extended the content and time available but as I recall,
   were consistently unwilling to be involved in training needs arising from the impact
                                          Page 5 of 13
                                                                                          WITNO4120100
                                                                                        WITNO4120100




   on inherited POL systems.


30. As far as I recall at that stage, some of the interface issues were addressed but

   Pathway were reluctant to engage with a system outside their development. Training
   was improved and again, as I recall, additional content and time allocated for each
   office implementation. However, training was consistently raised as a primary
   concern and eventually became the core of a formal Installation Incident
          Installation Incident 218"     ). These Incidents could be raised by BA and POL and
   were visible to all parties. They would normally address a perceived failure by
   Pathway to meet a required success criterion. They were then logged for discussion
   and resolution. A log of incidents is contained in POL00029130 (WITNO412_01/02).
31. Testing continued in the Model Office environment and work on release of software
   for Live Trial continued. Integrated work with BA systems also progressed.


32. The substance of technical difficulties is reported in the documentation
   (WITNO412_01/03; POL00028429). My position continued to be that of interpreting
   progress on problem resolution relative to moving into Live Trial and Roll Out from a
   logistical, support and communication perspective.


33. Various forums existed; principally the Checkpoint meeting with Pathway, POL
   Horizon Management Team Meetings and with BA through the CAPS Board
   Meetings.


34. As I understand, the technical issues were addressed between the Horizon testing
   and release team and Pathway.


35. Testing continued on the functionality associated with the Pathway release for Live
   Trial. I believe much of the end-to-end testing was done in the model office
   Environment.


36. 1 understood, that concerns remained in end-to-end testing and with the robustness
   of reference data for development of the migration processes.




                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                                                            WITNO4120100
                                                                                           WITNO4120100




37. My source of understanding was via the reports submitted to the POL Horizon Team
   Meetings.


38. The Post Office and Benefits Agency by then were moving in different directions
   relative to an integrated solution featuring a payments card. My perception was that
   different positions were developing on the scope and adequacy and outcomes of
   testing as expressed through their Programme Board. Their major concerns
   appeared to be the impact of failure on the security and viability of the overall benefit
   payment system and its constituent parts. I believe they reserved their position on
   release authorisation until assurances that their concerns were addressed.


39. The preparation of Post Office branches for automation was part of an extensive roll
   out plan, integrated with Pathways programme of logistics —          particularly the
   assurance of the delivery of equipment to post offices as required by the roll out
   programme and the availability of teams to check the connectivity to each office.
   This sat alongside the training and communication plan, and the development and
   testing of user manuals


40. Training had been tested ahead of the scheduling of Live Trial and there were
   expressed concerns by the POL implementation team about the time being made
   available to each office by the Pathway training schedule. This and other issues
   were being negotiated through the incident resolution process. The key Incident was
   no. 218 (referenced in para 30 above) and was increasingly a part of high-level
   exchanges between POL and Pathway (WITNO412_01/04; FUJ00079159). In
   essence we were increasingly concerned the product was not fit for purpose.


41. The Pathway-developed migration tool, for transfer of office data to the Horizon
   platform experienced early difficulties.


42. The call up and availability of Sub Postmasters and their staff in offices was also
   predicted to be on-going difficulty. As I recall, office closures were largely to be
   avoided. Migration on to the system was at risk of being drawn out and complex.




                                          Page 7 of 13
                                                                                               WITN04120100
                                                                                             WITNO4120100




43. Through negotiation with Pathway, migration technology was improved. The POL
    implementation team stood its ground but a conclusion of the training issues was not
    achieved until the latter part of 1999.


44. My understanding was that the underlying system was robust and that errors and
    bugs would be resolved as installation progressed. The training product had been
    tested and refined but was still not regarded as acceptable.


45. There was a view that delivery into the Sub Office estate would be affected by the
    age, experience and technical awareness of Sub Postmasters and their staff but that
    would improve with usage and confidence in the system as long as training and
    support was effective.


46. The hugely complex processes surrounding the physical readiness of outlets to
    receive and install the horizon equipment was given significant attention and back
    up plans were instigated. It was around this time that Pathway carried out a
    reorganisation of their Implementation Team.


47. The period from May to September 1999 covers the initial responses to the limited
    live trial and leading up to the conditional acceptance for roll out. At that time, I
    understood additional testing was carried out in the model office environment to
    replicate issues in outlets. There was a high-level register of revealed issues which
    was constantly addressed in discussions with Pathway.


48.As I recall, and with the help of the released documentation, the technical difficulties
   at that time included system lock outs, discrepancies in cash accounts —            and
   although not specifically technical —          deficiencies in the support at the Horizon
   Support Helpdesk for advice and resolution of incidents.


49. Technical (plus logistical and training) issues were referred to the POL Horizon
   Acceptance Forum which met regularly with representatives from Pathway.


50.All high and medium level incidents were addressed with a view to downgrading prior
   to an acceptance decision. Incidents, such as screen freezing and printer failures
                                              Page 8 of 13
                                                                                           WITNO4120100
                                                                                          WITN04120100




  were listed for intervention between Pathway and the testing teams. Work towards
  resolution was kept under review through documents submitted to POL and joint
  forums with Pathway. (Documents WITN0412_01/05; POL00028332 is an example.)


51. Training was a major success criterion for acceptance and continued to generate
   concerns despite intensive negotiations with Pathway. I recall a succession of letters
   between myself, the Pathway CEO and ultimately at ICL Director level. Concessions
   and improvements had been made to the training content itself and on the level of
   understanding and motivation at outlets in advance of formal training. Concerns
   about the user guides being developed alongside training were addressed.


52. It was recognised that support would be required after an office went live,
   particularly while the functionality of the Horizon Support Helpdesk provided by
   Pathway was limited. POL made a significant investment in the deployment of its
   line management resource to support balancing in particular and also general
   aftercare for outlets. Training was provided by Pathway.


53. A series of joint workshops with Pathway was instituted. Agreement was reached on
   a level of pre-training —    I think at selected outlets where concerns were identified.
   Additional content in the training scripts was introduced with additional in-office time
   and the entire POL line management resource was to be trained on the Horizon
   Field Support Officer course. Pathway were also required to provide training
   performance measurement and to share and follow up concerns


54. My understanding of the technical integrity and robustness of Horizon at this point
   was necessarily based on the information provided at the various levels of
   managerial scrutiny to which I was a party. I understood there were problems,
   particularly two high level incidents but that continued interrogation of the system
   and the degree of Pathway intervention demanded, meant that solutions were
   identified, being developed and could be applied.


55. I understood there was sufficient evidence that demonstrated the basic operational
   integrity of the Pathway solution and that sufficient evidence was emerging from the
   Live Trial operation of the capacity of Pathway to respond with technical intervention
                                         Page 9 of 13
                                                                                           WITN04120100
                                                                                          WITNO4120100




   when incidents arose.


56. I could only reflect the experience of the technical teams and the reports generated
   partly because I was not operating in a technical capacity, partly because we
   accepted assurances from Pathway, within the contract parameters that outstanding
   issues could be resolved within acceptable timescales and would be subject to
   satisfactory evidence.


57. By the time roll out was commencing, my role within the programme was limited and
   decreasing and a team was in place to manage the physical and logistical aspects
   of roll out. My role within the Post Office Horizon team ended towards the end of
   1999 and I moved on to other responsibilities.


58. From my perspective and recollection, the main input from end users was through
   the working forums set up during trial and early roll out, involving:
   -   the Heads of Retail Network, who managed the Retail Line structure and had
       responsibility for offices in their geographical jurisdiction.
   -   the management team from the evolving service support centre.
   -   the Post Office implementation team.

  One concern to emerge was the existence of 3 different support centres as the
   position was rationalised, so that users faced a complex set of decisions and advice.



59. The main concerns were about problems balancing at the end of the weekly
   accounting cycle and the level of support provided to individual outlets as they came
   on stream.


60. Throughout the whole period of my involvement with the programme I had frequent
   meetings with the NFSP Executive and individual representatives. This was mostly
   to keep them abreast of developments and particularly the roll out plan and
   timescales.


61. I can only recall the NFSP position in the early stages of trial and roll out to be
   supportive. As the number of offices going live increased, they reported more issues

                                          Page 10 of 13
                                                                                          WITNO4120100
                                                                                        WITN04120100




   being referred to their local representatives. I do not recall them expressing
   fundamental concerns about the abilities or robustness of the system.


62. From this perspective, 20+ years later and knowing the history during the
   intervening years of the experiences of some Sub Postmasters, it is easy to suggest
   some more effective scrutiny might have taken place. Other people will be better
   placed to comment. I will have to reinforce the view that the contractual relationship
   with Pathway was not supportive of enquiry or intervention —        whether on technical
   details or in training or logistics_


63. Having read through the extensive cache of documents which I received, my overall
   impression is of the intensive work and the comprehensive reporting mechanism
   which informed decisions on the viability of the programme. I can only reiterate the
   concerns expressed by those closest to the solution of the difficulties of interrogating
   the Pathway technical architecture beyond a level of demonstrated functionality.


64. With the benefit of hindsight and the challenging documented stories, this question
   almost invites any of us involved in the programme to suggest more might have
   been done. However, it would be reasonable to say that the early experience of trial
   and the feedback from both the Sub Postmasters themselves and their retail line
   managers might have signalled more clearly a concern about underlying problems in
   the software system.


65. This would be a more legitimate criticism had there been the access and
   opportunity, rather than accepting assurances from Pathway that they were to be
   expected in early stages and would be fixed. From my recollection and retrospective
   analysis, there were so many competing issues and interests, it is perhaps the voice
   of the user which could have been given a greater degree of consideration.


66. Having reread some of the initial documents and the latest batch recently released,
   there are some key aspects which have become clearer to me. We did believe in the
   validity of the system. It was being launched into a population of widely varying
   technical and cultural backgrounds. The amount of time and effort devoted to the
   training solution underlines a genuine belief that education, training and support
                                          Page 11 of 13
                                                                                         WITNO4120100
                                                                                       WITNO4120100




   were the keys to success and that confidence and ability to interface with the system
   could be attained for the vast majority of users.


67.We need also to remember thatwidespread use of mobile phones, laptops and
                                                                            of
   tablets did not form part of the experience of almost all of the thousands people.
   working in the Sub Office estate. It was a quantum leap for many of us. The whole
   programme, logistically, was a vast enterprise constructed, with some pride, by the
   POL and Pathway teams, involving pre-installation visits, outlet modifications,
   equipment availability and the whole training and support mechanism --- all to an
   estate which initially incorporated 19,000 outlets and many multiples of operating
   positions. The lead in times to these activities could stretch to months and even
   years.


68. Stopping and resetting this gigantic process had many implications. It was a
    leviathan, additionally encumbered by contractual conditions and government
   scrutiny.




   Statement of Truth

   I believe the content of this statement to be true



   Signed.     GRO
   Dated .....1q. .!?:¢ ~~-~-c   i   /fl. Z




                                          Page 12 of 13
                                                                            WITNO4120100
                                                                          WITNO4120100




Index to First Witness Statement of Bruce McNiven WITNO412 01


    Exhibit No.      Document Description            Control Number URN

1     ITNO412_01/01 PA Consulting Group: Review of POL-0024574     POL00028092
                    BA-POCL Programme 1 Oct 1997
                    and Outline of the Proposed End
                    State and Transition Project for the
                    Support of Automated Services,
                    Post Office Counters Ltd, 29 June
                    1998

      ITN0412_01102 Letters between Bruce McNiven    POL-0025612    OL00029130
                    and John Dicks, and associated
                    Acceptance Incident Forms

3     ITNO413_01103 Memo from Andrew Simpkins,       POL-0024911   D0L00028429
                    Horizon Release Management
                    re Horizon Testing &
                    Programme Plan - Current
                    Status, 4 December 1998

      ITN0412_01/04 Letter from John Dicks to Bruce POINQ0068747F FUJ00079159
                    McNiven, 11 August 1999

5     ITNO412_01105 Horizon Programme, Management POL-0024814      POL00028332
                    Resolution Meeting Minutes, 12
                    August 1999




                                   Page 13 of 13
