                                                                                      WITNO1090100
                                                                                     WITNO1090100




                                                        II4*iFInIW1 • f 1I!'ATIThT




                      POST        OFFKE HjRZON i1 INQUIRY




            FIRST VNES STATEMENT OF ANDREW FRANK WNN
                                                  I




Andrew Fa bk / ran, w say           Vlos. ..


    +   R




             ♦   is     , .   .
                                            ~ •   !::         .   .~•"'




                                       Page I of 24
                                                                                 WITNO1090100
                                                                                WITNO1090100




       •     .          o m •r a ni       «           •   .~    *«      .   P




4. The post was renamed Relationship Managcrt&i better refiect the role.




6. I underwent the same classoorn training course Pis a s      postmaster

   would. I found the basic operation relatively straightforward apart from

   the balancing process which felt quite daunting.

7. 1 routinely worked in several Crown Offices during Christmas pressure

   and during strike action. I was able to process most transactions

   without difficulty and balanced each time with no or nominal

   discrepancies. As far as I am aware no Transaction Corrections (IC)

   vher - gencrsted followirg ray actions in branch. Of course, there




                           Page 2 of 24
                                                                                WITNO1090100
                                                                            WITNO1090100




8. 1 did un occasions input towards training revisions as processes and

   products evolved, i was not aware of any fundamental approach to

   the type of training provided to subpostmasters.

9. It was clear from branch and colleague feedback that some

   subpostmasters did not feel adequately trained to operate without

   experienced supervision once their training was completed.

10. Specific training aids would be distributed to branches on a regular

   basis. This might be around a new product being roiled out, a change

   to existing processes or to cover specific scenarios where

   confusion/errors have been identified within the Network. These would

   typically be identified through calls to NBSC or TCs being required in

   P&BA.

11. I am confused as to what is being raised in relation to communications

   with Gurnos PO. There are possibly 2 issues.

12. Firstly there appears to have been a problem with understanding in

   branch due to the use of acronyms — although the only one used in the

   example provided was ATM. POL did seem to reduce everything

   down to an acronym and could confuse staff as well as

   subpostmasters when new ones were introduced. My e mail

   suggested that a glossary that was available to all might be an idea if it

   could be updated regularly. Whether not understanding what a PL




                            Page 3 of 24
                                                                                     WITNO1090100
                                                                                   WITNO1090100




            cash. This was probably due to a lack of ono hedge. However all

            ATM discrepancies were compensated for by TCs. No other

            transactional errors could be identified to recover the missing cash by.


1   sii • l:r F




        16. Different teams might use different approaches depending on the

            product. For example the Lottery team would review Horizon and

            Camelot data over a month to issue one TC if required (to avoid simple

            timing errors) whilst the Santander team would issue one TC per

            transaction to aid branch understanding.




                                    Page ;1 o24
                                                                               WITNO1090100
                                                                              WITNO1090100




17. Each TC oul have two elements (a debit & credit) in line with

    Horizon funcon lities. TCs would be accompanied by evidence to

   support their issue.,-- this would be in different formats depending on

   the product.. They would arrive at the branch the next morning and



   them prior to their next branch trading rollover.

16. The N    C were the designated contact point for branches if the were

   unable to resolve an error they had made or if they required assistance

   in investigating a discrepancy.

19. Understandably in practice branches would try to resolve errors

   themselves in the first instance but then lose the track of whet they

   had done. This would often turn simple fixes into     m lex untangling

   exercises.

20. If a branch believed transaction anomalies had occurred     e NBSC

   would be their first point of contact. if they were unable to answer the

   query the case would be passed onto Fujitsu — and possibly P&BA.

21, if a branch were unsure of the validity of a TC, believed they needed a

   TC issuing or required investigation into a branch discrepancy they

   would          the relevant team in P      -- possibly via the NBSC.

22. If they did not accept the answer provided, the branch would be invited

   to submit an appeal in writing to The Relationship Manager laying out

   their case. The requirement to write in was to ensure a proper record

   was kept, to ensure all aspects of the case were covered and tried to

   lead the branch into thinking through what the key problem was from

   their perspective.


                           PageS of 24
                                                                                           WITNO1090100
                                                                                          WITNO1090100




   or set's         ccnaHy debt would e blocked ur t l ' e case had been

   investigated ad respc iced ato in irting.

2&My general approach i. investigating th wide ,range of cases received

   was to identify what the problem was (often not what the branch

   thought it           s), where the cash is (P&BA

   accouniIChenUCustomerIunknown) and hether it was possible to

   recover the funds. This oul                        the basis of my responses.

25.Dompenseting TDs would be issued if apforLte end any relevant

    lo       d neunts wceui:.J toe n                    .

  .Tt      F w so fu 4hr designated fsaBatican port in                    Carr

   However if a branch was determined to continue tn dlsp,rte they could

   approach a senior manager.

2LAn Operating Level Agreement (OLA) was drawn up with the Network

   and Service Delivery teams. This was to define wttct P&BAs principal

    uttor;ie€s should ex „ ct frcm us covering aspecter l e time to issue

         ,i, ~ o    dsuters io rt ib         h. nth   ' ad   how Je " k   id     e

   rev             d.

2E. By the time the document was signed off I believe all pa: es were

   aware of what was happening and                    is was reflected in the document.

   As such its usefulness was, I believe, limited. That said it would be



29. The documem wes routi 'rely udeJ during my employment but I

   cannot canii          nt or it r o,,) .
                                                                                  WITNO1090100
                                                                              WITNO1090100




30. In 2009 lmade a presentationrelating to TCs, debt recovery

   reporting. ! m unsure who the audience was, but my best guess

   would be the NF P. The intention woud have been to Liar qty the state

   of play wtrin P&BA and our aspirat'nn for the future.

31. At the time   ny teams within P&BA were struggling
                                                  ling to clear the

   accounts they owned and this was widely regarded as the prime

   target. I made the point that unless all TCs were        u to and

   supported with appropriate evidence         ey would end up ettin

   disputed and aimply get stuck on the debt teams accounts m a °ping
   that derail P&BAfunds o wed would not reduce as quickly as, might

   appear from simply clearing product accounts.

32.1 cannot recall making a statement about investigating why large debts

     might consistently emerge ut that would seem           nsible thing to do.

33. The facility for branches to have a "Dispute" button on Horizon was

   considered on more than one occasion. Branches, quite

   understandably, were reluctant         accept TCs or unaocxunted for debt

   when carrying out tires=' monthly trading period roll over.
                                                            r.

34. From a POL perspective the management of such a facility           pe r

   problem atic. In e fiat instance
                                n POL would need to contact th e

   branch to determine the basis of a dispute. Phoning a branch during

   office hours can beextremely inconvenient to busy branches whilst

   writing to enquire and waiting for a response might take significant

   time and make resolution of genuine issues harder than they need be.

35. More importany w          1 be who would have
                                               ,`6, the power to reject the
                       soul




   di p t           mple many TCs were issued in airs to credit one
             For example


                               Page 1 _f 25
                                                                                           WITNO1090100
                                                                                          WITNO1090100




   product and debit the other with no balancing impact on the branch. if



       a a th3r iLpue the debit and reu ses to accept `otther evidence then

   POL rii t' have 4t e option t               forr   t e let; t. Car   rs.ely where

   cash appears to have simply 9OflA missing,                  vnership is not so clear

   cut.

36. My preferred approach was to stick with the dispute process to ensure

   there is a clear path for branches to challenge losses, instigate a

   comprehensive investigation and receivc                    eri   supportingwhy

   f nds c w t Le recovriL:.Wor a(!y elLa'v it                      t secvet actjc-r
   t wj piz°c

37. VRthin the process was the facility to record a branch being forced to

   accept a TC issued too close the Branch Trading to allow for proper

   investigation. I believe that facility was utilised once during the

   remainder of rr y employment.



                           n w have f rrr      ap      !the weekly L : r c

       criru               i     o ur''er t sent to each branch. The second I canot

   recall the medurn or s. ,cc purpose.



   coming from                 tentially a wide range of sources to indicate that some

   branches did not have a clear understanding of the settle centrally and
   •




         •




                    •r-_
               a;




                                       Page 8 of 24
                                                                                 WITNO1090100
                                                                                WITNO1090100




40. The process outlined how branches might challenge shortfalls by

   initially discussing their case with the relevant product team within

   P&BA via either the contact details on the relevant TC or the NBSC.

41. If the product owner could not satisfactorily resolve the query or if the

   cause of a discrepancy could not be identified the branch could then

   write to the Relationship Manager.

42. The idea of the "settle centrally" process was to allow branches to

   move from one trading period to the next in a balanced position

   without having to resolve cash discrepancies at the point. Apart from

   giving the branch the opportunity to resolve a discrepancy they did not

   believe was proper to them, branches would often be aware that

   compensating TCs would be due to arrive to net off the relevant

   discrepancy created by the settled centrally TC.

43. If discrepancies were not placed into a suspense type account,

   branches would potentially struggle to establish the actual balance

   state they were in, whist there would be less visibility of potential

   balancing problems to POL.

44. The settle centrally process offered the opportunity to balance at

   trading period end without using the make good cash process -- either

   adjusting cash gains or losses they really thought was not proper to

   the branch or to fail to physically actually remove or add the cash as

   declared through the make good cash option.

45.1 cannot recall what Problem Updates were. The examples provided

   all postdate my POL employment.




                            Page 9 of 24
                                                                                         WITNO1090100
                                                                                       WITNO1090100




   simply        ai e i the team to problems like outages and would routinely

   {:pis    5
                rn es it iri progress.

47.1 cannot r , 1# cg providedwith detailed description of v !ht

   resolution processes entailed.

49. As Problem Manager my role was essentially to identify                   would

   own           resolution of a problem that had arisen, monitor and report

   into POL on impact an for progress.

49.1       nnot recall a scenario where I would h v v i   ie1 1         u' ovity for

   Fujitsu to proceed the fix a rroobl rn ,h . °, s prep r             tLe

50.1 was aware that Fujitsu vere able t sr ss brnch data remotely as

   this would be necessary to amend branch profiled to deal with

   changes to product sets nd branch profiles. Equally any software

   issues would need to be amendedremotely.

51.1 was aware          t Horizon records could be altered remotely by Fui u.

   I cannot recall from whom I obtained this information
                                                              fr




                                                                   o




                                                                             y




   understanding as that any such action was tightiy regulated and

   would require signoff from POL— I would not know who would have

   such uthority but would assume this to be at director level.

52.1 would typically produce letters to be sent to branches when software

   problems had caused discrepancies. These would reflect the issue

   and impact arising          outline what method would be used to rcolve,

   ! believe all suctp leek v- o€ Id ,:)e signed by the Ha d of P&Eft. Ii. s




                                Pge 1C F 2
                                                                                              WITNO1090100
                                                                                             WITNO1090100




          ul, foil w w rep r y of the problem involving a range of POL

   p Eso in l andthiht subsequent agreement on ho to

    b;c.mairLvcfI d               re.vd rtftypeoplo'ri ff r 3cx Ceue „

             the pro e*..     ?r 1 wt welf—e- d fin% in te' n°r of branu` h

   despatching the cheque I included a °throw away° comment to reflect

   the fact that we had a few examples were cheques making good

   losses did not arrive for processing as they should have.

C4. My understanding of Horizon accounting developed over time and was

   possibly as good as anyones in POL by tae end of my employment,

   G-lc     pier n''4j tLchn ,,aa` . iir     ckda        arl.a;r e reIa,IJve y iow.

   .,ciseq erg ly,; I ' c.,,yId      n ran .atl° er a v itt a great r U, r arW t irv4dkng

   vhere nc ss ry.




551 believe theLocal Sus Aense roryg                   re r to                  in 2012

   whr a small number of br n es i ; a sp ci c transactional state

   pro J toL be impacted by a .errs er Lul ng in i                rpnerg in their

   local Suspense accoritn.                     were able to conrm the

   discrepancies where not proper to the branches —a balancing figure

   would have been seen in a different account — I cannot recall which.

   The values were then seen to reappear exactly 12 months after they

   arose which generated Fuji u involvement, In hindsight the issue

    houl have been invest a                by Fu: u in 2 92 Wrstead Lf Le

   : ~ ' tie' discrepancy teing es, l '               by P     :° . it .' i s, mh.a tr air




                                            f
                                                                               WITNO1090100
                                                                             WITNO1090100




   Fujitsu did investigate at that time but did not pick up the subsequent

   reappearance of the problem.

55. 1 was asked to check POLFS records to establish that all impacted

   branches had been identified. Some further cases were identified.

   also asked the question as to whether any other branches could have

   been in a similar transactional state as the others impacted, but had no

   discrepancy. Logically I could not envisage any balancing issues

   going forwards but the question seemed worth asking.

57. 1 believe the issue was first identified by the Current Agents Debt team

   who identified the duplicated suspense entries. Once the problem was

   identified the financial consequences were identified by reviewing all

   branches with problem on a stock unit basis and confirming the

   recuring values on the relevant POLFS account

58. Fujitsu would be able to confirm my calculations by checking the

   transactional movement of the funds into suspense by FAD code and

   stock unit. I cannot say how they might have identified any branches I

   may have missed. However, my analysis would have been confirmed

   by the Current Agents Debt team leader_

59. PL's Litigation Lawyer would typically talk through scenarios like this

   to obtain a non-technical view of the time line and accounting impact

   on branches.
                                                                                 WITNO1090100
                                                                             WITNO1090100




their branch trading statements but I cannot recall being aware of this



  tne lag when a historic di.crpancy had not been cleared.




appeared on his cheque line. He claimed to have evidence ut did of




each day due mistakes when cutting off the cheque li= re r choosing

the incorrect methiod of ay            nt. Such events are simply corrected in

branch. NBSC wouldtalk a branch through the required correctional

process if required.



holdings a receipts and payments mismatch would occur with a

<t sultant di!: carp   n :'y.




                                Page13 of 24
                                                                                                 WITNO1090100
                                                                                                WITNO1090100




           66. If a phantom 2-sided transaction appeared then errors            uld result in

                 both cheque and diet areas requiring TCs to be issued.

           67. The p rinci al east cis of my role involved 'resolving branch accounting

                 issuee. The rr at majort, of these
                                                  e were caused by hr.nch, error,

                 fraud, client, or supply discrepancies.

           68. More than one subpos        as r described how stressful the period was

                 waiting for m investigation to conclude whilst a significant potential

                 loss hung over them, Consequently, I always attempted to investigate

                 cases in full but in as timely manner as possible.

           69. Given        t no c    n'bnq eue occurred in the claim above I beeve

                 my approach to focus on the- mfg!°riplr cs.se'with actual Sore pan ces

                  ri Erw   res en6reiy i pr p a and my approach €n a sins€!ar sit sa on

                 would be the same in the absence of any alternate directive o

                 managers.


Investigations


          70. , could be asked to rove g e:sh rtr 1, by it
                                                         h r branches,, other

                 areas of POL, NFSP or Fujitsu. I cannot recall an instance          ere i

                 would not take on an investigation apart from when in the later month

                 of my employment was required to pass on any shortfall investigations

                 where the branch blamed the Horizon system to a Network team.

          71. The start point of any investigation would always ideally be to obtain

                 the branch`s view (ideally in willing) on what had gone wrong, when,

                 what the impact has been and to supply any                  they had   ey
                                                               evide




                                                                       nce




                 felt might help   eir case.


                                          Page 1 .. of
                                                                             WITNO1090100
                                                                           W I TNO1090100




Horice and relevant teams within P&A. I might also approach people

in other parts of POL to include Service Delivery, Network and NBSC.

I cannot recall exactly how I would approach the different case types

but I did produce a generic case type approach for use prior to leaving

the business.




or circa £100 they would typically search their transaction logs for

transactions around this size. I do recall a fraud that hit branches after

POL introduced a product which I believe was like a gift card. The

product only allowed deposits to be made. Fraudsters would produce

their card and ask to withdraw say £50. Branches would be unfamiliar

with the product, find a button that related to the card and process the

withdrawal. Most branches would quickly realise the transaction was

requiring the branch to take cash rather than issue and decline the

transaction. Some unfortunately did not notice and would see a £100

loss emerge and not be able to identify the cause.




                        Page15of24
                                                                                 WITNO1090100
                                                                               W I TNO1090100




   branch by removing or adding cash at their trading period end. As

   similar discrepancies would reappear straight away it was clear the

   cash had not been added/removed. This made it very difficult to

   identify the causes and times that actual problems had risen.

75. Once the issue has been identified the next stage would be to

   determine where the cash was e.g. client, P&BA accounts, customer,

   stock/cash centre.

76. The next stage would be to determine whether the funds could be

   recovered. In most cases they could be and a compensating TC

   would be issued. I would not be able to recover funds from a customer

   for example.

77. Regrettably there were occasions when it was not possible for me to

   identify the cause of discrepancies. Even where branches routinely

   balanced well only to discover a loss within a limited period it might not

   be possible to identify any transaction that was not accurately

   recorded. The branch might then need to face the possibility in the

   absence of a transaction not having been recorded at all (which never

   arose to my knowledge) the discrepancy might well relate to cash

   being simply removed from or added to the till. In some cases that

   might relate to money moving tolfrom the retail side but some could

   involve theft. Where it was possible to identify a specific period a loss

   arose in I would routinely the cash movements on branch transaction

   logs (Horice) to ensure the discrepancy accurately reflected the

   difference between opening cash balance, cash transactions recorded




                            R •
                                                                                          WITNO1090100
                                                                                         WITNO1090100




             and nal balance tolals. No balancing anomaly ever arose in my

             ins        ations.

          78, Where value might be added I world irivolve ranches with the

                                                  old o to re=bus ai specific
             i vestigation. In most cases that would

             evidence       e branch might hold or to ask them to review transactional

             history within a specific timeframe. I do recall cases where

             subpostmasters would knock on a customers door if I was able to

             identify a problem with a specific transaction.



             occasions this would leas, to furt, r inns of i ive.4 ti, •a on.

             TCs were issued with supporting evidence. My divestigaticos would
           O.T

             detsil the evidence available and lay out the reason(s) why I would not

             be able to recover any missing funds. Often a satisfactory resolution

             was found by obtaining a wider perspective of actions and ve          and

             linking new           gether. This was usually more productive than
             dying to disprove evidence.

           1, i did have sympathy with hr nch s in relation tot e evid.erme available

             to them apart om transaction logs amd, Trading, Ststemonts that would

             be available in branch. This would have been even more difficult in

             the period following the roll out of Horizon on line when P&BA teams

             were typically in back log meaning many TCs were issued long after

             the -vent, giving branches little chanceof recalling specific events.
                 v,.,




             alternate approach to suggest.


The dispute process

                                        P•ge i7of4
                                                                                 WITNO1090100
                                                                            WITN01090100




83. My letter to Gurnos Post Office in August 2010 would represent a

   typical response to a branch dispute.

84. 1 don't believe the letter suggests that a training gap caused a shortlaD.

   It may well have been the reason why the branch repeatedly input the

   wrong figures from the ATM log into Horizon. Such cash

   discrepancies would then be corrected by TCs. The short term ATM

   cash discrepancies may well have reduced the visibility of cash

   leakages that appear to have happened.

85. Despite a site visit and comprehensive reviews of the branch's

   transactional records, no outstanding product errors, or cash

   unaccounted for were uncovered. My view was that there were no

   further areas of investigation open to me. The problem appeared to be

   one of cash disappearing from the branch. The relevant sentence, on

   reflection, was not well worded as it is possible that the funds were

   removed from the branch through some type of fraud or theft.

86. The subpost istress would have had the opportunity to review ATM

   and Horizon records and confirm that the TCs issued had netted off

   the resultant discrepancy. This information would be available in

   branch. She would also be able to check transaction logs and the data

   entered into her branch trading statements.

87. My e mail to my colleague Robert Atkinson in 2012 suggests I had

   received some feedback around the dispute process and wanted to

   document roles and responsibilities. The communication does not

   suggest any change of approach and appears to be a routine business

   as usual piece of work.


                             Page 18 of 24
                                                                           WITNO1090100
                                                                         WITNO1090100




   but it did give managers an opportunity to ensure their processes were

   up to date and effective.

89. I did not carry out an audit at Kevin Palmer's branch. There was a

   designated Audit team who would carry out branch audits.

90.1 may well have reviewed the POL, Lottery and branch records.




92. 1 also explained why a cashfcheque adjustment in relation to the

   cheque in question would have generated a cash gain that would

   offset the disputed TC.




                             Page19of24
                                                                                                WITNO1090100
                                                                                              WITNO1090100




                   balanced with significant discrepancies at most trading period ends.

                   This suggested a lack of control and made it impossible to associate

                   single errors/actions to trading period discrepancies. I was able to

                   identity That over the previousmonths that the branch had made good

                   cash gains (Le. removed cash from the till)of 1 222.98. The cheque

                   error under dispute would have           n a part of these gains.


           eit


            94. if I was asked       provide a witness statement to aid a pr sc        on i

                   would have done so. Such a st foment wocidubin any accounting

                   discrepancies that had beer deemed relevant to the case. A report

                   would be effectively the same as would be produced as por a dhp vute.

            95.1 cannot recall the basis upon which Mr Ismay decided not to allow




Civil Litigation


            96. gin; I was asked to provide a witness
                                                  ess statement to aid a civil iitigatk n I

                   would have done so on the same basis as outlined above. In the case

                   of Castleton I was asked by the POL solicitor to help obtain pay

                   information. This did not fall under my remit but would be an example

                   of trying to   sist through the wide range of contacts I had.

            97. Whilst I never pursued debt recovery, my role clearly supported the



                 branches suffering losses; where< did not consider recovery action to
                   be appropriate. Cases WO r'd generally fail into 2 categories.


                                            P; , c,,2Dof2
                                                                                                  W I TN01090100
                                                                                                 WITNO1090100




              returns making it difficult to find evidence to support any subsequent

              claim from the branch.

         99. Subsequently the process was amended to assume the branch was

              correct unless a Stock Centre could conflrmthe stock received

              been fully checked and aligned to the rem out recorded by the branch,

              Another example would L z.roun cEr ny ales / typical Lr oce s,

              error would be for a clstr n r t      k. to bu-, L r' t c:uro . The   rK   n h

              might then press Buy on Horizon instead ofSelr. This would                 t' ut

              in a loss and currency holding discrepancy. It was simple enough to

              correct the error in branch by processing 2 sell transactions. However,

              this would result In a 2    Margin' value being paid to POL's currency

              provier leaving the branch wig a larger loss than was proper to th e

              error. A ro : s change wts .e ,oLdi
                                              Lt i 1t, c 'rrct this anomaly.

         100.           The second type would     regaraling Icsses that wereclearly

              due to fraud. While in many cases b        .     could be seen to not

              follow basic processes, some frauds were new and innovative. Whilst

              several examples were considered sympathetically within POL leading

              to branch losses being written off there were some examples when I

              did        b   el es wt hd doneby. I cannot recall a specific
                    o




                xern le of thu.


elhti nshi   vtt `, t ih

                                         Page 21 of 24
                                                                               WITNO1090100
                                                                              WITNO1090100




101.      Whilst working in Problem Management I had regular contact

   with Fujitsu. This was basically a one way communication whereby

   Fujitsu would alert POL to a Horizon problem, the impact, estimated fix

   time end subsequently provide updates to refiolution I did not have

   the t chnic l knowledge or awareness of Horizon sc ; un in

   functionality to identify issues that might not have been made clear to

   me at that time.

102.     Working      i in P&BA I found ad hoc contact with Fujitsu very

   difficult. Access did become slightly easier towards the end of my

   employment. When we did wo k with the relevant personnel the

   outcomes were geosraily po&t~ve and efficient, There did emain



   circumnavigate them.

103.     Gareth Jenkins suggestions in May 2013 did not create

   significant change in information access. The change proposed by

   Gareth provided me with access to a very useful piece of Horizon

   transactional data to support my investigations into one type of error

   dispute — card paymentauthor sations. It did open a door to obtain

   other potentially useful data.

104.     The problem would be knowing hat else might he thereand

   what it     I offer. I would estimate I only used this facility 56 times

   and only for that purpose.

105.     The     al change in obtaining date from Fujitsu came with the

   introduction of "Notice which gavea limited number of     POL   per onn i

   almost real time sccess to a branch's Horizon activity. The ieeeii of


                            Page 22 of 24
                                                                                        WITNO1090100
                                                                                       WITNO1090100




             detail was significantly greater than that obtained from Credence. As a

             result, I eiieve the standard of my dispute investigations and

             subsequent responses improved
                                  improveddramaticaily in reatoo to certa i

             la yfas.


e e   ores


         106.       In hindsight there er several things          ! have done

             differently, For example the Stock Centre and Currency issues could

             - a e been resolved quicker if I had pushed harder. I can't think what

             ~ictons i m. Rghthave; taken that   uld have p, s ~tvy im acted this

             whole case. ,s iilst l had faith in the integrityof Horizon was aIwes

             comfortable with directing branches who claimed to have Horizon

             faults to the appropriate point. I was not aware of any branch that

             raised a dispute with me subsequently finding out their losses were

             caused due to Horizon errors.

         107.       I believe the 2 rain causes of the problems lie within the P OL

             culture (that existed widely within the business in not supporting suss

             postmasters     Il enough` and Fujitsu's reluctance to allow POL

             access to Horizon data (either in enough detail or     flier)

         108.       I was shocked on joining POL to discover that losses

             established within branches were widely assumed, and prosecuted,

             based on sub postmaster theft. Whilst I supported the view that

             branches were responsible for their bases (where it w s notpossiLie

             to bertiy and recover) it seemed char to me that n many c,ases

             kaces, w,, r : due to deft was carded out by others with access to the


                                      Pae• 23 of 4.
                                                                                         WITNO1090100
                                                                                       WITN01090100




               should have been given assurance that losses reported in a timely

               manner would be investigated and operational procedures amended to

               help identify where a problem was.

           IIITt




               due, I believe, to inadequate training and project accuracy.

           110.      While not being directly involved with the Second Sight

               investigation it seemed odd to stop their work when it became evident

              their findings were not in line with OL expectations.

           111.      POL's contract with Fujitsu should have been drawn up

              differently. I do believe this was due in          to both parties'
                                                          part




Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be tree.



Signed:       G RO

bated:




                                       Page 24 of 24
