                                                                                         WITN05240100
                                                                                       WITNO5240100




                                                       Witness Name: Trevor Rollason

                                                       Statement No.: WITN05240100

                                                       Dated: 6 January2023



                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY



             FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF TREVOR ROLLASON




I, Trevor Rollason, will say as follows...



I had a telephone conversation with two members of the Inquiry's legal team on 8

December 2022. They asked me a series of questions, which I answered. The Inquiry

then prepared a draft witness statement and sent it to me on 19 December 2022. I

read the draft statement carefully and had a further discussion with a member of the

Inquiry's legal team on 21 December 2022. I have made amendments to this

statement which have been incorporated prior to signing this final version.



  Background


       1. I have been asked about what jobs I held before working at the Post Office.

          Prior to joining the Post Office. I had a paper round and worked at Tesco. I

          had no prior employment in IT or Training roles.




                                        Page 1 of 26
                                                                                     WITNO5240100
                                                                                WI TN05240100




2. 1 have been asked when I joined the Post Office and about what jobs I

   held at the Post Office before I worked on the Horizon IT Project. I joined

   the Post Office in 1974 straight from school. I undertook a six-week

   counter training course and then spent 3 to 4 years working as a Counter

   Clerk in a Branch Office. I then worked as an Acting Branch Manager at a

   number of different branches around the Essex area. These included the

   Chelmsford and Brentwood branches.



3. In 1983 1 was promoted to Buildings Manager in Chelmsford Head Office. I

   was in this role for around a year. I then worked as a Customer Service

   Manager in the Accounts Department where I had every sort of role

   including Cashier, Stock Cashier, Inward and Outward revenue etc.



4. In 1986 1 was promoted to the Post Office Head Quarters in London. I was

   then sent on a three-month long industrial engineer course. I obtained an

   Institute of Management Certificate in Work Qualification Method (an

   MTM2/ MTM1). These were qualifications in efficiency measurement

   techniques. I also received a Prompts qualification which was a

   qualification in clerical management systems. I was then sponsored by the

   POCL to do Open University courses in finance, marketing and HR.



5. 1 then had a role        an Industrial Engineer where I would travel around the
                       as




   country as a problem solver. I worked in cash centres and call centres,

   dealing with cash in transit in the Post Office. I then worked on the

   rebranding of business units and many different aspects of the business.


                                   Page 2 of 25
                                                                                WITN05240100
                                                                              W ITN05240100




6. In 1989 I was promoted to Area Manager and Counter Manager of

   Basildon. I was responsible for the offices of 112 Subpostmasters (SPMs)

   as well as 10 main branch offices. Whilst I was there I went back on the

   counter. There was a new system called ECCO' which was introduced in

   my absence. I learnt how this worked.




   it was then taken up nationally in around 1988/1989 by POCL National

   Training Department, John Roberts was very impressed with it. He was the

   main speaker at the end of the events. District Managers also supported

   these courses as well.




8. Between 1988 and approximately 1992 I was a Graduate Assessor for the

   Post Office.



9. Following the Post Office reorganisation, the Post Office went from 32

   districts to 7 regions, where I was then an Assessor to recruit new branch

   managers. I travelled a lot and conducted job interviews to assess whether

   applicants were right for the job.




10.1 have been asked a number of questions relating to my involvement in the




                                        3 of 26
                                Page
                                                                                WITNO5240100
                                                                              W ITN05240100




11.1 have been asked during what period I worked on the Horizon IT Project. I

   was promoted to work on the Horizon IT Project in around 1995 to 1996. 1

   stopped working on the project when I moved onto standards and

   conformance in around 1998 to 1999, however I cannot remember exactly

   when I left.



12. 1 have been asked if my job title changed during that period and if so, what

   to. I can't remember if my job title changed during my period working on the

   project, but I was the National Horizon Training Manager. I don't think

   anyone else in the business had a background like I did, which is probably

   why I got the job.



13. 1 have been asked to provide a brief summary of the work I carried out on

   the Horizon IT Project. I worked in a team with Ann Green (now Ann

   Cocker) who I knew since I was 18 as we worked on the counter together.

   She was a trainer and had a wealth of knowledge. I also worked with Lisa

   Browsden. Our role was to agree a training course with ICL Pathway for

   70,000 people. There were different categories of people who needed

   different training. We were also asked to develop user awareness events

   for 72,000 people to attend. These were the main tasks.



14. 1 have been asked if I worked with the Benefits Agency (BA), I did work

   with the BA. I had contact with `Paddy' (Patrick) McGlinchey and went to

   his office in Belfast a lot and he came to our HQ in Victoria frequently. I saw

   what they wanted from a client perspective. The fraud department were


                                Page4of25
                                                                                        WITNO5240100
                                                                                   W ITN05240100




       worried about whether automation gave rise to the potential for more fraud.

       Therefore, I worked very closely with them both (BA and the fraud

       department) to make sure the training course covered all they wanted.



   15. l have been sent a number of documents regarding the Horizon IT project.

       I have been able to access some but not others.



   16.1 have been asked about the extent to which I can recall my involvement

       with the Horizon IT Project. It was a difficult project as there were two

       different companies with two different perspectives of what they wanted.

       ICL Pathway wanted proper training to be as cost effective to them as

       possible. From my perspective I wanted to make sure that the training was

       sufficiently adequate not to cause problems.



   17. The user awareness events were excellent and well worth doing, although

       they did require a lot of time away from home. They helped placate SPMs'

       fears by giving          an opportunity to have a go on Horizon using training
                         them




       mode. The SPMs had reservations, as we all did, but they also had the

       rollout schedule so they knew when their office would be re-wired, and they

       also knew their go live dates. This did put the SPMs a little at ease,

       however they were still very concerned.



Involvement in designing the training programme

   18. I am asked a number of questions relating to my involvement in the design

       of the training programme for Horizon.


                                       Page 5 of 25
                                                                                 WITN05240100
                                                                               W ITN05240100




19. 1 have been asked how I became involved in the design of the training

   programme. We (my team) became involved in the design of the training

   programme once we knew Peritas would be the training company. We

   became very close with them, and Ann Green in particular spent a

   significant amount of time with them looking at what we wanted to achieve

   and how to do it. Her intellect was beyond belief. Martin Brown, who

   worked at Peritas, was more at our level regarding his knowledge of Post

   Office issues. We worked very closely to develop the training.



20. A disagreement arose when ICL Pathway wanted to complete all the

   training in one day for counter clerks and one day for branch managers.

   We came to an impasse as we couldn't agree the length of the training. I

   refused to accept only one day of training for SPMs. Ann Green, who was

   of the same opinion as me, was not prepared to move on this. One day of

   training for counter clerks was not ideal but was just about manageable.

   However, one day for SPMs was insufficient. We had many meetings on

   this but in the end, we agreed to disagree. The senior management of

   POCL including Douglas Craik, and Liam Foley (Director of ICL Pathway)

   agreed to 1.5 days of training for SPMs and branch managers, but it was

   still only one day for counter clerks. At this meeting was myself, Doulas

   Craik, Bruce McNiven, Lorraine Holt and Andy Barkham (both from ICL

   Pathway). The managing director from Pathway also attended but I can't

   remember his name. Bruce McNiven was generally very sensible and he

   was there because I came to serious loggerheads with my opposite

   number at ICL Pathway. There was also someone called Barry Davies from


                                      6 of 26
                               Page
                                                                                    WITNO5240100
                                                                               W ITN05240100




   Pathway but I can't remember what his role was. I lost it after that that

   meeting and said to my bosses that it was not sufficient. I asked for it to be

   revisited but it wasn't. I was concerned that we would be putting

   insufficiently trained SPMs on the field. However, I was outvoted and was

   told the course would be built around I to 1.5 days and that was that.



21.1 spent a lot of time with Judy Land to sort incorrect and incomplete cash

   accounts and the problems it would cause. She was the head of group in

   the finance division and looked after the cash and reconciliation accounts. I

   forewarned her of problems when the first lot of cash accounts came in.

   Some didn't balance and others hadn't been completed correctly. I also

   spent time with the fraud department to discuss the problems and fraud

   that may happen with automation. That was a big concern.



22. 1 can see the point of view of ICL Pathway but they didn't know the real root

   causes of why one day's training was not sufficient. I thought they should

   do more as I knew the problems that insufficient training was going to

   cause.



23. Prior to user awareness events, SPMs would contact us to find out what

   would happen at them. We would say they would find out at the events.



24. Another issue was that we had an age range of 16 to 89 year-olds to train.

   There were many over 50s who had never used a computer, but we were

   giving the same training to every single person expecting them to go


                                       7 of 26
                                Page
                                                                                      WITNO5240100
                                                                                   W I TN 05240100




       through it as the same pace, which was not going to happen. Peritas

       trainers would have known about the different age groups who would be

       attending the training courses. If I had seen Kevin Fletcher's comments at

       the time (found in fax from Alan Bourne to Kathryn Cook enclosing Report

       on Horizon System Training" document POL00039733), I would have gone

       to Douglas Craik and said again that there was not enough training time —

       however that document didn't come across my desk at the time.



    25. We were receiving accounts that never balanced. I would go to Chesterfield

       Postal finance division, where accounts went to at the end of each week

       (the financial headquarters). Chesterfield reconciled the accounts, including

       the national accounts, and looked for any instances of fraud in pensions

       and other documents.


    26. I have been asked about the Programme Delivery Authority (PDA), and

       whether I was on the Joint Benefits Agency/Post Office Board. I do not

       recall PDA or whether I was on the board. I was on so many different

       boards that I can't recall all of them. Each day I would have another board

       meeting.



Role of Peritas

    27.! have been asked          Peritas Limited's role was in relation to the Horizon
                           what




       IT project. Peritas developed the training and user awareness course with

       me. I spent so much time in Stockport at Peritas' HQ it was unbelievable.

       Peritas worked on the project from start to finish.



                                     Page 8 of 25
                                                                                   WITN05240100
                                                                                 W ITN05240100




28. Peritas developed and delivered the training and recruited all the trainers

   and people to host user awareness events. Peritas supported this with their

   own staff at events to answer questions. From a user awareness point of

   view, I can't fault them or ICL Pathway. However, from the training

   perspective it's difficult. We received feedback regarding certain trainers

   not being of the required standard and we informed Peritas who would

   have dismissed those trainers. I had to build confidence in the training. I

   wasn't happy to put it to people in a live environment without training. Ann

   and I worked to get that into the business.



29.1 have been asked who I worked with at Peritas. I worked with Stuart

   Kearns who was the boss of Peritas. He was an academic and wonderful at

   algorithms. The contract said no SPM would travel more than 15 miles or

   30 minutes for their training event, however his algorithm was a straight-

   line calculation and didn't take into account that travelling 15 miles meant

   some SPMs had to take journeys which took 45 minutes. However, all

   courses were booked and it was absolute nightmare to reschedule and

   reorganise the rollout.



30. 1 am asked about the working relationships between the Post Office, ICL

   Pathway and Peritas. I had no concerns about the working relationship. I

   worked initially with Lorraine Holt who was head of ICL Pathway. She was

   trying from day one and was very inflexible. She was removed from post

   and Andrew Martin came in. We then had a much better working




                                Page 9 of 25
                                                                                     WITN05240100
                                                                                  W ITN05240100




       relationship and we did the best we could do for the time we had for the

      course.




Training Needs Analysis and Competency Test

   31. 1 have been asked about the document FUJ00001276 (which is a

      document titled "Training Needs Analysis for the BA/POCL Counter

      Automation Project by Stuart Kearns", dated 19 March 1997). This

      document is fine and covers all the areas we needed to cover. I don't know

      why it's so long but it covers all aspects of the business we needed to

       provide for counter clerks, SPMs, managers, auditors, investigating

      departments, and trainers. After rollout each office also had two weeks

      support from our staff who had their own training course too. I was

      confident it was a well-produced document.



   32. I have been asked what the Post Office considered to be the necessary

      skills for a postmaster to be competent in using Horizon prior to the

      Training Needs Analysis. As far as I'm aware the only requirement was to

      attend the course. It wasn't until we introduced a competency test that we

       had some form of measure to see it SPMs were competent enough. I

       vividly remember Ann and I discussing whether we should be calling it a

      "competency test", as that phrase frightened her because at the end of the

      day people would be more worried coming to the training course if it carrie

      with a test. We thought long and hard about it but couldn't think of another

      term aside from "competency test".


                                  Page 10 of 26
                                                                                        WITN05240100
                                                                                    W ITN05240100




    33. Ann and I developed the test, then Kathryn Cook introduced it into the

       contract. I then worked with Sue Smith            was the National Post Office




                                                   who
       Training Manager and she was very good.



    34. The test was introduced prior to Horizon going live when we were in

       process of agreeing the final draft of the training course. ICL Pathway and

       Peritas were on board with the test. I have seen from the documents

       provided that 80% passed and 20% failed. That (20%) seems quite high to

       me as it amounts to 14,000 people which is a huge number, but you (the

       Inquiry) have better stats. A member of the Inquiry's legal team asked if the

       20% figure related to pre-course competency testing as set out in

       POL00039735. The 20% figure may have referred to pre-course testing

       because it seemed quite high.



    35. The counter clerks competency test was pretty basic to be honest. The test

       involved questions such as: "Can you turn the computer on? Can you input

       your password? Can you carry out a postal transaction? Can you reverse a

       transaction? Can you add up the figures at the end of the day?" That was

       about it. I don't know if the SPMs failed more than the counter clerks but I

       would want to see the stats.



Initial design and testing of training programme

    36. I have been asked about the first design for the training programme. There

       were different stages. The first stage was an OBSC (order book control


                                   Page 11 of 26
                                                                                   WITNO5240100
                                                                                WI TN05240100




   services) which was piloted in Bristol where we worked with BA, Peritas

   and ICL Pathway to develop the course. The course was for putting in a

   book on the system and then taking it out and transferring it to another

   office. It was very simple and trained staff how to book in and out. We went

   live with that one. For OBCS training we had SPMS, unions reps, counter

   clerks, franchise reps etc. -- around 6 to 8 people testing the system.



37. 1 have been asked about who was responsible for designing and approving

   the training plans, courseware, session reviews and course scripts. In each

   case it was myself, Lorraine Holt (ICL Pathway) and Peritas. We both

   approved and tested all that went out. POCL agreed each part of the

   training plan, they didn't sign off until they were happy all was right. They

   were the final sign off for the training plan, and they signed off each stage

   too.



38. I have been asked about the testing of the initial design of the training

   programme. As an ex-Area Manager I knew competent staff, so I picked

   SPMs from my old region to test the training programme. I chose

   competent people who would tell the truth about whether the training was

   good enough. This caused friction as I ensured we had competent clerks

   and SPMs who knew their jobs to test the system. The people I chose to

   ask to test the training included my ex-wife, who was an SPM. She had no

   problems herself with the programme, but she pointed out many things that

   were not right and said the training wasn't long enough. She was an ex-




                                Page 12 of 26
                                                                                        WITN05240100
                                                                                     W ITN05240100




      counter clerk so for her to say that adds to my sense that we should have

      gone further, but I wasn't listened to.



   39.1 have been asked if the views of SPMs were sought on the design of the

      training programme. They were not. We would meet with them and stand

      behind counters and look but we didn't ask them anything about the design.

      Their input was in testing the course itself — the training course we were

      putting forward.



   40. 1 have been asked about a report by Kevin Fletcher titled "Horizon System

      Training — The First 14 — Report of practice events, dated 28 March 1999"

      (POL00039733). As stated in paragraph 24 above, I had not seen this

      report at the time. It may have been after I left in 1999 which is why I didn't

      see it at the time Horizon would have been live by then. If I had seen it, I

      would have shown it to bosses and said it shows there wasn't enough time

      to train SPMs and the problem was the course was too short. I moved on

      with Bruce McNiven to outlet standards and conformance in mid-1998 to

      1999 (however, as set out in paragraph 11 above, I cannot recall exactly

      when I left). Ann Green took over from me then. I do not know the views of

      the Post Office on this report or whether they took any action as a result of

      it.


Horizon Training and Competencies Development Group


   41. I have been asked about a group involving myself, Kathryn Cook, Sue

      Smith, Alan Bourne, Clare Dryhurst, Jeff Widdowson, John Breedon, Ann


                                   Page 13 of 26
                                                                                   WITNO5240100
                                                                                 W ITN05240100




   Green and Paul Kirk. This group was formed to help with the competency

   side of business and how we measured success or failure. Clare Dryhurst

   was quality control manager. Kathryn Cook was leader and she took on

   board everything we were saying. I tried to get an amendment to the

   contract as competency training wasn't in the initial contract and it would

   cost ICL Pathway more money to add it in. I am sure training may been

   sped through quicker than it should have been, but I can't prove it.



42. We put to ICL Pathway a solution to help us make sure people coming into

   the network after training were capable of using the system. Kathryn Cook

   passed this on to ICL Pathway who approved it.



43.1 have been asked how often the group met. I don't remember how often

   the group met, but it was not regularly. We met once or twice. If I had a

   problem, I'd go to Kathryn Cook.



44. I have been asked if I considered the group was effective. The group was

   definitely effective in my view. There was no way I was going to sign off the

   course without the competency test, but I had more weight behind the

   request for competency training when I had senior staff's agreement.



45. I have been asked about a memorandum from Kathryn Cook 're: Horizon

   Training Competency and Conformance' from January 1999

  (POL00039748)., which said "Most of you have been involved in the

   developing debate            the business about concerns over the entry level
                       within




                                 Page 14 of 26
                                                                                 WITNO5240100
                                                                               W ITN05240100




   of competency of those attending Horizon Training events i_a that it may

   be low enough to prejudice their ability to make the most of ICUs training". I

   haven't seen this document and I can't remember it. However, the concern

   was probably justified as my concerns were the same. There was a wide

   range of people going on the course, from ages 16 to 89. Some had never

   seen or used a computer, some went reluctantly. Lots of people didn't like

   or want change. I don't recall too much about it and don't think anything

   was done about it. I think the concerns were a given, but it was one of

   those things as you can't change as they were SPMs, some of whom had

   been there 40 to 50 years. It was never going to be possible to improve the

   entry level competence of the SPMs coming onto the course and we had to

   accept that who turned up was who we got.



46. POCL staff weren't a problem. However, once you went live, any new staff

   employed by the SPMs were trained by the SPMs not POCL. That diluted

   the quality of the training. This was another area of risk I raised to Douglas

   Craik and Bruce McNiven but there wasn't a solution we could afford to do.

   We just had to accept that there would be mistakes made by these people.

   I don't know how POCL became aware of this issue but we all knew about

   these issues.



47.1 have been asked about the work of the Service Management Team to

   improve conformance. It sounds familiar but I couldn't tell you much about it

   now. There were so many different people and teams and I couldn't tell you




                               Page 15 of 26
                                                                                    WITN05240100
                                                                                 W ITN05240100




      what they all did. I do not know how conformance was defined or what it

      was about.



Competency Report

   48.1 have been asked about a memorandum from Kathryn Cook to Bruce

      McNiven dated 9 April 1999 regarding a Horizon Competency Report

      (POL00039735). I do not recall how the findings of this report were

      researched, there were lots of people on the Horizon project.



   49. I have been asked about the suggestion in this report that "most problems

      in subpostoffices are to do with the preparation of the cash account rather

      than customer facing activities". This is what frustrated me about the

      project. We had high level! director level POCL staff who had never worked

      on a counter or worked as an SPM and who didn't know about what

      happened in the Post Office, passing comment to people who did know.

      We had SPMs staying there until midnight trying to balance accounts. We

      had SPMs trying to balance on a Thursday even though they couldn't,

      because the accounts had to be balanced by Wednesday. We had SPMs

      sending in incomplete accounts to Chesterfield. It's why I spent so much

      time at Chesterfield trying to prepare them on what to expect. It was

      obvious to everyone with grassroots knowledge that with short training and

      a mix of SPMs of all ages, it was inevitable that these problems would

      happen.




                                  Page 16 of 26
                                                                                  WITN05240100
                                                                                W I TN 05240100




50.1 have been asked what I thought a SPM ought to be able to do at the time

   once they noted a discrepancy between the Horizon generated data and

   that actual cash and stock in branch. The SPMs had the helpline available

   who they could have phoned. They could also have phoned the Retail

   Network Manager who was their boss.



51.1 have been asked what the "systems and processes" were dedicated to

   handling errors that the competency report refers to. Every time there was

   an error, Chesterfield raised what was called an error notice and it went

   back to the SPM to correct the accounts.



52.1 have been asked what is meant in the report(POL00039735) by `          do

   not have a conformance culture". I do not know. It sounds like someone

   being paid too much money to come up with waffle.



53. 1 have been asked about my views on the conclusions of the competency

   report. The competency test for counter clerks covered enough of the

   transactions they would do on the counter. It was not rocket science to

   pass that test. I am surprised that 20% failed (however, as set out in

   paragraph 34 above, the 20% figure may have referred to pre-course

   competency testing because it seemed quite high) but they were not fully

   trained so it might have been difficult. It was all new to them. They knew

   how to do transactions manually but they were now being asked to do it on

   a point-of-sale system. I don't think the competency of the clerks coming




                               Page 17 of 26
                                                                                        WITN05240100
                                                                                    W I TN 05240100




          into the course matters as they are learning something new and are being

          trained to be competent at something new.



      54.1 don't know if POCL took steps to test the conclusions of the report.



      55.1 have been asked it the report led to any changes to the training

          programme. It stayed the same while I was there. I vividly remember an 89-

          year-old SPM from Oxford who came and failed both her first and second

          competency tests. I then went on leave and came back to find out she had

          passed her third test and was going live. We then spent two days at her

          branch trying to unravel the mess her accounts were in. We tried to find out

         who had passed her but couldn't. The trainer would decide whether a SPM

          was competent or not. It was a frustrating process.



Changes from the initial training programme


      56. 1 have been asked about a document called "Collection of Acceptance

          Incident Forms for various incidents" from 1999 (POL00028357) and

          various questions relating to Acceptance Incident 218". 1 have not seen

          this document.



      57. I have been asked about whether I was aware of the incident itself. I don't

          know when this incident was raised but I was aware of the concerns and

          totally agree as the concerns reflected what I'd been saying since the start.

          There was not enough time to train SPMs on the most important element of



                                      Page 18 of 26
                                                                                 WITNO5240100
                                                                               W ITN05240100




58.1 have been told that the Inquiry has heard evidence that Acceptance

   Incident 218 was discussed in acceptance workshops between August and

   September 1999. 1 have been asked about my recollection of these

   workshops. My recollection of this is very misty and I can't remember. I was

   in 3 or 4 meetings every day. There was a lot going on.



59. 1 have been asked what changes I thought were necessary to address

   these concerns. I thought the training day should have been longer with a

   second afternoon to practice how to do a cash account. However, this was

   never going to happen as it would cost ICL Pathway a fortune and they

   weren't prepared to do so. I was outvoted on it in the end. Attendees

   should also have been given two or three goes at producing a cash

   account.


60. I have been asked about a letter from John Dicks to Bruce McNiven which

   mentions an email from me to Andy Barkham of 10 August 1999 referring

   to changes made to the Counter Manager and Counter Assistance Course.

   I don't recall this or remember who John Dicks was. I don't recall if any

   changes were made while I was there, but they might have happened after

   I left.




                               Page 19 of 26
                                                                                    WITNO5240100
                                                                                W I TN 05240100




   document. I do not recall any changes that were made to the training

   programme after the Acceptance Incident was raised although I'm prepared

   to stand corrected.



62. I have been asked about a document called `Horizon Testing - Key

   Problem Area Analysis and Action Plan' dated 27 August 1999, which

   describes me as a technical expert, Nancy Whittom as the business expert

   and Steve Grayson as the champion for Acceptance Incident 218

   (POL00028342). I know both other names. I'm surprised as Steve Grayson

   was on the other side of the business. I don't know why he was there as he

   looked at the implementation and building side and changes etc.



63. 1 have been asked why I was selected as the technical expert. I don't recall

   exactly but it was probably because I was involved in the training

   programme from the start. However, I wouldn't call myself a technical

   expert and I am surprised to hear that I was called this in the document.

   `Technical' is probably the wrong word and `operational' may be a better

   description. I do not recall what the role involved. I'm also surprised I was

   still there — I was sure I'd left by then (however, as set out at paragraph 11

   above, I cannot recall exactly when I left).



64. I do not recall how Acceptance Incident 218 was resolved. It was certainly

   not resolved in my time. The course wasn't changed to my knowledge. I

   don't think the counter office staff course was ever changed but it should

   have been.


                                Page 20 of 26
                                                                                        WITNO5240100
                                                                                     W ITN05240100




    65. I have been asked if I thought the training was satisfactory and whether it

       adequately trained postmasters and counter managers on how to balance.

           My response        no.


                         is




    66.1 have been asked what changes to the training programme would have

           been beneficial. There should have been a second afternoon to balance

       cash accounts. Apart from that, the course was okay. The SPMs also had

       two weeks support behind the counter with a specialist, helping the SPM

       through the first two account balances and sometimes the first three. More

       training could have made our lives easier in the support functions. It saved

           ICL Pathway a lot of money (having less training), but increased costs for

           POCL.


If IThTq


    67. I have been asked how competence in using the Horizon IT System was

       tested. It was the same route that tested all releases. Post Office, Union

           reps, counter clerks and branch managers all went through the competency

       tests and gave their approval. SPMs were asked about the trainers

           recruited by Peritas. They were given a sheet to insert their password,

           produce transactions for post office stamps and to reconcile the accounts

       etc.



    68. All SPMs and staff went to relevant training courses. For example, if there

       were six staff to be trained, they couldn't all be released at once. Some


                                      Page 21 of 26
                                                                                           WITNO5240100
                                                                                      W ITN05240100




   attended on day one, others on day two and three, and then the office went

   live on day four.



69. It was the role of myself, Kathryn Cook and the competency group to

   satisfy ourselves that the methods used to test competence were

   adequate.



70.1 have been asked about the nature of remedial training available to SPMs

   who failed the competency test. SPMs simply came back for more training

   and to re-do the competency test, like the 89-year-old SPM from Oxford I

   previously mentioned            paragraph 55. This started to affect rollout plans if
                              in




   SPMs weren't confident the office couldn't go live and that caused a lot of

   logistical difficulties.



71. I have been asked how the Post Office monitored the content and

   adequacy of the remedial training. There were stats on retraining, but the

   training itself wasn't altered. It was the same training again. Perhaps they

   should have concentrated on areas the SPMs attending were not

   competent on. But it was difficult as if there were five people attending the

   training again there may have been five separate points of failure, so

   maybe it was best to do the full training again.



72. In terms of other support, as I said above, SPMs would have had the

   support of an expert for two to three weeks for balancing. There was none

   other than that, but three weeks support should have been adequate.


                                      Page 22 of 26
                                                                                    WITNO5240100
                                                                                  W ITN05240100




      These experts were individuals from the Post Office who had been trained

      to a high standard and knew everything about the system. They were

      physically present to help the SPMs through the first two accounts they

      balanced. They stayed there for the first two weeks and if it came to a `a

      week they would go back on balancing nights. There were a fair few of

      these experts. I don't know the exact number, but it was considerable and

      enough to cover every new office for when Horizon went live there. These

      experts had a dedicated week-long training course and they were selected

      for the course based on general competencies. They would be postal

      officers who were very good and knew the system and transactions on

      Horizon well.



Feedback

   73. l have been asked what the Post Office did with feedback obtained from

      the SPMs. The answer is not a lot. This is my opinion because the training

      programme wasn't changed. I don't think we bothered listening to the

      SPMs to be honest. They were asked to give feedback at the end of the

      course which went to lCL Pathway/Peritas, but it was irrelevant what they

      said as nothing was done with it, and the training course wasn't going to

      change.



   74. l can only recall generic feedback SPMs had on the training course. Most

      feedback complained about a lack of time and cash accounts and

      reversals, which were the more complex transactions that could cause




                                 Page 23 of 26
                                                                                        WITNO5240100
                                                                                    WI TN05240100




      issues. We should have spent more time on that. Counter clerks would

      have gone to their managers with any feedback.



   75. I have been asked about my further involvement in the training programme

      during and after rollout. I had no more involvement in its design, but I

      attended around 10 to 15 training courses (Ann Green attended more) and

      50 to 60 user awareness events around the country to see what their

      quality was like. I think the user awareness events and the support from

      ICL Pathway and Peritas at these sessions was excellent. People turned

      up from the region where the session was to give local support.



Concluding remarks


   76. I have been asked if there is anything else I wish to bring to the Chair's

      attention. I think the Inquiry is barking up the wrong tree by trying to blame

      the initial training for the errors in Horizon. We tested and tested and tested

      the training. The feeling was that it worked perfectly from 1997. I

      understand that fraudulent errors occurred in 2006-2010 but I knew nothing

      about them.



   77. The issue was that, in my opinion, the Horizon software was not tested

      properly and contained glitches, so then there were errors in SPMs

      accounts which resulted in SPMs being incorrectly charged with fraudulent

      activity where they started having serious losses. I think it's highly unlikely

      that training given in 1997 to 1999 is the reason why SPMS started making

      serious losses and were accused of stealing.

                                   Page 24 of 26
                                                                                       WITNO5240100
                                                                                     WITNO5240100




       78. I knew my SPMs and it should have been said to bosses "it is not right,

          these SPMs have been here 30 years and have not taken £35,000" etc.

          Auditors and senior managers should have known — their incompetence let

          this happen.




Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed:

          GROi'!!
Dated: 6January 2023




                                       Page 25 of 26
                                                                         WITNO5240100
                                                                       WI TN05240100




Index to First Witness Statement of Trevor Rollason




No.     Document Description            URN           Control Number

      Fax from Alan Bourne to       POL00039733 POL-0036291
      Kathryn Cook enclosing
  1   Report on Horizon System
      Training
  2   Report on Training              FUJO0001276 POINQ0007447F
      Programme / Training Needs
      Analysis v1.0
      Memo from Kathryn Cook to       POL00039748 POL-0036306
  3   multiple recipients re: Horizon
      Training Competency and
      Conformance

  4   Letter regarding Horizon      POL00039735 POL-0036293
      Training
  5   Collection of Acceptance    POL00028357 POL-0024839
      Incident Forms for various
      incidents
      Training and User Awareness FUJO0001321 POIN00007492F
  6   Baseline Document v9

      Horizon Testing - Key         POL00028432 POL-0024914
  7   Problem Area Analysis and
      Action Plan, 17 November
      1998




                                  Page 26 of 26
