WITN0O3980100
WITNO3980100

Witness Name: Susan Harding
WITN 0398
Statement No.: 1

Exhibits: None
Dated: 23rd September 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

First Witness Statement of Susan Harding

|, Susan Harding, will say as follows...

Background

1. Iwas employed by the Post Office/Royal Mail for 40 years from 1976 until 2017.
| started as a Postal Assistant and ended my career as a Senior Manager

(Corporate Personal Contract).

2. | trained as an accountant with the Post Office in the 1980s and worked in

various departments where my finance skills were utilised.

3. Over time | became, more specifically, involved in work which was related to
the core operation of the Post Office, whose primary business was to move
monies between customers and clients. A customer would undertake a
transaction in a post office which would either be an inpayment (eg pay a bill)
or an outpayment (eg receive their pension). This transaction would be
tecorded in Horizon and the branches “cash” balance would increase or
decrease. The transactions would be transmitted to the Centre and the value
would be paid to or received from Clients. Depending on the branches overall

transactions within a period the branch would be “funded” or “defunded” ie they

Page 1of 8
WITN0O3980100
WITNO3980100

would receive a remittance of money from the cash centre or they would send

money to the cash centre

. became an expert in this area and was highly regarded in the business for my

knowledge of the “end to end” business accounting process.

. | was promoted several times and held a number of key roles which reflected
my knowledge of this core business process. These included Head of the
Operating Process and Business Process Architect. Both of these roles

involved me looking at how to improve this core business process.

. As a result of undertaking these roles | got involved in the initial implementation
of the Horizon System as an expert ‘customer’ and was asked to represent the
Post Office in “accepting” the system from an accounting perspective. This
involved my team and myself specifying the criteria by which the efficacy of the
accounting processes would be judged and formally undertaking a process to

evaluate this part of the system

. When Horizon was initially implemented it was built to replicate the accounting
Processes that were historically in place. This meant that a “cash account” was
still produced by horizon as this was needed to feed the “back office” accounting

systems and processes in place in Chesterfield.

Page 2 of 8
WITN0O3980100
WITNO3980100

8. Many of the pre-horizon processes and terminology were initially retained which
helped to reduce the impact on post offices of what was a very significant

change.

IMPACT Programme

9. Subsequent to my role in the initial Horizon Implementation and _ in my role as
the Business Process Architect | was asked to design a new end to end process
that would radically transform the accounting processes in branches and the

back office and bring them into line with standard financial practices

10. The principle business objectives were to design a solution that utilised industry
standard accounting processes, procedures and systems as far as was
practicable and possible. Thereby reducing the overall costs to the business,

increasing accounting efficacy and reducing losses

11.The business drivers were to reduce the overall cost and complexity of the
solution based on utilising off the shelf accounting solutions , specifically in the
back office systems, while recognising the unique operation of the front office

processes in branches

12. The objectives were to replace the antiquated bespoke systems in Head Office

which had limited integration and to remove non-standard accounting practises

Page 3 of 8
WITN0O3980100
WITNO3980100

13. The programme was sponsored by the incumbent Post Office Finance Director,

Peter Corbett and the IT Director, David Smith.

14. The design was developed between the Post Office and Fujitsu and required a
redesign of some of the accounting procedures in Horizon and the
implementation of a standard SAP accounting system in the” back office”, plus

decommissioning of several legacy systems

15. After the design was signed off and agreed a business case was prepared by
myself and ultimately agreed by the Business. Given my role in the design and
the Business Case | was asked to take on the role of Programme Manager to

implement the solution

16. My role involved:

a. Managing the programme team and external suppliers
b. Engaging with key stakeholders

c. Reporting progress

d. Managing risks and issues

e. Managing costs against the Business Case

f. Ensuring that the design was implemented as specified

17. The principle objectives of IMPACT were to

Page 4 of 8
WITN0O3980100
WITNO3980100

18. Deliver an integrated automated solution utilising industry standard packages
where possible.
a) Reduce the IT operating costs

b) Reduce losses and improve debt recovery

19. The initial concept and high level designs were developed through a series of

workshops involving Fujitsu and Post Office experts and user representatives.

20.The design of the new end to end process and systems was radical and
complex, involving the implementation of new (off the shelf) standard

accounting packages and the decommissioning of many “legacy” systems.

21.Users representing both Post Office employees and Subpostmasters were
engaged throughout the Programme through the Business Change Team

which was managed by Steve Grayston (my Business Change Mabager)

22.The programme took 3 years from conception to implementation and was a

radical change for both branches and back/head office staff

23.The redesign included the removal of the local suspense account.

24. This decision was based on the core principle that branches (specifically
agency branches) were accountable for the financial integrity of their accounts.
The “suspense account’, had historically been used to “balance” any

discrepancies which covered up losses in their accounts. The processes for

Page 5 of 8
WITNO03980100

WITNO3980100

raising a dispute regarding a discrepancy were not changed by the Programme.
Branches were supported by the helpdesk and/or the Network team and would
faise any concerns through those channels. As | have stated agency branches
were responsible for making good losses. This principle was not changed by
the Impact Programme

25. This decision was based on the core design principle that, contractually, agency
branches were accountable for the cash and transactions in their branch and

liable to make good any and all shortfalls

26. Consultation on the design and implementation was undertaken by the design
team and the business change team and involved stakeholders from both Head

Office branches and agency branches throughout the Programme timeline

Accounting Principles

27.Prior to IMPACT branches were required to “ balance” their accounts weekly
which involved verifying the transaction data against supporting documents and

confirming stock and cash balances.

28. In Crown Offices (owned and managed by Post Office employees) any resulting

shortfall in cash was declared as a loss.

29. In Sub Post Office the owners were required under their contract to make good
any shortfall. The majority of post office branches were operated on this basis

ie the owners of the branches were not employees of the Post Office

Page 6 of 8
WITNO03980100

WITNO3980100

30.The accounting period was changed as part of the Impact Programme to
monthly in line with standard accounting practise. However branches were able
to, and encouraged to, “balance” more frequently in order to identify any

discrepancies as soon as possible and resolve them.
31. It was agreed during the design of Impact that the suspense account would be
removed, as historically it was used by Subpostmasters to” hide” discrepancies

in their accounts, rather than resolve them.

32.In contractual terms, they were liable, contractually, for any shortfalls which

had to be made good.

33. All design principles were agreed by key stakeholders and the detailed designs

were developed with significant user involvement through workshops and

document reviews.

34. Users were also involved in the various testing stages and sign-off.

Other questions

35. The majority of post office branches were operated on a “franchise” basis ie the

owners of the branches were not employees of the Post Office .

Page 7 of 8
WITN0O3980100
WITNO3980100

36. User involvement in the Impact programme was significant and managed by
the Business Change Team. Focus groups were developed and used to
engage representatives of all impacted areas within the Business. I believe that

this engagement was sufficient.

37.A number of other techniques were used to engage all branches including

conferences, newsletters and videos.

38. The” robustness’ of Horizon was not considered to be an issue and there was
no evidence to suggest there were any “bugs” affecting the efficacy of the

system.

39. IMPACT did not significantly impact on the useability or user functionality of the
Horizon system. It was primarily a “back office” system implementation to
replace old bespoke systems with package accountancy solutions. The revised
system was thoroughly tested before it was implemented into the live
environment. The testing strategy and plan was signed off by experts and user

representatives and they were all involved in the different test phases.

Statement of Truth

Dated: jlh (6) clelur 2042

Page 8 of 8
