                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITNO4510100




                                        Witness Name: Michael Edward Pryor Peach

                                                      Statement No.: WITNO4510100

                                                                 Dated: 3 March 2023



                      POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




     FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF MICHAEL EDWARD PRYOR PEACH




I, MR MICHAEL EDWARD PRYOR PEACH, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION

1.    I am a former employee of Fujitsu Services Limited (Fujitsu). I left Fujitsu in

      September 2009.


2.    This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the

      Inquiry) with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request provided to me on 6

      January 2023 (the Request), to the extent I have or had direct knowledge of

      such matters. I was assisted in preparing this statement by Morrison Foerster,

      who represent Fujitsu in the Inquiry.


3.    The topics set out in the Request concern events that occurred over 13 years

      ago. I have set out my best recollection of these events in this statement, which

      relate to (a) problem and incident management systems, (b) the Software

      Support Centre (SSC) at Fujitsu, (c) Escher and Riposte, (d) bugs, errors and

      defects (bugs, each a bug) in the Horizon IT system (Horizon), (e) remote

      access, and (f) the conduct of prosecutions by and on behalf of Post Office




                                     Page 1 of 54
                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITN04510100




     Limited (POL). While I have tried my best to recall these events, due to the time

     that has passed, there are areas where my recollection is unclear or limited.


4.   As requested by the Inquiry, I have reviewed the documents referenced by the

     Inquiry in the Request. I have also refreshed my memory by reviewing other

     contemporaneous documents made available to me by Fujitsu. Where my

     recollection has been either supported by or prompted by documents, they are

     referenced using the Inquiry's Unique Reference Numbers and are set out in

     the index accompanying this statement.


BACKGROUND

5.   I was first employed by ICL PLC (ICL) in 1980. Initially, I was in regional

     technical support for customers using the Virtual Machine Environment (VME)

     operating system. Later, I transferred to the VME Network System Support

     Centre unit in Bristol as a Network Support Diagnostician. I then became

     manager of the VME Base System Support Centre unit, based initially in

     Reading and then Bracknell. Both of these units—the VME Network System

     Support Centre and VME Base System Support Centre—were part of the ICL

     Customer Service team (ICL Customer Service).


6.   Following my role as manager of the VME Base System Support Centre unit, I

     spent a brief period as a project manager in ICL Customer Service, introducing

     the PC-PARIS product, which was a Known Error system supplied to ICL

     support units and to VME customers. This Known Error system was unrelated

     to Horizon. Still working within ICL Customer Service, I then headed a small

     Rapid Application Development (RAD) team based in Bracknell which

     specialised in delivering short-term development projects to ICL Customer



                                    Page 2 of 54
                                                                                        WITNO4510100
                                                                                      WITNO4510100




      Service. This RAD team was not part of ICL Pathway Limited (Pathway), and

      did not develop any code or applications for Horizon.


7.    I left the RAD team and ICL in 1997 to join Pathway in Feltham as the Manager

      of the SSC (3rd line support). I held this role until I left Fujitsu on 30 September

      2009.


8.    My work and involvement with Horizon was almost exclusively concerned with

      the Horizon system that first went live in 1999-2000 (now known as Legacy

      Horizon). Legacy Horizon was replaced by a new system (Horizon Online or

      HNGX), which was in the process of going live when I left Fujitsu.


LCGI CVCTGM



9.    The Known Error Log (KEL) system was designed and written within the SSC.

      The purpose of the KEL system was to provide information about errors

      reported on Horizon. As I recall, the system was accessible by all Pathway (and

      later Fujitsu) Post Office Account (Post Office Account) units including

      support, testing, development and management support. These units could

      raise a record of a "known error" on the KEL system, and we referred to these

      individual records as "a KEL".


10.   The system was written primarily by Steve Parker, who had a great deal of

      support experience, and experience of previous Known Error systems, which

      he used to develop a system that was accurate, used full text searching

      capabilities, and was easy to use. The KEL system documented the symptoms

      of the incident, and Systems Management Centre (SMC) (2nd line support)

      would enter the symptoms into the system as closely as possible to what the

      customer (usually a postmaster) had described. By logging symptoms as


                                       Page 3 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITNO4510100




      described by customers rather than technical staff, the system was designed to

      find more "hits" if other customers reported similar symptoms recurring.


11.   Units outside the SSC were encouraged to use the system. In particular, the

      SMC were encouraged to raise a KEL for any calls (i.e., reports of an incident)

      which were to be passed to the SSC. The SSC staff would then update the

      KEL. If the issue which prompted the KEL was resolved, the resolution would

      be appended to the KEL. If the issue was unresolved because the evidence

      required to assist diagnosis of the fault was insufficient, then the evidence that

      was required would be documented on the KEL. In order to search for a similar

      error on the KEL system, all that needed to be done was to type into a text

      search box—essentially the same as a "google" search.


12.   I believe the KEL system was adequate for its purpose because it did what it

      was designed to do, which was to provide a way for support teams to confirm

      whether an incident that was being reported by a customer was a known issue.

      It was also designed and developed by the people who most used it.


PINICL AND PEAK SYSTEMS

13.   When I joined Pathway, the Pin ICL system was in use, but it was ageing. It was

      used to record the details of incidents and to allocate them to development, and

      later support teams. I was not involved in the design or development of PinICL,

      and only used it for a short period of time, which I cannot recall, and I cannot

      comment further.


14.   Since PinICL needed to be replaced, the decision was taken to develop the

      Peak system. This work was done by the SSC for a number of reasons: (a) the

      SSC were likely to be the people who most used the system, (b) some SSC


                                     Page 4 of 54
                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITN04510100




      staff had experience of development, (c) I had experience managing staff

      developing Helpdesk systems, and (d) the SSC staff had experience of PinICL

      and could therefore retain much of the "look and feel" of PinICL.


15.   The process by which a call (which we also referred to as a "Peak") arrived in

      the SSC was as follows:


         a. An incident would be logged by the Horizon System Helpdesk (HSH,

            later called the Horizon Service Desk or HSD) on Powerhelp (an

            externally purchased Helpdesk application). Incidents coming into the

            HSH could have originated from postmasters, other units within the Post

            Office Account, or POL. Other Fujitsu units that were dealing with

            Horizon, including MSU, development and testing would raise calls

            direct onto the Peak system. The Network Business Support Centre

            (NBSC) would send calls by contacting the HSH.


         b. If the incident was suspected to be a software issue, it would be passed

            to the SMC, who would perform KEL checks (i.e., check the KEL system)

            and other diagnosis.


         c. If, after their diagnosis, the SMC considered the incident to be a software

            issue, the incident would be passed to the Peak system via an Open

            Teleservice Interface (OTI) and arrive in the SSC.


         d. The SSC Coordinator would allocate the call to a member of the SSC's

            technical staff (their formal title was "Product Specialist", but we would

            often call them SSC technicians) based on their area of expertise

            (Counter, Agent, Database, etc). Initially, the SSC Coordinator allocated



                                    Page 5 of 54
                                                                            WITNO4510100
                                                                          WITN04510100




   calls based on their knowledge of the areas of expertise of the SSC

   technicians, and if they were unable to determine which area of expertise

   was most appropriate for a particular call, they would speak to myself or

   the SSC technicians for guidance. Later on, I produced a skills matrix for

   all members of the SSC to assist the SSC Coordinator with the allocation

   process. The SSC Coordinator would also consider the workloads of the

   SSC technician when allocating calls—usually the number of incidents

   the technician was managing at the time, and sometimes I would tell the

   SSC Coordinator not to pass calls to specific technicians for reasons of

   workload.


e. The SSC technician would then analyse the incident and attempt to

   resolve it. If the incident was resolved, it would be closed on the Peak

   system, which in turn passed the closure details back over to Powerhelp

   via the OTI. If the incident was identified as a code error by the SSC, the

   SSC would forward the call to the development team responsible for that

   part of the system, usually after discussion with the specific developer

   as to exactly what evidence would be required in order to identify the

   exact area of code in error.


f. Incidents were also raised by other staff in Pathway's (later Fujitsu's)

   Customer Service team (Customer Service), and by testing and

   development teams. These were raised direct onto the Peak system. For

   example, receipts and payments mismatches would be raised by the

   MSU. In the case of the testing teams, the incident would be raised and




                           Page 6 of 54
                                                                          WITNO4510100
                                                                        WITNO4510100




   then passed to the development unit responsible for the part of the

   system in question.


g. Prioritisation of incidents which arose from the 1st and 2nd line support

   units (HSH and SMC, respectively) was done prior to the incident arriving

   in the Peak system. So, except for incidents raised by the SSC, neither

   myself nor SSC staff were responsible for allocating the priority of an

   incident. The SSC could later change the priority if, for example, an

   incident reduced in urgency as a workaround had been put in place. The

   SSC would also upgrade a call if it became more urgent, but I do not

   recall it happening often.


h. Evidence for an incident was generally obtained by SSC technicians

   accessing the live system through secure PCs (SSC PCs) attached to a

   secure Local Access Network (LAN) connecting to the data centres. The

   SSC had dedicated servers in the data centres for the storage of

   evidence, but I do not recall the exact mechanism by which the data was

   "attached" to an individual Peak. I do recall that on a number of

   occasions, development staff would visit the SSC secure area in order

   to look at evidence from the live system. When gathering evidence,

   access to the live system would be on a "read only" basis. Development

   staff did not have access to the live systems and would need to visit the

   SSC secure area to view diagnostic data.


i. Where an incident was reported from development or testing teams,

   these teams were able to attach the evidence to the Peak itself.




                           Page 7 of 54
                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITN04510100




         j.   An incident would be considered closed once the root cause had been

              identified and a remedy put in place. The remedy would differ depending

              on the nature of the root cause. For example, an incident requiring a

              code fix would remain open until such time as the fix had been tested

              and applied to the live estate. Other closure categories may have

              required different closure actions.


         k. When an incident was resolved on Peak, it would be returned to the

              SSC, who would then close it. This in turn caused the incident to be

              reported as closed over the OTI link to Powerhelp.


16.   I believe the Peak system was more than adequate to manage incidents on

      Horizon because enhancements were made to the system that went beyond its

      original scope of managing incidents. Furthermore, since the Peak system was

      internally developed, it was also capable of rapid change should additional

      requirements be requested by other units in Fujitsu involved with Horizon.


Service Level Targets

17.   I am aware that there were Service Level Targets (SLTs) in the contract

      between POL and Fujitsu, and I recall that the majority of these SLTs related to

      hardware, including timescales for replacement, engineer response times, and

      network availability. These would still be "service tickets" but would be handled

      by HSH and SMC and would only relate to PinICL or Peak if a hardware or

      network call were passed to the SSC in error.


18.   There were SLTs relating to the processing of transaction data which indirectly

      impacted Peak. Fujitsu were targeted with processing high percentages of

      transaction data from Post Offices into the Fujitsu data centre systems within a


                                      Page 8 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




      certain number of days. My recollection is that when it was recognised that a

      Post Office branch had not reported their "end of day", a Peak would be raised

      and passed to SSC to investigate the reason. I recall that SSC staff developed

      a script to run on one of the data centre servers to report all missing "end of

      day" markers.


19.   I recall that all of the SLTs in the contract contained penalties, but I was only

      indirectly involved in the monitoring of these, there was a unit inside Customer

      Service which monitored, and reported on all of these SLTs.


20.   There were no SLTs relating to the management of software incidents or the

      production of code fixes.


SOFTWARE SUPPORT CENTRE (SSC)

21.   As I state above at paragraph 7, I was the SSC Manager from 1997 to 2009.


22.   The SSC's initial role was to provide 3rd line software support to Fujitsu-written

      software in the live estate, to accept incident calls from 2nd line support (SMC)

      in the PinICL (later Peak) systems. This involved analysing incidents, closing

      and returning those incidents that were not software related. For those that

      were software related, the SSC was to identify as closely as possible the root

      cause of the incident and pass the incident to the unit which could resolve it

      (usually in the development team), and thereafter to monitor the incident to

      completion.


23.   The role of the SSC changed from this initial brief in a number of ways, under

      different Customer Service Directors.




                                     Page 9 of 54
                                                                                   WITNO4510100
                                                                                 WITNO4510100




24.   Although I outline the changes that I can recall below, I regret that I cannot

      remember timescales, and only some of the reasons for the changes:


         a. The SSC developed, supported, and maintained Peak for the reasons

            outlined in paragraph 14 above.


         b. The SSC developed a visual monitoring tool to give early warning of any

            failures to servers and databases in the data centres and to give

            advance notice of possible incoming incidents. This was simply a

            support tool and, while it was not part of the Horizon system, it was

            subsequently made available to POL through the Service Management

            Portal.


         c. The SSC were responsible for recovering any outstanding transactions

            which had been "stranded" on counters and not passed to the

            correspondence services in the data centres because the SSC occupied

            a secure area in Bracknell which connected to the live estate. I describe

            the process in more detail at paragraph 89 below.


         d. The SSC were responsible for responding to ad-hoc data requests from

            POL—relayed through the Customer Service Management Support

            Team—for the reasons noted in paragraph 24(c) above.


         e. The SSC developed, supported and maintained the KEL system.


         f. The SSC developed the Service Management Portal—an initiative from

            the Customer Service Director at the relevant time, Dave Baldwin.




                                   Page 10 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                     WITNO4510100




         g. SSC staff reviewed technical documents relating to design, software

              development and support of new facilities and applications within

              Horizon because once the developed products were released to the live

              estate, the SSC would be responsible for supporting the code in those

              products. The SSC would provide written feedback (usually via me) to

              the document author.


         h. SSC staff reviewed Change Proposal (CP) documents relating to

              changes in the functionality in the Horizon applications. As with technical

              documents, the SSC would be responsible for supporting any code that

              resulted from such CPs, and written feedback would be given (again,

              usually via myself) to the document author.


         i.   SSC staff designed and tested workarounds for reported issues on the

              live system.


         j.   SSC staff actioned corrections to data on the live system.


25.   The SSC was/is the 3rd line software support unit. I was not involved in

      producing the processes for the other support units, and the extent of my

      understanding and recollection of these other units is as follows:


         a. 1st line support was performed by HSH based in Stevenage. Their role

              was to respond to the call, identify the broad area of the issue and to

              check the KEL system. If the call was a hardware problem, they would

              pass the call to the engineering team; if the call was a network issue, to

              the network team. HSH would try to resolve the issue with the caller. If




                                     Page 11 of 54
                                                                             WITN04510100
                                                                           WITNO4510100




   the call was believed to be a software issue, the call would be passed to

   the SMC for analysis.


b. 2nd line support was provided by the SMC, also based in Stevenage. In

   addition to receiving calls from HSH, the SMC was tasked with

   monitoring the state of the counters and the servers in the data centres

   using the Tivoli system. The SSC did not use the Tivoli software directly,

   but my understanding is that the system automatically reported on the

   state of the servers in the data centres, and the Tivoli software running

   on the counters would collate event messages and pass them to a data

   centre server. Event messages are entries in Windows NT (which was

   the operating system at the time) "event logs", which are included in all

   Windows systems. Windows operating systems and applications

   running on Windows write messages to the event logs which, as a result,

   are a major source of diagnostic information. There were an agreed set

   of targets with regard to SMC's relationship to the SSC—specifically

   "filtration" (i.e., the ratio of incidents which were inappropriately passed

   to the SSC). For example, the SMC had a target not to pass calls relating

   to hardware faults to the SSC. If the SMC passed 100 fault calls to the

   SSC, and 5 of these were subsequently closed as hardware faults, then

   the SMC's filtration rate would be 95%. The "End to End Support

   Process, Operational Level Agreement" dated 17 June 2003 (End to

   End Support Process) (FUJ00079897) sets out the categories of calls

   which should not be passed to each of the different support lines.




                           Page 12 of 54
                                                                                         WITN04510100
                                                                                      WITNO4510100




         c. 3rd line support—software support—was provided by the SSC with

             similar filtration targets to 4th line support.


         d. 4th line support was provided by the development team, which

             developed code fixes, or arranged for such fixes to be developed by

             external software suppliers.


26.   These processes were the subject of Information Technology Infrastructure

      Library (ITIL) and British Standards Institution (BSI) audits. While I cannot recall

      specific audits, for BSI audits, I remember sitting with the auditor and

      responding to questions about processes, procedures, work instructions and

      relevant documentation, and the auditor would then spend time with one or

      more members of my team asking more questions. I also recall the SSC would

      receive observations and comments that would come out of the audits. I recall

      one ITIL audit where I had a long discussion with the auditor about the

      relationship between "incidents" and "problems" in ITIL terminology. The SSC

      passed this audit with no significant comments.


SSC staffing and roles

27.   In 1997, when I joined, I recall that the SSC had 6 staff including contractors,

      and had only been recently set up in order to support the initial roll-out of

      Horizon to 10 Post Offices in the Stroud area. When I left in 2009 the number

      of staff was 25. I recall that at one point the staff level was close to 30, but

      cannot recall when this was.


28.   All of the people in the SSC reported to me—a flat structure. All but one, the

      SSC Coordinator, were tasked with diagnosing reported incidents in the live

      estate. When I left, the SSC technicians were graded the same as development


                                      Page 13 of 54
                                                                                         WITNO4510100
                                                                                       WITN04510100




      staff, ranging from DEV4 to DEV6, with DEV6 being the highest paid, most

      experienced and technically capable staff. Specifically, these were John

      Simpkins, Steve Parker, Anne Chambers, Patrick Carroll and Mark Wright.


29.   All SSC technicians were expected know the Riposte product (from Escher).

      This was the software which ran on the counters and the correspondence

      servers in the data centres. EPOSS interfaced to Riposte on the counters. SSC

      technicians were also expected to have an overall understanding of the system

      structure, but they would then specialise in specific areas of Horizon—for

      example, Database, Agent and Counter—dependent upon their skillset on

      joining the team, the areas I felt the unit was short of staff, and their own wishes.


30.   As a specialist in an area, the SSC technician would deal with incidents

      primarily, but not exclusively, in their area of specialty. For example, Counter

      specialists would concentrate on Riposte, EPOSS software and Escher Mails—

      any software running on the counters or in the correspondence servers. Other

      staff would concentrate on the systems which ran in the data centres.


31.   The SSC Coordinator's role was mainly administrative; ensuring that out-of-

      hours call rotas were maintained, handling phone calls coming into the unit and

      ordering stationery. The SSC Coordinator also allocated incoming incidents on

      Peak as per my comments above.


32.   During my time as SSC Manager, I recall reporting to Steven Muchow, Peter

      Burden, Carl Marx, David Baldwin, Naomi Elliot, Andy Hall and Wendy

      Warham. I cannot recall exactly when, and for how long, they were my

      managers.




                                      Page 14 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITN04510100




33.   I wrote job descriptions for Fujitsu's Human Resources team (HR) to use for

      external recruitment for the SSC. I can only vaguely remember the technical

      requirements for the SSC, but they would have included knowledge of at least

      two or three of Structured Query Language (SQL), AttributeGrammar, Java, C

      or C++ languages, and at least three years' technical support experience at the

      code level (meaning the ability to look at code to determine the cause of the

      incident).


34.   In addition to the technical requirements that I specified, HR had additional

      requirements for SSC roles relating to security and financial checks, because

      we worked in a secure area, but I do not know the details of these.


35.   Interviews with candidates for the SSC were done by me and one of the more

      senior SSC technicians, who prepared a set of technical questions which had

      to be answered correctly at the interview.


36.   On joining the unit, new staff members were given a "joiners pack" which

      included a copy of their job description, SSC work instructions, and

      explanations of all the jargon and mnemonics. Since work instructions, jargon,

      and mnemonics changed on the Horizon systems, I would produce a new pack

      for each joiner.


37.   New staff members were also allocated a "mentor" from the more senior SSC

      technicians. All new joiners were technically competent when we employed

      them. The mentor's purpose and responsibilities were to (a) train the new joiner

      on Riposte, (b) confirm the new joiner understood Riposte and the structure

      and functions of Horizon, (c) work with the new joiner and monitor their

      performance on incidents, and (d) generally "look after" them until they


                                    Page 15 of 54
                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITNO4510100




      understood the processes and systems. New joiners would initially have no

      access to the Horizon system. Using their judgment, the mentor would tell me

      when the new joiner was sufficiently trained to be allowed access to the live

      system and I would then request full access for them. I cannot recall specific

      examples of how long it took for new joiners to be sufficiently trained, but my

      recollection is that it usually took around 6 months.


38.   Briefing of SSC staff on general matters relating to Horizon and Fujitsu were

      either done by senior management briefings, or by me, either in person, by

      email, or unit meetings. Such matters would include the status of the Horizon

      project, the Fujitsu company in general, and changes in management

      personnel. Technical     information   was    available   through   the   design,

      development and support documents held in Fujitsu's document system, which

      would be reviewed by SSC staff, and by staff simply talking to each other.


SSC reports

39.   Reports on the operations of the SSC were prepared by me monthly and sent

      to my manager. The format varied depending on the requirements of my

      manager.    For most of the time that I was SSC Manager, my immediate

      manager was the Customer Service Director, but there were occasions on

      which I reported to someone who then reported to the Customer Service

      Director.


40.   The purpose of the SSC monthly reports was to inform my manager on the

      operation of the unit. I recall that the report always included figures for the

      volume of calls coming into the SSC, the number of calls closed, as well as

      showing categories and filtration rates between the SMC and the SSC, and



                                    Page 16 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITN04510100




      between the SSC and development team. There was always a section relating

      to any major incidents reported in the system (those incidents which had been

      forwarded to the SSC with a high priority). Later reports would also include

      details of staff time and activity, any ad-hoc data requests made by POL and

      any transaction recovery actions which had been taken. Where relevant,

      information in the SSC monthly reports would feed into Problem Management

      meetings and Service Reviews with POL.


41.   The SSC did not undertake trend analysis to determine whether the same

      issues were recurring, as this was the responsibility of other Customer Service

      staff based on data supplied by the HSH and SMC (i.e., the calls in Powerhelp).

      The SSC were only supposed to receive the first instance of a new software

      issue. If there were multiple calls, there was a facility for the HSH/SMC to

      identify those calls onto the Peak system.


42.   If the SSC recognised that a particular problem could have implications for

      multiple branches, this was added to the Peak and the KEL. It is important to

      note that problems which occurred in overnight processing sometimes had the

      potential to affect all Post Office branches, but not every potentially affected

      branch would be listed on the Peak.


Service Management Portal

43.   The Service Management Portal (SMP) was an initiative proposed by the then

      Customer Service Director (Dave Baldwin), to be written by the SSC as

      something completely separate from the live estate and the formal development

      of Horizon. It was created in about 2006, and it was a prototype to demonstrate

      the ways in which Fujitsu could display data of interest to POL.



                                    Page 17 of 54
                                                                                   WITNO4510100
                                                                                 WITNO4510100




44.   The development was to be an intranet system accessible by POL

      management and Post Office Account staff which would provide a variety of

      functions. The functions that I can remember were reporting against hardware

      call SLTs, reporting on network reliability, real-time reporting on some system

      functions, and a function that would show the nearest working Post Office

      branch in the event of network failure causing one or more branches to cease

      trading. As noted in section 4 of the "Service Management Portal User Guide"

      dated 22 December 2005 (SMP User Guide) (FUJ00142216), the real-time

      reporting was a red/amber/green representation of the state of a number of

      system functions, including Alliance and Leicester Network Banking, overall

      failure count on Network Banking transactions, Transaction Enquiry Service

      servers and EPAY connections for E-Top Ups. In addition, there was a map of

      all Post Offices which were not communicating, with subsets for VIP Post

      Offices and Post Offices that were reliant on satellite communications. POL

      could also check on the current state of an individual Post Office. The data

      which was used to provide the information was detailed on the SMP.


45.   I cannot recall the names of individuals who had access to the SMP. I arranged

      for Fujitsu and POL staff to be given access but I would not deal directly with

      the individuals being given access. For example, POL would supply me a list of

      POL staff to be given access, and I would add these names to the SMP system

      and provide POL a list of usernames and passwords.


46.   Most of the SMP system was written by me, with assistance from SSC

      technicians. Data for the system came from daily extractions from Peak,

      Powerhelp and Tivoli.




                                   Page 18 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                 WITN04510100




47.   Access to the SMP system was restricted to some POL management staff

      whose roles I did not know (I was simply provided with names, so that I could

      set up usernames and passwords) and Customer Service staff. Through the

      SMP, it was possible to access some underlying Powerhelp calls which would

      include updates to relevant Peaks.


48.   My recollection is that the SMP system had additions made over several years,

      including major incident management, reporting against SLTs to the Service

      Review Board, Operational Business Change and Operational Change

      Proposal (OCP) procedures, but was not often used by POL management, and

      (from comments relayed to me by Customer Service management) showed

      every sign of withering to nothing by the time I left in 2009.


49.   As part of my work on the SMP, I prepared documents to support its use. I wrote

      these documents at a time when it was believed that the SMP would be in

      regular use:


         a. SMP User Guide (FUJ00142216) for Fujitsu and POL staff using the

             SMP.


         b. "Service Management Portal Support Guide" dated 29 August 2007

             (FUJ00142217), which was a detailed technical support guide, so that

             SSC staff members would be able to support the SMP in my absence.


         c. "Service Management Portal High Level Design" dated 19 July 2007

             (FUJ00142218), a design document using the standard format for

             design documents at the time.




                                     Page 19 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITNO4510100




Recollections of my time in the SSC

50.   I remember on my first day thinking that running a software support team which,

      at that time, did not have adequate access to the system to gather evidence,

      nor the Fujitsu-written source code that we were supporting, was going to be

      an impossible job. It left me wondering what on earth I had taken on. It also

      came with a very long "to do list".


51.   This situation did improve rapidly. The SSC was given greater (but not full)

      access to the system—parts of the system were still not accessible, for

      example, the audit server. The SSC was also given read access to the source

      code. The relationships between the different support units (i.e., the HSH, SMC,

      SSC and development teams) were defined, additional staff were recruited and

      we moved to a secure location in Bracknell. We also developed a specification

      of the equipment required for a test rig specifically for SSC use, which the SSC

      would use to recreate problems reported on Horizon. Over time, I was able to

      complete all the items on my "to do list".


52.   Overall, I suspect that, like everyone else in every other job, there were some

      good days and some bad days. I remember thinking that I did a good job of

      treating my staff with respect and managing the team, and getting the software

      problems with the system managed properly.


53.   I believe that the SSC provided a professional and competent service, both to

      POL and to Fujitsu. The unit regularly hit or exceeded the targets which we

      were set, developed and maintained support tools for the SSC and for other

      support teams, and provided a service to POL for management information




                                     Page 20 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITN04510100




      which was beyond the scope of the contract (for example, by producing ad hoc

      reports and developing the SMP)


54.   The SSC staff, for the most part, seemed to me to be happy in their work and

      staff turnover was low. This meant the team's performance was consistent,

      there were fewer new joiners requiring training, information could flow freely

      between team members and incidents were therefore resolved quickly.


55.   As with any job, there were bad times when incident rates were high, and staff

      worked long hours to resolve incidents or times when staff were being called in

      to the office overnight to resolve incidents with the data centre systems.


56.   I cannot remember specific technical issues, however I can recall one instance

      where myself, an SSC technician and a member of the Belfast Operations

      Centre support staff (BOC Personnel) were in Bracknell throughout the night

      trying to resolve a problem with overnight processing which would have had a

      major impact on the following days' business for Post Office branches. I

      remember the problem was resolved in time, but as I have mentioned above,

      do not recall the exact nature of the incident, or how it was resolved.


57.   On a number of occasions, problems with overnight processing could cause

      SSC technicians to be called into the office at Bracknell. If the SSC technician

      felt that the incident was likely to cause impact on POL, the SSC technician

      could contact me, and I would go to the office. Due to the time that has passed,

      I cannot recall specific occurrences, dates, or the incidents that caused them.




                                    Page 21 of 54
                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITNO4510100




SSC's relationships with other units

58.   Since the SSC was the 3rd line software support unit, incidents were reported

      to the SSC by the SMC (2nd line support unit). There was, therefore, no direct

      relationship between the SSC and the HSH (1st line support unit). Nor was

      there a direct relationship between the SSC and the NBSC.


59.   The SSC's "supplier" of incidents arising from postmaster calls was the SMC,

      and incidents were not supplied directly from HSH or NBSC. Therefore, the

      SSC had direct interfaces and relationships with SMC and the development

      teams (4th line support). Ultimately, SSC, SMC and HSH were the responsibility

      of the Customer Service Director.


60.   The relationship between the SSC and SMC was generally cordial, although I

      know there were concerns at times about SMC's ability to correctly filter calls,

      and the impact this was having on the SSC (i.e, an increased volume of

      incidents being raised that did not require intervention from the SSC or

      development teams). There were also times when SSC staff felt that important

      system errors in the data centres were being missed by SMC, leading to

      pressure on SSC staff.


61.   Where concerns were raised, the SSC and SMC would have meetings, and I

      recall meetings with SMC managers to discuss these issues. Initially this

      involved me specifying Service Level Agreements (SLAs) to the SMC to

      identify in more detail what the SSC required from the SMC, monitoring the

      SMC's performance against those targets, and then discussing anomalies to

      see if there were ways in which we could rectify them. I recall that one specific

      area of concern was the SMC's ability to monitor Tivoli events correctly, and



                                    Page 22 of 54
                                                                                     WITNO4510100
                                                                                   WITN04510100




      that part of this was the way that Tivoli was configured. This was referred to as

      an "event storm", and it was the responsibility of the HSH/SMC to monitor these,

      which is detailed in the End to End Support Process (FUJ00079897).


62.   As discussed in the section relating to the SSC's position in the support

      hierarchy, the SMC were tasked with filtering all calls except software bugs.

      Since the incident was going to be passed to the SSC, it is natural and correct

      that the SMC staff member raise a KEL, and also natural that they would believe

      it (through, in my experience, a process of elimination) to be a software bug

      (rather than, for example, user error) and record it as such on the incident or

      problem management systems.


63.   I have only vague recollections of the interface between the SSC and the MSU.

      The MSU would pass to the SSC requests from POL for ad-hoc data, and

      monitored and reported to POL on all the contractual SLTs. I also recall a

      process in which the MSU would receive information about mismatches in

      accounts and would then raise a Peak for SSC staff to investigate.


64.   The working relationship between SSC and development teams (4th line

      support) worked well. SSC staff were always at liberty to contact development

      staff to discuss incidents. Generally, this would involve senior SSC technicians.

      One SSC staff member, Patrick Carroll, was placed on long-term loan to

      development, tasked with developing the server that would provide the SSC

      with access to the live systems at HNGX.


The proportion of incidents referred to the SSC

65.   The SSC did not receive incidents direct from the HSH or NBSC, only from the

      SMC. I remember agreeing and then documenting a set of targets by which


                                    Page 23 of 54
                                                                                    WITN04510100
                                                                                  WITNO4510100




      the SMC and SSC would be judged by other lines of support and which allowed

      Support Units to monitor their performance relative to expectations, which are

      detailed in the End to End Support Process (FUJ00079897). This document set

      a target on the SMC to only pass to the SSC the first instances of new software

      bugs. That is to say, no calls which were subsequently closed as user error,

      network error, hardware, documentation, duplicate calls and other categories

      documented in the End to End Support Process (FUJ00079897).


66.   Initially the number of incidents passed to the SSC was very high and the

      "filtration" from the SMC was inadequate, which could result in SSC staff being

      overloaded with calls which were not software-related. Measures were put in

      place to change this. I remember going to Stevenage on several occasions to

      give presentations on the system structure, and there were also some

      secondments from the SMC to the SSC. SSC-developed tools such as the KEL

      system were also introduced, and SMC were granted access and encouraged

      to create KELs. Over time the filtration rate from the SMC improved

      consistently, meaning the SSC was adequately staffed to deal with incoming

      incidents.


Major incidents

67.   At the request of the Inquiry, I have considered the "Horizon Service Desk Joint

      Working Document" dated 4 September 2008 (FUJ00080096). The document

      does not appear to mention the SSC and relates to the HNGX, which had just

      gone live when I left Fujitsu. As far as I can tell, the document sets out the

      processes to be followed by helpdesks.




                                    Page 24 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




68.   As I specify above at paragraph 15, incidents were reported to the SSC by the

      SMC (2nd line support). Major incidents (i.e., "A" priority) which were being sent

      from SMC to SSC would be preceded by a phone call alert from SMC to SSC.


69.   I reported on any incidents which were major—i.e., any incidents which were

      "A" or "B" priority in the SSC monthly report. In general, major issues were

      those that had the potential to affect a number of Post Offices, or which had a

      significant impact on the functioning of servers in the data centres and therefore

      were reported by the Tivoli monitoring software. The SMC were responsible for

      the monitoring of Tivoli, and therefore the incidents would be raised by them.


Prioritising incidents

70.   The input that I had to the prioritisation of calls in HSH was limited to software

      calls. Although my name is shown as author of the "Call Enquiry Matrix and

      Incident Prioritisation — Software" specification dated 23 April 2007

      (FUJ00080499), I have no recollection of this document, and I must have had

      significant input from elsewhere, because I never used the Powerhelp system

      and would not have known the "Cause Codes" or "Repair Codes" used in the

      document.


SSC resources

71.   The rate at which incidents were presented to the SSC fluctuated greatly. This

      could be due to, for example, reference data changes, new functionality being

      introduced to the system, software releases. All of these had the ability to

      increase the number of incidents being reported to the SSC. Sometimes I felt

      that I did not have enough time or resources, at other times, overtime claims




                                    Page 25 of 54
                                                                                        WITN04510100
                                                                                      WITNO4510100




      were very low, and the incident rates were also low, and I had all the resource

      that I needed.


72.   I was concerned whenever call rates rose, or whenever the SMC did not hit

      their "filtration" targets, that my staff would be overstretched. I recall reporting

      to my management about those concerns in my monthly reports.


73.   That having been said, the SSC did not get overwhelmed by incidents, and the

      number of incidents which were resolved kept pace with the number being

      reported. Furthermore, the SSC staff also had sufficient time to respond to ad-

      hoc requests for information from POL and from Customer Service, and to

      develop tools to help in their work. So overall, I believe that we did have

      sufficient resources and time, including staff, to investigate reported incidents.


74.   At the Inquiry's request, I have considered the following documents:

      POL00004074, POL00004075 and POL00000678. With regard to SSC staff

      members raising with me issues over having sufficient time or resources to

      investigate potential problems. I do not recall specific instances, but there were

      occasions when on-call staff had been called in to the office for major issues

      with the central systems when we all knew that the problem could have an

      impact on the live estate. For example, a number of Post Offices not being able

      to trade the following day until the problems were resolved. These were

      obviously time-critical problems, and we always wished that we had more time.


75.   There were also occasions in which SSC staff needed help from development

      staff overnight to understand a particular issue. In these circumstances, I felt it

      part of my job to call development managers and request their staff's

      assistance, even though they were not on-call.


                                     Page 26 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




76.   With high priority incidents, there was always a degree of "pressure" to establish

      a root cause for an incident, and, if possible, produce a workaround, or at least

      mitigate its impact. Under these circumstances, SSC technicians may well have

      felt that they wanted more time, and more resource to resolve the incidents,

      and may well have told me so. The SSC technicians working on the problem

      could have access to resources that they needed to resolve the problem, and

      during my time as SSC Manager, I do not recall any occasions where I denied

      requests for additional resources, or any occasions where my requests for

      additional resources were denied.


ESCHER AND RIPOSTE

77.   Incidents relating to third party software were handled in the same way as any

      potential software error. The SSC would thoroughly analyse the evidence

      obtained from Horizon in order to establish the root cause. The only difference

      in the process would be that the SSC would not have access to the source

      code. However, it was possible to establish that the root cause was related to

      third party software by looking at the points of interaction between the Horizon

      code and the third party supplier's code.


78.   My recollection of the process is that the Peak would be transferred to the

      development unit responsible for the support contract with the third party

      supplier and that the development team would manage the interface with the

      supplier.


79.   This was certainly the case with Escher with regard to potential defects in the

      Riposte system. The support contract with Escher mandated that only certain




                                    Page 27 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                     WITN04510100




      people within Pathway (and later Fujitsu) were permitted to communicate direct

      with Escher.


80.   Since, at the time that the contract was put in place, Horizon was a development

      project with no support teams, the list of contacts included only development

      and managerial roles.


81.   I remember that there were software errors in Riposte, although I do not recall

      the specific issues. However, I have watched the oral evidence provided by

      Stephen Muchow and John Simpkins to the Inquiry on YouTube, which

      indicates that there were more errors than I first recalled.


82.   Handling the interface between Fujitsu and Escher was outside my knowledge,

      but from the point of view of the SSC, it took longer to resolve incidents where

      external suppliers were involved.


83.   Since I was not included in the list of contacts who had a direct relationship with

      Escher, I cannot comment on Fujitsu's working relationship with them. I also

      have no knowledge of the relationship between the development team and

      Escher.


PROCEDURE FOR IDENTIFYING AND RECTIFYING BUGS

Recollection of bugs

84.   In the Request, the Inquiry has asked me to set out my recollection of the

      identification and rectification of:


         a. the bugs identified in Bates and others V. Post Office Limited (No. 6)

             "Horizon Issues" [2019] EWHC 3408 (QB), having regard to Appendix 1




                                       Page 28 of 54
                                                                                        WITNO4510100
                                                                                      WITN04510100




              (the Technical Appendix) and Appendix 2 (Summary of Bugs) of the

             judgment, save for bugs 16, 17, 21, 22 and 29; and


          b. any other bugs that had the potential to cause apparent discrepancies

              or shortfalls in branch accounts, or that could undermine the reliability of

              Horizon to accurately process and record transactions.


85.   As I explain above, I was SSC Manager from 1997 until 2009. HNGX did not

      go live until the year after I had left Fujitsu, and I do not recall being involved

      with Peaks relating to HNGX. Many of the bugs set out in the Technical

      Appendix relating to HNGX appear to have been identified or reported after I

      left Fujitsu.


86.   I believe that Steve Parker's evidence to the court, documented in

      POL00004075, explains that during the period January 2001 to December

      2014, 27,005 incidents were passed to the SSC at an average of 563 per

      month. As I have been away from this environment for 13 years, I regret to say

      that I have no recollection of any specific Peaks, PinICLs or KELs, including

      those that have been referenced in the Technical Appendix and Summary of

      Bugs. I have also been shown Peaks containing entries made by me, which are

      said to relate to the bugs noted in paragraph 84(a) above, and I do not have

      any specific recollections regarding these Peaks.


87.   In relation to bug "12. Counter-replacement Issues" in the Technical Appendix,

      I do remember there were occasions in which a counter replacement caused

      incidents which were reported to the SSC. I also remember that processes were

      put in place with the MSU for SSC to retrieve any overwritten transactions so

      that MSU could report on these to POL.


                                      Page 29 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                     WITNO4510100




88.   The Riposte software on a counter should always replicate transactions to other

      counters in the branch. In the case of a single-counter branch, the counter had

      a mirror disc. Therefore, if a branch was transitioning from multiple counters to

      a single counter, the remaining single counter should have had a mirror. If it did

      not, then this was a failure of process. My recollection is that Riposte messages

      and transactions could be treated the same (although I do not know if there is

      a technical difference between them), and the Riposte message store was the

      collection of Riposte transactions or messages held on a counter, replicated to

      other counters in the same Post Office branch, and replicated to the

      correspondence servers in the data centres.


89.   As mentioned at paragraph 24(c), I know that there was a process used by

      engineers which was used to recover "stranded" transactions from counters at

      Post Office branches. When this occurred, the engineering team would attend

      the Post Office branch to recover the transactions at the branch. If a counter

      would not connect to the local LAN, the engineers would use a data recovery

      laptop, connected to the counter to extract data in the Riposte message store.

      The exact nature of the process followed by the engineering team, and the build

      of the laptop is not known to me. If this process failed, and the SSC were able

      to liaise with the network team to make reconnections, then transactions could

      be recovered. As a last resort, if this process failed, the affected counters would

      be taken from the branch and returned to the SSC's secure area in Bracknell

      which connected to the live estate. I cannot comment on the extent to which

      stranded transactions could lead to discrepancies in branch accounts, but I

      presume they would have a financial impact somewhere in the system.




                                     Page 30 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




Fujitsu's process upon identifying bugs

90.   The steps taken to identify bugs and discrepancies in branch accounts were no

      different, from the SSC point of view to the steps taken to identify any potential

      bug in any part of the system, namely some, or all of the following:


         a. Gather the evidence for the reported incident


         b. Analyse the data from Horizon to identify the source of the problem


         c. Attempt to recreate the problem using reference equipment


         d. Analyse the source code (as noted in paragraph 77 above, this step

             could not be taken in relation to third party software)


         e. If the problem could be fixed by a workaround, then develop and test

             that workaround


         f. If the problem required a code fix, then attach the evidence to the Peak

             and pass to the relevant development team


91.   If it was recognised by the SSC that an issue could affect branch accounts, this

      would be stated on the relevant Peak. There were problem and major incident

      processes in place, but do not remember them, and these processes were run

      outside of the SSC, which is noted in the "POA Customer Service Problem

      Management Process" dated 29 July 2005 (Problem Management Process)

      (FUJ00079953). The only difference that I can remember in relation to the

      SSC's process for dealing with a potential bug that could impact branch

      accounts and any other potential bug would be the parts of the system from

      which the SSC would gather evidence.



                                    Page 31 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITN04510100




Releases and release management

92.   When a bug was identified, either by the SSC or 4th line support staff working

      with the SSC, a developer in 4th line support would outline the expected time

      that would be required to develop a code fix.


93.   At this point the Release Management process would come into effect. As part

      of this process, there were weekly meetings between the Live System Test

      team (LST) (which was co-located with the SSC in Bracknell), release

      management staff, development staff and SSC. I usually attended these

      meetings.


94.   The decision as to the timescales to fix any bug would have been taken by the

      release management forum, and would be dependent on a number of factors,

      which would include:


         a. Potential impact of the bug to Post Office branches (including

            postmasters)


         b. Length of time required to produce a code fix


         c. Length of time to test the fix


         d. The equipment needed to test the fix


         e. Priority of the fix in relation to other fixes currently in process


         f. Potential risks of implementing a fix


         g. Availability and effectiveness of any mitigating factors / workarounds.




                                     Page 32 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITNO4510100




95.   The release management forum was an internal Fujitsu meeting. Input was

      sought from POL regarding the business impact of specific incidents, which

      would be relayed to the release management forum by one of the attendees.

      From this discussion would come a schedule for the production, testing and

      release to the live estate of any fixes.


96.   The release and implementation of all code fixes to the live estate was the

      responsibility of the release management team. My recollection of the process

      is that any fixes required to be applied to Horizon's code would go through the

      release management process, and these code fixes would be implemented

      using Tivoli software.


97.   There were different types of releases: major releases and interim maintenance

      releases. Major releases were fixes to known bugs plus new functionality, for

      example, a change of data centre, while interim releases were bug fixes that

      could not wait until a major release because of business impacts. I recall POL

      was involved in the release process, certainly in the early stages regarding the

      content of releases, but I cannot recall exactly how the process was managed.

      For major releases, POL was very involved, to the extent that POL staff would

      be on site in the SSC secure area in Bracknell monitoring the progression on

      the release deployment. I can recall attending one major release with John

      Bruce from POL, but I cannot remember the details.


Code fixes and workarounds

98.   Whenever a code fix was to be sent to the live estate to rectify a bug, it would

      be tested by the LST. The LST used a test rig with "live keys" in order to make

      it as close as possible to the systems used in the live estate. The LST and SSC



                                     Page 33 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                     WITN04510100




       shared the use of this test rig and therefore, whenever SSC staff were creating

       rectification for problems, or trying to recreate issues in a controlled

       environment, this is where such testing would take place.


99.    If a code fix was unsuccessful, Peaks would be raised based on the symptoms

       being experienced. Some fixes could be regressed, which means the fix could

       be removed from the live estate and replaced by the original state (i.e., the code

       that was in place before). If a code fix could not be regressed, there would need

       to be a fix for the fix, which would be handled in the same way as any other

       incident.


100.   Where workarounds were produced, they would be documented on the relevant

       Peak, and the steps necessary to apply the workaround would be documented

       in instructions to SSC staff. If the workaround was likely to be used on a

       consistent basis, scripts would be produced in cooperation with development

       staff.


101.   Test rigs outside the LST did not use "live keys" and so were not identical to

       the live system. Workarounds would be tested on the test rig which most closely

       aligned with the live estate. I cannot recall the processes by which POL was

       involved in the testing of code fixes.


102.   Workarounds would be implemented for any bug based on a number of criteria,

       the primary one being the impact of the bug to Post Office, by which I mean the

       whole business, including POL and postmasters (to the SSC they were all "the

       customer"). Other criteria would be discussed at the release management

       meetings. My recollections of this process are detailed above at paragraph 94.




                                      Page 34 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                     WITN04510100




103.   A workaround could be offered to an identified bug in place of a code fix for a

       number of reasons. For example, if the code fix would take a long time to

       produce, if a code fix was impossible to test, or if the exact root cause of the

       bug could not be identified and therefore the code responsible for the bug could

       not be identified. As noted above, discussions concerning these issues would

       take place at the release management forum and the decisions taken there. A

       workaround could be specific to one incident, but it could also apply to other

       incidents with the same, or similar symptoms. The nature of the workaround

       could also differ depending on the nature of the problem.


104.   If a rectification in the form of a workaround was possible, then the SSC would

       use the test rig to test the workaround.


Sharing information

105.   There were no procedures or work instructions of which I was aware that

       restricted the flow of information about any workaround or potential bug

       anywhere in Horizon.


106.   SSC staff would frequently discuss any reported issue at a Post Office branch

       with the postmaster there and would discuss any workaround or potential bug

       with the development staff responsible for the code. As far as I can recall, there

       were no instructions passed to me, nor was any pressure applied to me

       restricting to whom I could talk about workarounds, potential bugs or perceived

       failings in Horizon.


107.   When incidents were closed, this would be communicated to the postmaster

       who raised the incident by the HSH/SMC. In cases where the SSC was

       communicating with a postmaster about an incident, SSC staff would


                                     Page 35 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITN04510100




       sometimes agree closure of the incident with the postmaster. If a workaround

       was being applied, POL would sometimes liaise with the postmaster as to when

       the workaround was to take place—for example, if messages needed to be

       inserted to the counter message store. As I recall, these types of workaround

       required liaison between Fujitsu, the postmaster and POL, because (a) the

       postmaster would have to have the Post Office branch open (otherwise

       transactions would appear after end-of-day processing and cause failures), (b)

       Post Office branch staff would have to log out of their counters (otherwise the

       Riposte sequence number would mismatch and cause error), and (c) POL

       would also be asked to confirm that the inserted transaction had been

       successful. However, workarounds that were applied to data centre systems

       were not always agreed, or discussed with POL.


108.   There were processes in place detailing the interface levels for normal

       communication between POL management and Fujitsu management—

       Problem Managers in each organization would communicate with Problem

       Managers at the other, Directors with Directors, and so on. I believe that the

       documentation for this was the Problem Management Process (FUJ00079953).

       I do not recall being involved in this process to a significant degree. I was

       occasionally involved in some conference calls with POL relating to problems

       or major incidents, but these were rare exceptions.


109.   As part of the SSC's processes, communication with POL management would

       normally go through the Business Support or Management Support Units within

       Customer Service rather than direct by SSC staff.




                                    Page 36 of 54
                                                                                       WITN04510100
                                                                                     WITNO4510100




110.   I do not believe that any of these procedures or practices imposed any

       restriction or pressure on myself or my staff not to pass information to POL or

       within Fujitsu. I cannot recall any instances where either myself or my staff were

       restricted or pressured to not pass information to POL. There were documented

       "lines of communication" between POL and Customer Service as outlined in

       paragraphs 108 and 109.


111.   There were prohibitions on the viewing of diagnostic data from the system

       outside of the SSC secure area. It was possible, particularly after the

       introduction of banking applications, that the diagnostic data could contain

       "personal data" (which I believe was defined in relevant data protection

       legislation). Therefore, this data would be held in secure servers on the live

       system and the data could only be viewed using the purpose-built SSC PCs

       connected to that live estate. This meant that, in the event that a Peak was

       passed to development staff, they would be allowed access to the SSC secure

       area by the SSC staff member who had been allocated the Peak.


Notes of prayers

112.   At the Inquiry's request, I have considered the email from Lionel Higman to

       myself and others dated 18 July 2005 (FUJ00086334) and the "Note of Prayers"

       dated 18 July 2005 attachment to the email (FUJ00086335). I cannot remember

       the exact purpose of the "prayers" meetings, although I have a vague

       recollection that they were a daily meeting to discuss development issues

       relating to upcoming releases. I note that a number of Customer Service

       managers were included on the distribution list for the Note of Prayers meeting

       on 18 July 2005, including testing, release and support managers.




                                     Page 37 of 54
                                                                                       WITN04510100
                                                                                     WITNO4510100




Peak PC0145617

113.   At the Inquiry's request, I have considered Peak PC0145617 (FUJ00086828).

       For the reasons I have explained at paragraphs 85 and 86 above, I cannot

       recall the details of any specific Peaks. Reviewing the details of Peak

       PC0145617 has not prompted any memory of the incident.


114.   Looking at the Peak, the issue, as reported by the Postmaster, appears to be

       that the screen would "freeze" during a transaction, forcing the Postmaster to

       reboot the counter. There is no indication from the Peak that this would have

       any impact on branch accounts. I believe that my reasons for stating that Fujitsu

       was unlikely to get a fix from Escher, and that it was unlikely Fujitsu would

       implement such a fix even if it were provided by Escher, are contained within

       the Peak. Fujitsu's development, network and SSC teams, and Escher, could

       not identify the root cause of the problem, which appeared to lay somewhere

       between Escher code and network issues. Therefore, there was no realistic

       expectation of a code fix from any source.


115.   Again looking at the call, it appears that it was not possible to recreate the bug

       in a test environment, there was also no realistic expectation of being able to

       test any code fix supplied from any source. The development team's suggestion

       was that any potential code fix would be likely to cause more problems than it

       solved, and a workaround was available (documented in the call as a change

       to the relevant Post Office branch's network type), which was the solution that

       I recommended. The underlying problem was a combination of a Riposte

       process error and a network failure occurring simultaneously. This only

       happened on the ISDN network, and the effect of the workaround was to switch




                                      Page 38 of 54
                                                                                          WITNO4510100
                                                                                        WITN04510100




       the branch to a different and more expensive network (ADSL) on which the

       issue did not occur.


116.   By recommending in the call that "no attempt be made to fix these problems",

       was recommending that no code fix be written. The call records my

       recommendation that Fujitsu implement network changes which had been

       shown to resolve the issue without requiring a code fix—even though this

       workaround would have a cost implication to Fujitsu as the ADSL network was

       more expensive.


117.   I wish to stress that I do not recall the details of this incident and my explanation

       above at paragraphs 113 to 116 is based on my interpretation of the Peak, 16

       years after the event.


REMOTE ACCESS

Remote access and my role as SSC Manager

118.   In responding to the Inquiry's questions on the topic of remote access, I wish to

       stress that at no time did I personally use remote access to any part of Legacy

       Horizon or HNGX. I never requested access, nor did I ever want it, not being

       sufficiently technical. I was a manager of SSC support staff, and therefore was

       not sufficiently technically trained in Riposte or any other part of the system to

       provide technical support. I did not need access to either the Legacy Horizon

       or the HNGX systems. My knowledge of remote access is not as detailed or

       comprehensive as the SSC technicians who I managed and who did use

       remote access to provide software support.


119.   It is clear from the Peaks that I have been shown—for example, Peak

       PCO143500 (FUJ00120588)—that the use of remote access could affect


                                       Page 39 of 54
                                                                                        WITNO4510100
                                                                                      WITNO4510100




       Post Office branch accounts. Transactions were only inserted to make

       corrections to    previous   erroneous transactions, and         therefore those

       transactions would be expected to impact the branch accounts. The exact

       impact of this use of the SSC's is beyond my technical knowledge. I do know

       that the SSC PCs and later laptops were "fixed build" with toolsets and audit

       requirements agreed between the SSC, Security Architects and others.


SSC access rights

120.   SSC staff members with access to the SSC PCs had access to Horizon,

       including live Post Office branch data, from the secure area in Bracknell. The

       SSC PCs were located in the secure area. Only SSC and LST staff, and at one

       point Release Management, had access to the secure area. In order to use the

       SSC PCs, it was necessary to have log-in credentials and "key-cards" which

       generated one-time passwords for dual factor authentication. This was

       restricted to SSC technical staff only—this did not include the SSC Coordinator,

       new joiners, LST or Release Management. For example, I did not have access

       to the SSC PCs. During times of major releases, BOG Personnel would use

       SSC PCs to perform the release deployment. For this activity, they would use

       their own secure ID 2-factor authentication.


121.   The facilities to do all functions relating to Horizon were built into the SSC PCs,

       and I believe the nature and extent of the SSC staff member's access depended

       on their "role"—a technical term—which would distinguish between types of

       access on login to systems. I do not recall the exact details of these roles or

       their access, so I am unable to comment further on the extent to which this

       access extended to the branch accounts.




                                      Page 40 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




122.   I do recall that no SSC staff members, nor indeed anyone else, could change

       or delete transaction data in the counters. Transactions in Riposte were

       immutable—they could not be changed or deleted.


123.   If a postmaster made a mistake, a transaction could be "reversed" (by inserting

       a "reversal" or "corrective" transaction) but it could not be deleted. There were

       processes by which SSC staff could, under instruction or approval from POL

       and with assistance from the postmaster, insert corrective transactions, and

       recall that there were processes in place to control this rare occurrence,

       involving dual-person sign-off on the Peak and approved OCP requests for the

       SSC to do the work, which I believe had to be approved by POL as well as

       Customer Service. An example of this process is OCP 21918, titled "Insert

       Corrective Transactions at Branch 382137" dated 2 March 2009 (OCP 21918)

       (FUJ00084131). My recollection is that the process was technically complex

       and could only be done in agreement with the postmaster and was extremely

       rare.


124.   As documented in "Secure Support System Outline Design" dated 2 August

       2002 (System Outline Design) (FUJ00088036), prior to the introduction of

       Network Banking, the SSC could only do the activity with cooperation from

       counter staff. Once Network Banking was in place, then Secure Shell (SSH)

       software was implemented, and everything that the SSC did had a full audit

       trail.


125.   Not all SSC staff had such access. As I note at paragraph 37 above, new staff

       joining the unit were allocated a "mentor" from the experienced SSC staff. Only

       when the mentor felt that they were technically ready were they allowed access



                                     Page 41 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




       and I do not recall anyone being allowed the access within the first six months

       of joining the unit.


126.   As outlined above at paragraph 34, HR had specific vetting processes for

       Fujitsu staff working on the Post Office Account, and additional vetting

       processes for SSC staff. If I was ever told what those additional vetting

       requirements were, I have forgotten them. I do recall that one person who

       interviewed for a role in the SSC was subsequently rejected by HR for having

       a County Court judgment against them which was undisclosed.


Remote access procedures

127.   At the request of the Inquiry, I have considered the design document titled "Host

       BRDB Transaction Correction Tool Low Level Design" dated 13 November

       2007 (Design Document) (FUJ00084135). The Design Document is for a tool

       to correct transactions on the central database (Transaction Correction Tool),

       which is intended for SSC use. The document and the Transaction Correction

       Tool itself is only relevant to HNGX.


128.   My involvement in this process was to ensure that the tool was produced and

       delivered to the SSC for HNGX. I left Fujitsu before HNGX was implemented

       and therefore have no knowledge concerning the use of the Transaction

       Correction Tool.


129.   During the period Legacy Horizon was in operation, the SSC could only insert

       transactions into the counters—and therefore Post Office branch account

       data—via Riposte. There was also a separate tool, the TIP Repair tool, which

       could correct data that had been sent to POL via a data centre system. My




                                     Page 42 of 54
                                                                                       WITNO4510100
                                                                                     WITN04510100




       recollection is that this tool generated separate correction files to POL, and not

       all of these correction files would have had an impact on branch account data.


130.   In HNGX, Riposte was no longer used in Horizon, and therefore the function

       needed to be transferred to the central database. As I stated in paragraph 122

       above, transactions in Riposte could not be changed or deleted.


131.   Although I cannot remember the technical details of the design of the

       Transaction Correction Tool, it is apparent from the Design Document

       (FUJ00084135) that the use of the tool only enables the insertion of a

       transaction, and its use is audited through the logfile, which is a part of the

       standard Oracle product.


132.   There would certainly have been restrictions placed on the use of the

       Transaction Correction Tool, and as suggested in the Design Document, the

       tool was restricted to a few SSC staff.


133.   At the request of the Inquiry, I have also considered an email exchange

       between myself and Simon Ajina from November 2008 to January 2009

       (FUJ00086866). At that time, Simon Ajina was responsible for ensuring that the

       Customer Service requirements for HNGX development were being met.


134.   As part of the process for design and development of HNGX, a number of

       requirements from the SSC were documented that related to tools specifically

       for SSC use (for example, documented event point in the code). The email

       exchange between myself and Simon Ajina (FUJ00086866) relates to SSC

       requirements to access the live system elements in HNGX, and not Legacy

       Horizon.



                                     Page 43 of 54
                                                                                         WITNO4510100
                                                                                       WITNO4510100




135.   I do not recall the full details of the system checks put in place to control remote

       access. I do recall that Horizon's processes involved using only "defined-build"

       (or "fixed build") PCs and latterly for out-of-hours call-out laptops (the SSC build

       specification was held as a document in the Fujitsu document system and

       would have been approved by development, support, security and senior

       managers). I remember Glenn Stevens (who has sadly died) from

       design/development being the SSC's interface. I also recall that the process for

       using these PCs involved a two-stage login process involving a one-time

       password generator, and that the PCs were connected to a dedicated, secure,

       LAN and that links were encrypted.


136.   My role would have been to review and approve the documents relating to the

       SSC PC build. Whenever there was to be any correction to any data, the

       process involved the raising of an Operational Change Proposal (OCP), which

       usually had a number of signatories. I cannot recall the full list of possible

       signatories, but I was certainly one.


The System Outline Design

137. At the request of the Inquiry, I have considered the System Outline Design

       (FUJ00088036). I do not know what the Tivoli remote console was and I do not

       recall SSC staff using Tivoli "Remote Console". The System Outline Design

       refers to support tools for all support units, including the SSC. As I have

       mentioned above at paragraph 25(b), Tivoli software was used by the SMC and

       SSC did not use the software directly. Tivoli monitored servers in the Horizon

       system and it generated alerts to indicate the possibility of errors, which Tivoli

       would pick up from operating system events logs. As I understand it, Tivoli was




                                      Page 44 of 54
                                                                                          WITNO4510100
                                                                                        WITNO4510100




       mainly accessed by the operating systems on the servers, primarily Windows

       NT. The operating systems were not supported by the SSC, which only support

       code written or implemented by Fujitsu.


138.   BOO Personnel, which I mention at paragraphs 56 and 120 above, supported

       the operating systems and databases. These staff were based in Belfast. I do

       not know what tools they used to support those parts of the Horizon system.


139.   At the time that the System Outline Design was produced, access to the live

       estate was not fully audited. Audit trails did exist, and included recording of staff

       login/logout on SSC PCs and SSC servers in the data centres.


140.   What was not directly auditable in the early stages of Horizon was exactly what

       the SSC staff had typed when logged into the SSC PCs and SSC servers,

       although the logins themselves were auditable. Other audit trails were manual,

       through the use of OCPs or updates to the Peak system. If a transaction had

       been inserted into a message store, this would have also been visible in the

       message store.


141.   The purpose of the System Outline Design seems to be to specify a toolset for

       different support units to enable them to continue to support the systems, and

       to be fully auditable. The System Outline Design resulted in the use of SSH

       software, which was fully auditable—I believe via the audit servers, which were

       not accessible by the SSC.


142.   SSC access to the live system from the secure area in Bracknell was not

       automatically audited in the early stages of Horizon because at the time, the

       only software that could provide the access necessary to support the Horizon



                                       Page 45 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




       system was called RClient. RClient was a Microsoft utility which did not support

       the audit of specific keystrokes. The operating systems—Windows NT at the

       time—logged all Login/Logout events, so it could be determined when any SSC

       staff accessed the live system and when, but exactly what they had done could

       not.


143.   After 2002, SSH was implemented on all elements of the Horizon solution, and

       exact keystrokes could be audited.


Operational Change Proposal 21918

144.   At the request of the Inquiry, I have considered OCP 21918 (FUJ00084131)

       and the email from Matthew Lenton to Jonathan Gribben dated 25 June 2019

       (FUJ00087871).


145.   I have no recollection of the specific error relating to this OCP. However, it is

       apparent from OCP 21918 (FUJ00084131) that POL were aware that a

       corrective transaction was being inserted and had approved it (Julie Edgeley of

       POL is quoted as having agreed to the change and Gary Blackburn of POL is

       copied), and Gaby Reynolds of Fujitsu records that POL signoff has been

       attached to the OCP. The document also contains a note from Julie Edgeley to

       Anne Chambers informing her that the manager at the Post Office branch

       (Wendy) has also been informed.


146.   I have no recollection of the term APPSUP being used while I was SSC

       Manager.




                                     Page 46 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITN04510100




CONDUCT OF PROSECUTIONS

147.   I was not involved in the case of POL v Lee Castleton, and I did not know of

       this case before receiving the Request.


148.   Anne Chambers was one of the most experienced and technically competent

       of the SSC staff during my time as SSC Manager. As such she reported directly

       to me.


149.   Of the staff who were on the highest grade within the unit, Ms Chambers was

       the "lead" on counter software (including, for example, Riposte and EPOSS).

       My relationship with her was always positive and professional and I do not recall

       any negative comments that I wrote about her on my annual reviews of her

       performance in which, to my recollection, she always scored highly.


150.   I always found Ms Chambers to be dedicated to finding and resolving incidents,

       and thoroughly professional.


151.   I was aware at the relevant time that Ms Chambers was asked to give evidence

       at the prosecution of a postmaster. This was the only time that I am aware an

       SSC staff member gave evidence at such a case and it was done despite my

       strong objections, which I explain below.


152.   Fujitsu's security team, which sat within Customer Service, were responsible

       for the "Litigation Support" service. My understanding is that the process would

       generally involve the security team obtaining evidence for any litigation from

       the audit server. The SSC did not support this server and did not have access

       to it.




                                      Page 47 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITNO4510100




153.   In this particular case, the person at Fujitsu who was originally responsible /

       going to give evidence at court declined to go. I cannot recall who this person

       was or why they declined. My recollection is that Brian Pinder was the Customer

       Service manager of the security team at the time, and I believe it would have

       been his responsibility to perform this task within his team.


154.   I was instructed by the Director of Customer Services at the time, whose name

       I cannot recall, to detail someone from the SSC to go to court to explain the

       workings of the message store. I objected strongly that nobody in the SSC had

       any experience of courts, or was legally trained. I was overruled.


155.   I then persuaded Ms Chambers (over her equally strong objections) to appear

       in court because I considered her to be the most experienced and technically

       best in the area of counter code. I also chose Ms Chambers because I had

       complete confidence in her honesty and personal integrity to tell the court

       exactly what she was seeing in the Riposte message store, and I had

       confidence that she would not be rattled into saying anything other than what

       she was seeing in the message store.


156.   I also informally de-briefed Ms Chambers after her evidence, and my

       recollection of the conversation was that she had found the experience very

       stressful.


GENERAL

Robustness

157.   During my time working on Horizon, I was aware there were incidents that

       would affect the robustness of Horizon. Incidents that occurred during the

       overnight harvesting of transactions and subsequent processing of those


                                     Page 48 of 54
                                                                                        WITNO4510100
                                                                                      WITN04510100




       transactions, and separating them to different databases had the potential to

       have an adverse effect on POL and postmasters. I was also aware that there

       were incidents that related to apparent discrepancies in Post Office branch

       accounts, including in the Riposte software.


158.   It was the function of the support teams to ensure that such incidents were

       handled correctly. Specifically in the case of the SSC, it was one of its functions

       to ensure that any workarounds were tested and implemented promptly, and to

       be involved in the process for resolving those incidents.


Postmasters' access to advice and assistance

159.   Training of Post Office staff—both staff at Post Office branches and POL

       trainers—to use the system was entirely outside of my remit, as was the NBSC,

       which supplied assistance to any Post Office branch staff who were having

       difficulties, so I could not comment about any advice given to them on using the

       system.


160.   I do not have direct knowledge of postmaster interactions with the NBSC, HSH,

       or SMC except where such conversations were relayed to the SSC in Peaks.


161.   There was frequent interactions between             the SSC technicians and

       postmasters, especially on Wednesday evenings after the introduction of Cash

       Account. If incidents had been passed from the SMC to the SSC relating to a

       counter issue, and if the exact nature of the issue was not clear, SSC

       technicians would phone Post Office branches and speak directly to the

       postmasters to understand their view of the symptoms, and would try to help

       them resolve the issue. Incidents regarding the Cash Account would originate

       from the NBSC.


                                      Page 49 of 54
                                                                                      WITNO4510100
                                                                                    WITNO4510100




162.   It was necessary for the SSC to contact Post Office branches directly because

       no other part of the support hierarchy could view the Riposte message store.

       The ability to do so meant SSC technicians could match what the postmaster

       said they were doing over phone with the messages in Horizon.


163.   Such interactions were controlled at the SSC end. The SSC would phone

       postmasters, but were encouraged not to give out SSC phone numbers to

       postmasters. This was to avoid the SSC being swamped by calls which could

       have been resolved by the NBSC and the HSH, and to ensure all calls were

       logged and auditable. The support lines were structured so that customers

       would start at 1st line support, and the call would be progressed up the lines of

       support based on the nature and severity of the reported issue.


Causes of problems experienced by postmasters

164.   I think that, certainly in the initial phases of Horizon, there was a significant

       "culture shock" for POL staff and Post Office branch staff, moving from a

       manual, paper-based operation to a computer system. This was inevitable, for

       some of the postmasters this was the first time that they had used any sort of

       computer.


165.   This "culture shock" was particularly true when Cash Accounts were introduced

       requiring the postmasters to balance their Cash Accounts every week. I recall

       that the SSC had to rota staff to work late, and on occasion development staff

       also, on Wednesday evenings, when the Cash Account was done to assist

       postmasters in completing the process.


166.   I do not recall there being significant software bugs in EPOSS, but the Cash

       Account process involved a cross-reference between data from the counter and


                                     Page 50 of 54
                                                                                    WITNO4510100
                                                                                  WITN04510100




       manual counting of remaining stock and cash, if the two did not balance i.e.,

       there was a discrepancy, then postmasters would call the helpdesks.


167.   If the call was suspected to be a software issue, the SSC would check the

       message store contents and talk to postmasters to try to resolve the balancing

       issues/accounting differences in branch accounts.


Improving the advice and assistance to postmasters

168.   I was not directly involved with the helpdesks which were the first point of

       contact—NBSC and HSH—and had no input or involvement in their processes.

       For these reasons, I do not have direct knowledge concerning the advice which

       they gave to postmasters.


169.   In my opinion, and based on what I remember of the SSC workload and the

       comments from SSC staff at the time, in the early days of Horizon, I do not

       believe that there was sufficient correlation between, (a) the HSH scripts, (b)

       Post Office's procedures, and (c) what postmasters actually did. The result was

       that the helpdesks were unable to give advice to postmasters which was

       relevant to them. I also consider that the HSH, SMC and possibly NBSC were,

       initially, understaffed. Taken together, the impact was a higher than expected

       number of calls, and an unacceptable level of support.


170.   In my opinion, the monitoring of Tivoli, and the configuration of that software

       caused problems for all support units. Tivoli "event storms" in which a huge

       number of events were generated had the potential to overload the staff

       monitoring Tivoli, and contributed to them missing other events. I remember

       SSC staff sometimes complaining that important events were missed because

       of event storms, but I cannot remember or provide further details.


                                    Page 51 of 54
                                                                                  WITNO4510100
                                                                                WITNO4510100




171      Changes to the staffing levels and increased expertise in the helpdesks did

         improve the service provided. Over time, increasing familiarity and knowledge

         of the counter systems also enabled postmasters to resolve many of the issues

         they initially faced without helpdesk support. For example, I recall that the

         filtration rate improved from below 70% in 2000 to over 90% in 2006.


Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed:                GRO
Dated:          -a   , Mavv'cL     102.




                                     Page 52 of 54
                                                                            WITNO4510100
                                                                          WITNO4510100




           INDEX TO THE FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF
               MR MICHAEL EDWARD PRYOR PEACH

Exhibit       URN           Document Description            Control No.
  No.
  1       FUJ00079897   End to End Support Process        POIN00086068F
                        Operational Level Agreement
                        dated 17 June 2003
  2       FUJO0142216   Service Management Portal         POINQ0148345F
                        User Guide dated 22 December
                        2005
  3       FUJO0142217   Service Management Portal         POINQ0148346F
                        Support Guide 29 August 2007
  4       FUJO0142218   Service Management Portal High POINQ0148347F
                        Level Design 19 July 2007
  5       FUJ00080096   Horizon Service Desk Joint        POINQ0086267F
                        Working Document dated 4
                        September 2008
  6       FUJ00080499   Call Enquiry Matrix and Incident POINQ008667OF
                        Prioritisation — Software
                        specification dated 23 April 2007
  7       POL00004074   Transcript Day 4 — March 14,      VIS00005088
                        2019 — Bates & Others v. Post
                        Office Limited (No. 6) (Horizon
                        Issues)
  8       POL00004075   Transcript Day 3— March 13,       VIS00005089
                        2019 — Bates & Others v. Post
                        Office Limited (No. 6) (Horizon
                        Issues)
  9       POL00000678   Second Witness Statement of       VIS00001692
                        Richard Roll dated 13 March
                        2019, Bates & Others v. Post
                        Office Limited (No. 6) (Horizon
                        Issues)
  10      FUJ00079953   POA Customer Service Problem      POIN00086124F
                        Management Process dated 29
                        July 2005
  11      FUJ00086334   Email from Lionel Higman to       POIN00092505F
                        multiple recipients dated 18 July
                        2005 attaching "Note of Prayers"
                        dated 18 July 2005


                            Page 53 of 54
                                                                          WITNO4510100
                                                                        WITN04510100




Exhibit       URN           Document Description          Control No.
 No.
  12      FUJ00086335   Note of Prayers dated 18 July   POINQ0092506F
                        2005
  13      FUJ00086828   Peak PCO145617                  POINQ0092999F
  14      FUJ00120588   Peak PCO143500                  POIN0012678OF
  15      FUJ00084131   Insert Corrective Transactions at POINQ0090302F
                        Branch 382137 dated 2 March
                        2009
  16      FUJ00088036   Secure Support System Outline   POINQ0094207F
                        Design dated 2 August 2002
  17      FUJ00084135   Host BRDB Transaction         POINO0090306F
                        Correction Tool Low Level
                        Design dated 13 November 2007
  18      FUJ00086866   Email from Mik Peach to Simon   POINO0093037F
                        Ajina copying others dated 14
                        January 2009
  19      FUJ00087871   Email from Matthew Lenton to    POINO0094042F
                        Jonathan Gribben copying
                        others dated 25 June 2019




                            Page 54 of 54
