                                                                                     WITN09680200
                                                                                   WITNO9680200




                                             Witness Name:    Martin John Smith

                                             Statement No:    WITN09680200

                                             Dated:           19 March 2024




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




           SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF MARTIN JOHN SMITH




I, Martin John Smith, will say as follows:

Introduction

  1. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the

      Inquiry) with matters set out in the Rule 9 Request (the Request) dated 1St March

      2024. I have previously made a statement to the Inquiry — my first witness

      statement was dated 215 t November 2023 (WITN09680100).

  2. This statement has been prepared having regard to the documents provided

      with the Request, documents previously provided by the Inquiry and from

      memory. I have attempted to recollect events and the content of this statement

      represents the best of my recollection as at the date of this statement.




                                       Page 1 of 57
                                                                                        WITN09680200
                                                                                      WITN09680200




The Second Sight Interim Report


  3. I believe that prior to the publication of the Second Sight Interim Report

     (POL00099063) I had a number of telephone conversations with lawyers from

     the Legal Department of Post Office Ltd. From the papers which have been

     provided with the Request, I understand that these took place on 27th June 2013.

     I am not certain with whom I first spoke due to the length of time which has since

     elapsed and for that reason, it is also difficult to recall the precise conversation.

     I was asked, however, whether I knew about the bugs in Horizon Online affecting

     numerous branches. I inferred from the way in which the question had been

     phrased, that the Legal Department had been unaware of the bugs. I too could

     not recall being informed of any bugs and when I spoke to Jarnail Singh, he told

     me that he was also unaware of the bugs.

  4. Whilst I am unsure as to the exact chronology of events due to the passage of

     time, I am able to recall that I accompanied Mr. Clarke to a meeting at the

     premises of Post Office Ltd with a number of members of the Legal Department.

     I took notes during the meeting but do not have access to them. I can recall,

     however, that Simon Clarke advised that a review of cases should be

     undertaken to determine whether post-conviction disclosure should be provided.

     I believe it was also during that meeting that Simon explained the disclosure

     obligations which applied in criminal law and advised that a weekly call be

     arranged so that Horizon-related information could be collated in a central

     record. I also made reference at the meeting to the case of Mr. Ishaq expressing

     my concern that disclosure which should have been made had not been made

     and that he had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment.




                                      Page 2 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITN09680200




5. I provided Mr. Clarke with copies of several statements of Gareth Jenkins which

   had been served and I also expressed my surprise that Mr. Jenkins had not

   referred to the existence of the bugs during Mr. Ishaq's case. I also noted that

   Mr. Jenkins had confirmed at Court that Mr. Ishaq's branch had not been

   affected by a bug and that Mr. Ishaq had pleaded guilty. Mr. Clarke advised that

   the existence of the two bugs should nevertheless have been disclosed to Mr.

   Ishaq. He explained that it would have been open to Mr. Ishaq to argue that

   there were, perhaps, bugs affecting his branch which had yet to be detected. I

   can recall feeling deeply unhappy about the situation and asked Mr. Clarke to

   review Mr. Ishaq's case.

6. Mr. Clarke and I also discussed a case listed for trial before the Crown Court at

   Birmingham in which he was Counsel for the Prosecution. I think it was due to

   commence the following week and he was concerned that he could not properly

   deal with disclosure. It was in those circumstances that Mr. Clarke and I called

   Mr. Jenkins. During the course of the telephone call he confirmed that Fujitsu

   had declared the existence of two bugs to Second Sight. He also indicated that

   Fujitsu was confident that the audit trail being used for the purposes of

   prosecution had not been compromised by the bugs.

7. Simon Clarke advised that a team of solicitors should be assembled to conduct

   a file review process from the Derby Office of Cartwright King. I can recall that

   a meeting took place at which the questions to be asked were formulated and

   following that meeting a template document was designed for use during the

   review process. I was one of the solicitors who reviewed the case files. Given

   that the review process included cases prosecuted by Post Office Ltd prior to




                                   Page 3 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                  WITN09680200




   the date upon it became a separate entity, it was also necessary to liaise with

   the Royal Mail Group.

8. I do not recall the date when I first saw a draft copy of the Second Sight Interim

   Report. I believe, however, that it was made available to Cartwright King prior to

   its publication. I cannot recall whether the report of Helen Rose of 12th June

   2013 (FUJ00086811) was provided at the same time or subsequently.

9. Due to the passage of time, I am unable to recall my initial thoughts when I first

   saw these reports. I do not recall considering the extent to which either the

   Report of Helen Rose or Second Sight's Interim Report might support an

   argument that there was a lack of integrity in the Horizon IT system.

10. Similarly, I do not recall considering whether either document might support an

   argument that there had been a failure to provide adequate disclosure in respect

   of convictions based on data generated by the Horizon IT System.

11. I did not consider whether there were, or might be, other underlying documents

   relevant to (a) the issues specifically identified or alluded to by Second Sight or

   Helen Rose, or (b) other issues with the Horizon System's integrity. I do not

   believe that I provided any advice to Post Office Ltd to search for any such

   documents.

12. 1 have been asked to consider an email of Rodric Williams of 5th July to myself

   and Simon Clarke (POL00062162) to which Spot Reviews and Responses had

   been attached. I do not recall giving any consideration to whether the Spot

   Reviews should be disclosed to convicted Subpostmasters. I cannot recall

   whether I discussed this with Simon Clarke.

13. 1 have been provided with a copy of the Advice of Simon Clarke of 81h July 2013

   (POL00006365). I am unable to recall the extent to which I was involved in the


                                   Page 4 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




   preparation of this advice or discussing the issues referred to therein with Mr.

   Clarke. It was not uncommon for Mr. Clarke to prepare a document and to ask

   either myself or another member of staff to take a look at it before it was

   dispatched. In such instances he would often explain the reasoning behind his

   advice.

14. Mr Clarke referred to two bugs — B63 and B14. I had not appreciated at the time

   that I might have already been provided with some information about the latter.

   Following the submission of my first witness statement to the Inquiry I was

   provided with a number of documents to consider. Although my recollection is

   limited due to the passage of time, I believe that I may previously have had sight

   of an earlier version of the Peak Incident Management System Report

   (FUJ00084852) or something very similar. I also believe that I concluded that

   the error referred to therein would not have affected the integrity of the Horizon

   data i.e. the record of transactions securely locked away, on the basis of the

   description of the operation of the system provided by Gareth Jenkins in his

   witness statements. I did not, at the time, fully appreciate the disclosure

   obligations which arose. I was unaware of the post-conviction duty of disclosure

   under common law.

15. Mr. Clarke also advised that considerations as to the selection of the start-date

   "included proportionality, resourcing, transparency and POL reputation." He

   went on to note that he had "come to the view that all of these considerations

   militate in favour of a date close the initial HOL migration date of 2010, perhaps

   using the 1St January of that year."




                                   Page 5 of 57
                                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                                     WITN09680200




16. 1 did not disagree with Mr. Clarke. I also have a recollection that following the

   commencement of the review process, the parameters were changed slightly so

   that they covered any case with a hearing after 15t January 2010.

17. 1 have been provided with a copy of the Advice of Simon Clarke of 15th July 2013

   (POL00006357). I have been asked to describe the extent to which I was

   involved in preparing the advice or discussing the issues discussed therein with

   Mr. Clarke. As I have noted previously, I provided Mr. Clarke with a number of

   Mr Jenkins' reports. I believe that I also discussed with him the conversations

   which had taken place with lawyers from Post Office Ltd during the afternoon of

   27th June 2013.

18. 1 am asked about the extent to which I agreed with Mr. Clarke's advice. Due to

   Mr. Clarke's seniority and substantial experience his advice was generally taken

   as being correct and I did not disagree with it. Mr. Clarke's advice frequently

   contributed to my professional development.

19.In paragraph 5 of his advice, Mr. Clarke explained that were a defendant to

   assert, rightly or wrongly, that the Horizon system was at fault, it would be for

   the prosecution to demonstrate the integrity to the system and the evidential

   audit trail derived from Horizon. He went onto set out the detail which an expert

   would usually give in such circumstances and noted that the expert should state,

   in clear terms, that (a) where a defence has raised merely a general and

   unspecified criticism of Horizon, it is not only generally free from error but that it

   is protected by such systems and security as to prevent error and (b) where the

   defence has raised specific criticisms, he has considered those matters and has

   concluded that there is no proper foundation for them.




                                    Page 6 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




20. Mr. Clarke went on to outline the duties of an expert witness and further to the

   provisions of Part 33 of the Criminal Procedure Rules 2012, the duty of an expert

   witness instructed by the prosecution. He explained in paragraph 7 of his advice

   that an expert witness possessed of material which cast doubt upon his opinion

   was under a duty to disclose it to the solicitor instructing him who in turn had a

   duty to disclose that material to the defence. Mr. Clarke also explained that the

   duty existed irrespective of any requests for disclosure by the defence and that

   an expert should not omit material facts which detracted from his opinion.

21. It follows that Mr. Jenkins should have been given detailed written instructions

   in relation to each individual case which enclosed a full set of papers, asked

   specific questions, and set out the duties of an expert instructed by the

   prosecution. Mr. Jenkins had not been so instructed.

22. Furthermore, it was also evident from Mr. Clarke's advice that he appeared to

   be of the view that a report should have been sought in any case in which there

   was an express or implied criticism of the Horizon system. I believe the approach

   taken by Cartwright King had been to request a report if a defendant entered a

   not guilty plea to the offence charged.

23.The general form of statement which Mr Jenkins produced was initially prepared

   following advice provided to Jarnail Singh by Mr. Harry Bowyer, a senior in-

   house barrister at Cartwright King. Furthermore, the director of the Derby Office

   with significant prosecution experience, Mr Andy Cash, had confirmed his

   agreement with the advice of Mr. Bowyer. It was in those circumstances that

   Jarnail Singh had sought a report from Mr. Jenkins.

24.In his email of 1St October 2012 to Gareth Jenkins (FUJ00226331) Mr. Singh

   informed Mr. Jenkins that, "Post Office Limited have appointed one of their


                                   Page 7 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITN09680200




   investigators, Helen Rose, as disclosure officer dealing with Horizon challenges.

   She has prepared a document/spreadsheet detailing all such cases, past and

   present, approximately 20 in total, although none thus far successfully argued

   in court... Post Office maintain the system is robust."

25. 1 do not recall realising at the time that there were, in fact, two documents

   attached to Mr. Singh's email and given Mr. Singh's comments with regards to

   the robustness of the system, I did not consider it necessary to review the

   information provided by Helen Rose.

26. Simon Clarke advised that a different expert be sought. He also noted that there

   were a number of convicted defendants to whom the existence of bugs should

   have been disclosed and that a review was underway. It was also noted that

   there were a number of current cases where the existence of bugs should be

   disclosed where the test for disclosure was met.

27. 1 do not recall any conversations with Mr Clarke about the extent to which Post

   Office Limited was obliged to inform convicted Subpostmasters in cases which

   had relied in whole or in part on Horizon data that Mr. Jenkins' credibility had

   been `fatally undermined'.

28. 1 have been asked to set out my recollection of the telephone call with Mr.

   Jenkins on 28th June 2013 and to describe any other oral or written

   communications I had with him. I believe that the transcript (POL00142322) is

   accurate and relates to the call of 28th June 2013. I am unable to recall whether

   I had any other conversations or written communications with Mr. Jenkins at or

   around this time.




                                   Page 8 of 57
                                                                                      WITNO9680200
                                                                                    WITN09680200




The Horizon Weekly Call

  29.As I have previously explained, Simon Clarke advised during a conference at

     Post Office's Head Office in London there should be a central hub to record all

     Horizon-related issues. It was proposed that lawyers from Messrs. Bond

     Dickinson and Cartwright King should attend. It was generally myself who

     attended on behalf of Cartwright King. If I was unavailable, a colleague would

     generally attend. I would generally make notes of any issues arising in counsel's

     notebooks. On occasions I would request further information.

  30. 1 have previously referred to the first conference call which took place on 19th

     July 2013 in my first statement to the Inquiry. I have been asked to comment on

     the extent to which the Note at POL00083932 is accurate. It is not accurate.

  31.Although I do not have access to the notes which I made at the time of the call,

     there is no reference to the explanation provided by Mr. Parsons at the outset

     of the call after Rob King had spoken. Mr. Parsons expressed concern with

     regards to the difficulties which could arise following the circulation of minutes.

     He was particularly concerned that they could be further disseminated and

     attract opinion which might well be incorrect and also result in information being

     stored elsewhere without it being relayed back to the call. He explained that he

     had previous experience of such issues. It was evident that he was concerned

     about pre-action discovery in civil cases.

  32. My view from a criminal law perspective was that the information was to be

     reported to a single central hub in accordance with Mr. Clarke's advice — that

     was the very purpose of the call. I could also understand Mr. Parson's concerns

     that incorrect information could possibly be generated or that information might

     not be relayed back to the central hub.


                                     Page 9 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITNO9680200




33. 1 believe that I spoke towards the end of the call and not shortly after the

   commencement of the call as this note suggests. I advised from a criminal-law

   perspective that anything produced should be accurate and be available for

   disclosure. I can recall that immediately after I had explained the position and

   whilst I was putting myself back on mute due to background noise in the office,

   Mr. Parsons made a further comment with regard to disclosure. Having little

   knowledge of the rules relating to the disclosure of documents in civil cases, I

   was careful not to pass comment. I took the view that Post Office Ltd had already

   been advised from a criminal-law perspective and the advice had been accepted

   — the Wednesday call had been set up and a central record was to be kept of

   Horizon-related information.

34.The second Wednesday Horizon call took place on 24th July 2013. I have been

   asked to consider to what extent the Note at POLOO139731 is accurate. In order

   to answer this question, I have considered Mr. Bowyer's advice entitled

   "Response to the Interim Review of Cartwright King's Current Process by Brian

   Altman QC" (POL00066807). In this document Mr. Bowyer listed at point vi.

   examples of issues which had been reported to the Wednesday conference

   calls. I would have provided Mr. Bowyer with this information taking it from the

   notes which I had made at the times of those calls.

35. Mr. Bowyer referred to "Concerns that Post Office Card Account transactions

   have been "lost in flight". (Meeting of 24/7/13 — Prestbury's)." The note records

   that Gayle Peacock mentioned "Prestbury — Current agent settle debt for £700

   for Santander transaction, now blaming Horizon".

36. Mr. Bowyer made reference to the "Mention of undefined bugs at Horden (sic) —

   Not sure if they are being investigated." The note records that Gayle Peacock


                                  Page 10 of 57
                                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                                     WITN09680200




   mentioned "Howden — concerned over alleged bugs in Horizon System but does

   not know specifically what the issue is, asked for extra training which is being

   arranged."

37. Mr. Bowyer noted a "Possible case of Horizon receipt printing incorrectly — 4

   instead of a 1 (Meeting 24/7/13)." Mr Rod Ismay is noted to have "Reported an

   issue relating to a Business Banking customer — this is a dispute between the

   amount processed on the Horizon System against what the customer says he

   banked. Customer has provided a receipt to support his claim however there are

   concerns over the validity of this receipt. The customer will not provide the

   original copy. Entered on Horizon £180 — Says he banked £480."

38. I was not unduly worried that minutes would not be circulated given the concerns

   voiced by Mr. Parsons from a civil litigation perspective during the first call. I had

   been taking notes and I assumed that the Security Team within Post Office Ltd

   would also be starting to put a database together of the issues being raised on

   the calls. I can recall that a concern was raised at some point that care should

   be taken if making any notes on public transport or in public places — I am not

   able to recall, however, whether it was during this particular call that the concern

   was raised.

39.The third call took place on 31st July 2013 and I have been asked to say to what

   extent the note of the call (POL00139732) is accurate. As I have previously

   indicated, I do not have access to my notes which I took during these calls. In

   order to answer this question, I have again considered Mr. Bowyer's advice

   entitled "Response to the Interim Review of Cartwright King's Current Process

   by Brian Altman QC".




                                    Page 11 of 57
                                                                                      WITNO9680200
                                                                                    WITN09680200




40. I note that Mr. Bowyer referred to an "Issue where if the cashier presses buyback

   when selling Euros the loss won't be found. Will not generate transaction

   correction. It will be a hard loss that the SPMR will not be able to explain when

   audited. (Meeting of 31/7/13)".

41. Mr Bowyer also referred to "Errors in the Bureau de Change when remmed in

   as a quantity not a value. (Meeting of 31/7/13)."

42.The only reference to Bureau de Change in the note appears to be by Gayle

   Peacock who "Highlighted Bureau buy back problems. Discussion with Rodric

   Williams offline, though appears non Horizon related in so far as the 'buy' icon

   was pressed instead of the `sell' icon."

43. 1 do not recall there being any reference to the report of Helen Rose. I do believe,

   however, that it was during this call that there was a suggestion by Rodric

   Williams of a change of approach. I cannot recall what Mr. Williams said but I

   can recall informing him that a central record had to be kept. That was the very

   purpose of the call and there is no reference to this in the note.

44. 1 have been provided with a copy of a time entry which I made whilst I was in my

   office on 1St August 2013 (POL00139745). The note records "TC JS at 6 p.m.

   31/7/13: Discussing disclosure issues: JScott has instructed that typed minutes

   be scrapped."

45.This note relates to a telephone conversation which had taken place the

   previous evening with Jarnail Singh. According to my note, I had been engaged

   on the call for approximately 24 minutes. I am unable to recall the entirety of the

   conversation. My recollection at the present time is that Mr. Singh alleged that

   John Scott had indicated an intention to `shred' the minutes and to explain, if

   asked, that they had been destroyed on the advice of Cartwright King.


                                     Page 12 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




46. 1 am also able to recall that I complained to Mr. Singh that Bond Dickinson

   appeared to be exercising too much control over Post Office Ltd. I commented

   that the civil disclosure regime was clearly different to that in criminal law and I

   complained about the way in which the approach being taken by Post Office Ltd

   to the Wednesday morning calls appeared to be changing — it was essential that

   a central record be created and maintained. I explained that I would ask Mr.

   Clarke to prepare a written advice for Post Office Ltd so that the position was

   clear.

47.Towards the end of the call I used another telephone held in close proximity to

   try to record some of the conversation as I was concerned about the comments

   which had been made with regard to the destruction of the minutes.

48. 1 have been shown a copy of an email which Jarnail Singh sent to myself and

   Rodric Williams during the morning of 1St August 2013 (POL00325474). This

   was received following my conversation with Mr. Singh the previous evening

   during which I had expressed a number of concerns. As Mr. Singh had copied

   Rodric Williams into the email I believe that I concluded at the time that he was

   seeking to appear in control given his position within Post Office Ltd.

49. 1 believe that I would have informed Andy Cash in the Derby Office of Cartwright

   King of the concerns raised by Jarnail Singh during the telephone conversation

   of 31St July 2013 and of my concerns too. I do not recall having any

   conversations about the telephone call with Steve Gelsthorpe or Rupert Hawke.

50. I believe that I subsequently had a conversation with Simon Clarke in Cartwright

   King's Nottingham Office. I relayed the conversation which had taken place with

   Mr. Singh and played the recording of part of the telephone call which, from

   memory, was not that easy to hear. I believe that I also explained the concerns


                                   Page 13 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




   which Mr. Singh had expressed and my concerns arising out of that conversation

   and with regard to the Wednesday morning conference calls. I believe that I

   travelled back to my office in Derby and Mr. Clarke prepared an Advice on the

   Duty to Record and Retain Material (POL00006799).

51. 1 have been asked to consider an email from Steven Gelsthorpe, one of the

   Senior Directors of Cartwright King at the time, to Simon Clarke, Rupert Hawke,

   Andy Cash and myself of 2nd August 2013. (POL00139747). Mr. Gelsthorpe was

   considering how to impart the advice to Post Office Ltd that, "if there are factions

   within it who are running around trying to lay off blame for their own

   shortcomings by lying about the advice they have received then they lose

   privilege."

52.Whilst I do not recall having had any conversations in relation to this email, it

   was my belief at the time, based on information provided by Jarnail Singh, that

   Mr. John Scott, who was Head of Security at Post Office Ltd, had apparently

   indicated an intention to 'shred' the central record of Horizon-related issues

   reported on the Wednesday morning calls and to explain, if asked, that he had

   followed Cartwright King's advice.

53. Mr. Clarke stated in his Advice at paragraph three that "POL accepted that

   advice and according (sic) a weekly conference-call meeting was established

   so as to meet the requirements of the central hub. Participants were informed

   that they should bring all Horizon-related issues they had encountered to the

   meeting; minutes were to be taken, centrally retained and disseminated to those

   who required the information, this list to include POL's Horizon expert witness."

54. 1 am asked to state to what extent I believed the assertion in the second

   sentence. It was my understanding at the time that Jarnail Singh had spoken to


                                   Page 14 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                  WITN09680200




   the proposed participants from the various departments within Post Office Ltd

   individually prior to the first Wednesday morning call to explain the importance

   and purpose of the call.

55. 1 have been asked to consider paragraph 5 of Mr. Clarke's Advice and to set out

   the extent to which I agreed with the factual assertions therein. I am unable to

   recall fully my conversation with Mr. Singh of 31st July 2013 but recall that I

   relayed the conversation which had taken place to Mr. Clarke, outlining Mr.

   Singh's concerns and those which I had too.

56. 1 have been asked to describe the attendance which caused me to make my

   note of 14th August 2013 (POL00139748). This note relates to a telephone call

   which I received from Jarnail Singh on that date. Mr. Singh indicated that John

   Scott would be on that morning's Wednesday conference call and I took the view

   that his attendance would not be appropriate given the allegations which had

   been made. I believe that I also expressed my concern to Simon Clarke who

   was in my office at the time.

57. 1 have been provided with a copy of a Note of the Regular Call of 14th August

   2013 (POL00083930). I do not have any recollection of the conversations which

   took place during the call and do not have access to the notes which I took. I do

   recall being somewhat surprised that John Scott was actually in attendance. I

   had expected that Jarnail Singh would have escalated my concern within the

   Legal Department of Post Office Ltd prior to the call. I did not feel that it would

   have been appropriate to make any reference to my concerns during the call.

   After the conference call had concluded, Mr. Clarke asked me whether Mr. Scott

   had been in attendance and I confirmed that he had been present. I believe that




                                   Page 15 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITNO9680200




   it was around this time that Simon Clarke advised that John Scott should not be

   permitted to attend any conference calls held between lawyers.

58. Due to the length of time which has since elapsed I am unable to recall the

   communication process in respect of prosecutions discontinued or withdrawn. It

   is my belief, however, that Post Office asked to be informed when Simon Clarke

   proposed to attend Court to terminate a prosecution.

59. 1 have been provided with a copy of the letter of Susan Crichton of 16th August

   2013 addressed to Andy Cash (POL00006797). I note that the letter

   acknowledged receipt of Mr. Cash's letter of 2nd August which had enclosed

   Simon Clarke's Advice on "Disclosure — the Duty to Record and Retain Material."

   It also referred to an email of 14th August. Due to the length of time which has

   since elapsed I am unable to recall that email. I am also unable to set out any

   conversations with representatives of Post Office Ltd or Cartwright King

   concerning Simon Clarke's advice or the issues discussed therein prior to the

   receipt of this letter. I can recall, however, that surprise was being expressed

   within Cartwright King that there had not been a prompt response.

60. 1 am unable to recall whether I read Susan Crichton's letter of 16th August 2013

   at the time when it was received. I note, however, that Ms. Crichton indicated

   that she was deeply concerned at the suggestion in Mr. Clarke's note that there

   `may have been an attempt to destroy...minutes of the calls." Mr. Clarke had,

   however, recorded in his Advice that it had been relayed to him that, "An

   instruction was then given that those emails and minutes should be, and have

   been, destroyed: the word "shredded" was conveyed to me."

61. 1 also note that Ms Crichton letter also suggested that Post Office Ltd was

   committed to conducting its business in an open, transparent and lawful manner.


                                  Page 16 of 57
                                                                                         WITNO9680200
                                                                                       WITNO9680200




     It was evident, however, that civil lawyers within Post Office Ltd and acting for

     Post Office Ltd sought to use legal professional privilege which, it could be

     suggested, is contrary to the suggestion that Post Office Ltd was committed to

     openness and transparency.

The Review of Convictions

  62. 1 have been asked to summarise the nature and extent of the review of past

     convictions undertaken by Cartwright King and my involvement with that

     process. It is difficult to recall the precise process due to the length of time which

     has since elapsed. I believe that the process was set out in a Protocol. Cases

     were to be 'sifted' and designated as either 'Type A' or 'Type B' by answering a

     series of questions. I am unable to recall the questions but the outcome of the

     'sift' review would dictate whether or not the case was put forward to a full review

     by counsel.

  63. 1 was one of a number of members of staff at Cartwright King who undertook the

     sift reviews. The review process took place at the office of Cartwright King in

     Derby and members of staff from other offices were temporarily seconded to the

     Derby Office to assist with the sift reviews.

  64. 1 have a vague recollection that some of those members of staff may not have

     been available for one reason or another throughout the entire 'sifting' process

     resulting in changes of personnel. Furthermore, if more members of staff had

     been available, the process could have been completed in a shorter period. With

     hindsight, this would have been beneficial given the frequent requests for

     progress reports.

  65.The review of cases dating back to 1st January 2010 included prosecutions

     commenced by Post Office Ltd prior to its separation from the Royal Mail Group

                                      Page 17 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




   in addition to those conducted by Cartwright King on behalf of Post Office Ltd. I

   believe that there were in some cases missing documents and I can recall that

   there may also have been some missing files too. The same sift criteria were

   applied to all cases and in the circumstances I do not think that it would have

   been apparent to any fee-earner involved in the process that they were

   assessing the quality of work carried out by Cartwright King.

66. I am asked to consider to what extent, if at all, a Subpostmaster raising integrity

   issues with Horizon at trial was a necessary or sufficient factor in whether to

   disclose the Helen Rose report. I regret that I am unable to recall the Protocol,

   the briefing or the questions to be asked by those who conducted sift reviews.

67. 1 have been provided with copies of my email to Susan Crichton of 16th July

   2013 (POL00039998) which enclosed two documents prepared by Simon

   Clarke. The first of these documents set out a brief discussion of the CCRC's

   criteria (POL00039993) and the second was a draft response (POL00039995)

   which Mr. Clarke thought might assist Post Office Ltd. Due to the length of time

   which has since elapsed, I am unable to provide any details with regards to the

   nature or extent of any involvement which I may have had in connection with the

   response of Post Office to the CCRC or with any advice provided to Post Office

   in this respect. I do not think that I considered whether a convicted

   Subpostmaster who did not raise the integrity of the Horizon system as an issue

   at trial could fall into the first of the criteria set out by Mr. Clarke. I have no

   recollection of considering whether the CCRC should be informed of the

   concerns which had been discussed regarding Gareth Jenkins.

68. 1 have considered the advice provided by Simon Clarke in the cases of R v.

   Lynette Hutchings dated 19th July 2013 (POL00060715), R v. Samra dated 22


                                   Page 18 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITN09680200




   July 2013 (POL00040022), R v. Wylie dated 23rd July 2013 (POL00133633), R

   v. Grech dated 231d July 2013 (POL00108042) and R v. Cleife dated 19th

   November 2013 (POL00112905).

69. 1 am able to recall discussing the case of R v. Samra with Mr. Clarke. I believe

   that I also attended the Crown Court at Birmingham with him whilst he made an

   application to a Judge in chambers there. I believe that Mr. Clarke informed the

   Court of the existence of a draft report. I am unable to state whether we were,

   at the time, simply aware of its existence or whether we had been provided with

   a copy of the draft Second Sight Interim Report. In any event, I believe that it

   had yet to be published and Mr. Clarke explained that Post Office Ltd could not

   fully comply with its duties of disclosure at that point in time.

70. Due to the length of time which has since elapsed, I am unable to set out the

   nature and extent of any involvement which I may have had in advising or

   assisting Mr. Clarke to advise in connection with these cases or, with the

   exception of the case of R v. Samra, the nature and extent of any discussions

   which I had with Mr. Clarke. As I have previously indicated, Mr. Clarke was

   highly experienced and his advice was generally accepted as being correct.

71. I have been provided with copies of a note prepared by Messrs. Bond Dickinson

   entitled Civil Claims by SPMR's' (POL00040095) and of Mr. Clarke's Note of

   12th September 2013 (POL00114253). I believe that Post Office Ltd expressed

   concern about the possibility that civil claims may be commenced by

   Subpostmasters and asked for advice in connection with the Note prepared by

   Messrs. Bond Dickinson. I passed the request onto Simon Clarke. Due to the

   length of time which has since elapsed I am unable to say to what extent, if any,

   I may have contributed to or assisted with its preparation.


                                    Page 19 of 57
                                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                                     WITNO9680200




  72.In his Note of 12th September 2013, Mr. Clarke commented that, "whilst a

     number of criminal prosecutions against SPMR's and clerks have been

     terminated since the publication of the Second Sight Interim report, none was

     stopped because of errors found in the Horizon system." Mr. Clarke also

     commented that, "In all cases the prosecution was stopped because it was

     considered that the continued prosecution of a particular SPMR/clerk no longer

     remained in the Public Interest." I do not recall either agreeing or disagreeing

     with these assertions. I do not believe that I attended any hearings with Mr.

     Clarke at which proceedings were terminated.

  73. 1 am asked to consider to what extent, if at all, there was a difference in the

     frequency of terminations following the publication of the Second Sight Interim

     report or in the reasons for termination in comparison to periods prior to its

     release. There was an increase in the frequency of terminations — the Second

     Sight Interim Report had become available and Post Office Ltd had yet to obtain

     a statement from a new independent expert witness.

Brian Altman KC's Review of the Cartwright King Process

  74. 1 have been asked to consider Brian Altman KC's Interim Review of Cartwright

     King's Current Process (POL00006583) and Harry Bowyer's advice - Response

     to the Interim Review of Cartwright King's Current Process by Brian Altman QC

     (POL00066807).

  75.In paragraph 6 of his Interim Review Mr. Altman KC spoke of the important

     elements of independence and objectivity indicating a preference that any

     solicitor involved in a case should not be involved with the sift review. I do not

     believe that I had been concerned that some of the cases had initially been sifted

     by the solicitor responsible for the prosecution of the case given that, if the case

                                     Page 20 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                  WITN09680200




   had been put forward for a full review, it would have been reviewed by in-house

   counsel. I note that Mr. Bowyer had suggested that the cases could be re-sifted

   if Mr. Altman KC thought it appropriate.

76.In paragraph 12 of his Interim Review Mr. Altman KC questioned whether the

   sole issue of non-disclosure was too restrictive an approach to take considering

   the list of issues reported to Second Sight. He commented that one such

   concern was "POL investigation and audit teams that have asset-recovery or

   prosecution bias and fail to seek the root cause of reported problems."

77. Mr. Bowyer noted in his response that the issues of training and support were

   already included in the scope of the review and agreed that the sift criteria might

   be too narrow given the information derived from the "Wednesday Hub

   Conferences". Mr. Bowyer indicated that it would be highly desirable for a

   conference to be held with Mr. Altman KC in order that the review process could

   be as watertight as possible. I am unable to recall Mr. Altman KC's concern that

   Post Office Ltd failed to seek the root cause of reported problems being

   considered during the review process.

78. In paragraph 14 of Mr. Altman's Interim Review he stated that he was "interested

   to discover also what material, in addition to Second Sight's report and any

   Helen Rose report CK was sending to potential applicants." I do not recall that

   any further consideration was given to disclosing any other documents at the

   time.

79. In paragraph 15 of the Interim Review Mr. Altman KC asked whether the three-

   year temporal limit for the review was sufficient. He asked whether the reason

   for the cut-off date was supportable. Mr. Bowyer in paragraph 15 of his response

   explained the reason for taking the starting point as 1st January 2010. I am


                                   Page 21 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




   unable to recall whether the start date was reconsidered prior to the conference

   which took place with Mr. Altman KC on 9th September 2013.

80. I have been asked what if anything was done to identify suitable cases for review

   where a defendant had pleaded guilty and there would, in those circumstances,

   not be the type or breadth of information available as in the case of a contested

   trial. Mr. Bowyer responded to this concern in paragraph 19 of his response —

   he explained that the same sift criteria applied to guilty pleas as to any other

   cases. I am unable to recall any change in the approach taken by Cartwright

   King.

81. In paragraph 24d of his Interim Review Mr. Altman KC observed that the sift

   sheet was attempting standardisation by focussing the sifter's attention on a

   series of questions. He was concerned that the process might potentially be too

   narrow. Mr Bowyer agreed given the information being derived from the

   Wednesday morning calls. I anticipate that it was expected that this would be

   further considered during the conference.

82. I can recall asking within Carwright King whether the material being generated

   by the Wednesday calls required disclosure. I was informed at that the Second

   Sight Interim Report and the Helen Rose Report put people on notice that there

   had been issues with the system.

83. I have been asked to consider a Note of Conference with Brian Altman KC on

   9th September 2013 (POL00006485) and Notes of a Meeting of 9th September

   2013 (POL00139866). The latter document was typed by myself, following the

   conference, based on handwritten notes which I took during the conference with

   Brian Altman KC and from memory. It is not a transcript of the conference. I did

   not write down any comments which I made and there were also times when I


                                   Page 22 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




   was looking at documentation rather than making notes. On occasions the

   speed of conversation was also too fast to properly note and I believe that

   people spoke over each other too.

84. Due to the length of time which has elapsed, I am unable to set out the

   background to this meeting — I believe it had been arranged following the receipt

   of Mr. Bowyer's `Response to the Interim Review of Cartwright King's Current

   Process'. I am able to recall a suggested being made that the role of Brian

   Altman KC would be one of 'critical oversight'.

85. Whilst I cannot recall the entirety of the meeting, I am reminded by reading my

   typed note that Susan Crichton explained that there had been `rumbles' to the

   effect the Horizon system did not work and that during the conference, Rodric

   Williams suggested that he believed the phrase used by Helen Rose to the effect

   that she knew Mr. Jenkins was `aware of all of the Horizon integrity issues' was

   unfortunate. I regarded Mr. Williams comment as a suggestion that there were

   not, in fact, numerous integrity issues.

86. I do not believe that Cartwright King were provided with a copy of the Instructions

   which had been sent to Brian Altman KC and so in those circumstances, would

   not have been aware of the issues referred to therein by Post Office Ltd or Bond

   Dickinson. I do not recall the allegations relating to the failure to record minutes

   or the shredding of minutes being discussed.

87. In the note of the conference prepared by Bond Dickinson, it was recorded that

   Simon Clarke had said that there had been some cultural issues at the start

   which had now been overcome — he thought it was necessary to put duties on

   individuals.




                                   Page 23 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITNO9680200




88. My note stated "We discussed last Friday: main problem is cultural. People in

   different departments. Needs to be a proper coming together."

89. Mr. Clarke's reference to the word 'cultural' could have been a reference to the

   view held within Cartwright King that some departments within Post Office Ltd

   may have become aware of information which had not been shared more widely.

   I anticipate it could also have been Mr Clarke alluding, in a polite way, to the

   report I had received from Jarnail Singh relating to the typed minutes of the

   Wednesday morning calls. I believe that there was also a discussion about the

   possibility that staff at Post Office Ltd may attend some of the Wednesday

   morning calls and then ask others to attend on their behalf. It is possible that

   this is what Susan Crichton may have been referring to when she said, 'People

   then dump...'. I do not have access to my notes but suspect that I did not note

   the entirety of her comment.

90.There are references in both documents to the phrase 'bandwagon'. I did not

   regard this as derogatory, but recognition that more subpostmasters may come

   forward following the publicity generated by the Second Sight Draft Report.

91. I note that in the record of the conference prepared by Bond Dickinson, it was

   recorded that I made a comment to the effect that I thought that 'there was a lot

   of Horizon information which had not been getting to Gareth Jenkins.' I believe

   that I may have been concerned that Mr. Jenkins had not referred to the bugs

   during the case of R v. Ishaq and was therefore considering when he might have

   become aware of them. It would appear from my note that Mr. Clarke

   commented that either Mr. Jenkins was not aware of the information or Fujitsu

   were in an 'ivory tower'.




                                  Page 24 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITN09680200




92.In Messrs. Bond Dickinson's Note there is reference to a cut-off date of 1St

   January 2010. The Note also stated that prior to the HOL rollout there was a

   cash audit done so that all POL branches balanced. Brian Altman KC advised

   that there was no positive duty to seek out individuals pre 1 January 2010 but if

   POL was approached it would need to make case-specific decisions on

   disclosure.

93. My typed note reads as follows: "Susan: That's when the system rolled out —

   knowing that branches balanced — so thought justifiable date."

94. 1 believe that there would have been some discussion as to why Cartwright King

   had proposed a start date of 1St January 2010 although I am unable to recall it

   due to the length of time which has since elapsed. The auditing procedures prior

   to branches migrating to Horizon Online would, however, have had no relevance

   to Subpostmasters convicted of offences prior to the start date of 1St January

   2010. I am unable to recall any discussion with regard to the Callendar Square

   Bug.

95. From Bond Dickinson's Note of the conference, it can be seen that Mr. Altman

   KC advised considerable caution in relation to mediation cases involving

   previously convicted individuals. "The concern is that lawyers acting for those

   individuals may be using the scheme to obtain information which they would not

   normally be entitled to in order to pursue an appeal." I can recall it being

   suggested within Cartwright King that reports which referred to methods of

   investigation and opinions about witnesses or the merits of a case should not be

   disclosed.

96. I am asked to say whether I agreed with Mr. Altman's advice — I would not have

   thought to disagree. I can recall that Mr. Altman KC advised that the disclosure


                                  Page 25 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




   duties of a prosecutor arose at the point of charge which was not something I

   had appreciated. I also note that no disagreement was voiced, for example, in

   connection with Mr. Altman KC's view that there should be post-conviction

   disclosure in the case of R v. Hutchings.

97.A conference took place on 4" October 2013 with Brian Altman KC in which

   representatives from Post Office Ltd, Bond Dickinson and Cartwright King

   participated. Due to the passage of time, I am unable to recall the discussions

   which took place during that conference.

98. Paragraph 129 of the General Review of Brian Altman KC dated 15th October

   2013 (POL00006581) explains that the main topic of discussion was 'the extent

   to which Cartwright King should be involved in exercising a supervisor function

   over the criminal cases going into mediation. There is understandable concern

   that offenders might use the mediation scheme to gain information as a platform

   from which to launch a fresh or new appeal, and so CK wish to exercise a

   measure of control over the dissemination of information and material during the

   process.'

99.In Mr. Altman KC's `Review of Post Office Ltd Prosecution Role' dated 19th

   December 2013 (POL00112937), reference is again made to the telephone

   conference on 4th October 2013 — in this document it refers to 'issues

   surrounding the scope of CK's review.'

100.       I have been asked to consider the Advice of Mr. Altman KC entitled

   `General Review' dated 15th October 2013. I am unable to recall when I first read

   it and if so, whether I read it in its entirety. I am unable to recall whether I had

   any views in relation to it and whether it had any effect on the approach taken

   by Cartwright King to the review of cases. Upon reading it now, I note that Mr.


                                   Page 26 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




  Altman KC advised in paragraph 145 that it was not for the prosecutor to make

   qualitative judgements about the utility.. .of information to be disclosed. With the

   benefit of hindsight, I considered the issue of utility with regard to information

   provided by Mr. Jenkins in the case of R v. Ishaq and whether the issue relating

   to freezing screens during the pilot scheme might reasonably assist with his

   defence.

101.      In paragraph 64 Mr. Altman KC reported that, "When I queried the

   rationale behind the cut-off date, I was told, and entirely accept, that, prior to

   each branch rollout, a cash audit was done so that each branch balanced." I

   understand that prior to each branch being migrated to Horizon online, someone

   would attend on behalf of Post Office Ltd to check the requisite amount of cash

   was physically on the premises. Whilst I am unable to recall the conversation at

   this particular conference, I note that there is also a reference to `balancing' in

   my typed note of the meeting on 9t" September 2013.

102.       Mr. Altman KC referred to 'the Falkirk event raised in the Misra case'. I

   believe that I referred Mr. Clarke to another statement provided by Mr. Jenkins

   at about the time the draft Second Sight Report became available. I am,

   however, unable to recall any other discussions regarding this bug prior to this

   advice or set out my understanding of it. Similarly, I am not able to say whether

   I agreed it was "an isolated instance". I am also unable to recall formulating a

   view on whether Post Office Ltd should examine cases pre-dating the 2006 fix.

103.      In paragraph 129 Brian Altman KC noted that, "There is understandable

   concern that offenders might use the mediation scheme to gain information as

   a platform from which to launch a fresh or new appeal, and so CK wish to

   exercise a measure of control over the dissemination of information and material


                                   Page 27 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




   during the process." It is my belief that Post Office Ltd had initially raised this

   as a concern prior to the commencement of the mediation scheme and that

   internally with Cartwright King, concern was being expressed that reports which

   contained opinions about the merits of a case i.e. the strengths or weaknesses

   of it, should not be disclosed. I am unable to describe any steps which may have

   been taken by Cartwright King, myself or Post Office Ltd in response to this

   advice.

104.         Cartwright King responded to this advice with a note entitled

   "Observations and Analysis of the Cartwright King Prosecution Review Process"

   (POL00040194) dated 5th December 2013. I believe that I assisted with the

   preparation of this advice by providing statistics and information such as details

   of missing files and documents.

105.         In the response it was noted that, "Until the publication of the Second

   Sight Interim Review the Prosecutors for Post Office had adopted a firm

   approach to requests for disclosure in relation to the Horizon system which was

   treated as being robust and reliable." I am asked to state how the "firm approach"

   differed from the approach taken following the publication of the Second Sight

   Interim Report. A general moratorium had been imposed by Post Office Ltd on

   the commencement of any new prosecutions following the publication of the

   Second Sight Interim Report, and so the response dealt with the position up to

   the publication of the Second Sight Interim Report. I believe that there were,

  from memory, only two new prosecutions following the publication of the interim

   report and the Horizon system was not relevant to either.

106.         I have been asked to consider paragraph 17. This paragraph refers to

   `Second Sight and other material.' It is my recollection that the test to be applied


                                   Page 28 of 57
                                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                                     WITNO9680200




     related to the Second Sight Interim Report and the Helen Rose Report. Due to

     the length of time which has since elapsed, I am unable to recall precisely what

     Counsel was required to consider during a Full Review.

  107.        I have been shown a copy of Mr. Clarke's Advice in relation to the case

     of R v. Hosi dated 1St May 2014 (POL00133638). Due to the length of time which

     has elapsed I am unable to set out the nature and extent of any discussions

     which I may have had with Mr. Clarke or the nature and extent of any

     involvement I may have had in advising or assisting to advise in connection with

     this case. It is unlikely that I would have disagreed with Mr. Clarke's advice and

     am unable to say whether Post Office followed his advice.

Fujitsu Prosecution Support and Finding New Expert.

  108.        Cartwright King was asked by Post Office Ltd to identify suitable potential

     experts to provide an opinion with regard to the Horizon system. I believe that

     Cartwright King prepared a shortlist of a number of potential experts. I am able

     to recall that Simon Clarke and I attended Imperial College London (ICL) to

     speak to two potential experts, Professor Jeffrey Kramer and Dr. Naranker

     Dulay.

  109.        Cartwright King were also asked to advise with regard to the contractual

     position with Fujitsu in terms of ensuring that data would remain available

     following transfer to new servers.

  110.        I have been asked to consider an email from Richard Boyce to Hugh

     Flemington of 11th July 2013 (POL00145361) into which Simon Clarke, myself

     and others were copied. Due to the length of time which has elapsed, I am

     unable to set out the nature and extent of any involvement which I may have

     had in advising in connection with the Transitional Support Service Change

                                      Page 29 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITNO9680200




   Control Note. I believe that Post Office Ltd were concerned that data might

   become lost.

111.      I can recall attending a meeting at Fujitsu's offices in Baker Street in

   London on 291h November 2013. From memory, I think that the invitation had

   been extended to only Simon Clarke at Cartwright King. Mr. Clarke had,

   however, asked that I attend with him in order to take notes. I can recall that

   diagrams were drawn on a white-board by members of staff from Fujitsu whilst

   they provided an explanation as to how the Horizon system securely locked and

   stored transactional data in a digital vault. I cannot recall the precise words used

   or the full explanation given due to the passage of time and I do not have access

   to my notes. I was, however, left with the impression that Fujitsu had confidence

   in the integrity of the Horizon IT system and that the transactional data from

   branches was securely locked away. I unable to recall any conversation about

   complaints by Subpostmasters.

112.      I have been asked to consider Simon Clarke's Note of 2nd July 2014

   entitled "Securing Data for Future Prosecutions" (POL00113135) and the

   Proposed Memorandum of Understanding (POL00113136). Due to the length of

   time which has elapsed I am unable to set out the nature and extent, if any, of

   the involvement I had in advising or assisting to advise in connection with these

   documents or discussing them with Simon Clarke.

113.      As with any documents which Mr. Clarke prepared, it is quite possible

   that I may have been asked to look at them prior to finalisation or forwarding to

   Post Office Ltd. As noted previously, I would generally accept Mr. Clarke's

   advice as being correct.




                                   Page 30 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITNO9680200




114.      Due to the passage of time I am unable to recall the view of Fujitsu's

   commercial and legal team referred to in Paragraph 4 and similarly I am unable

   to say whether the contract referred to by Mr. Clarke was HNG-X v9.0

   (FUJ00000069)

115.      I have been asked to consider to what extent, if at all, I understood POL

   to have a contractual right to obtain documents held by Fujitsu that held

   information on bugs, errors or defects within the Horizon IT system such as

   Known Error Logs (KEL's), PinICL's, PEAK's etc. I do not recall when I first may

   have heard of some these terms and whether I understood the contractual

   position in relation to such records.

116.      I have been provided with copies of an email from Jarnail Singh to Chris

  Aujard, General Counsel, dated 23rd July 2014 (POL00148748) and the

   attachment, namely a document prepared by Simon Clarke of 23rd July 2014

   entitled "Advice — Expert Report — Imperial College, London" (POL00148749).

   The email chain contains an email from Andy Holt to Chris Aujard of 18th July in

   which Mr. Holt appears to have identified the need to "agree how we steer this

   or define the requirement correctly so the scope doesn't get out of control and

   we allow Imperial College to produce independent report."

117.      I was concerned that Post Office Ltd were seeking to `steer' the process

   so that ICL did not produce an independent report. I believe that I forwarded the

   email to Simon Clarke so that he could prepare a written advice. Due to the

   length of time which has since elapsed I am unable to set out precisely how Post

   Office Ltd responded to Mr. Clarke's Advice.

118.      It is evident, however, from the documents which accompanied the

   Request that Simon Clarke prepared a 'Draft Scope for computer experts' on


                                   Page 31 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                               WITNO9680200




   17th September 2013 (POL00040040). The Draft Scope required the experts to

   consider the Horizon Online computer system and prepare a definitive report.

119.      I note from my email to Jarnail Singh of 1st October 2013

   (POL00146545), which I copied to Rodric Williams and Andrew Parsons, that I

   had attached an email from Professor Kramer which contained his CV. I suspect

   that Professor Dulay's CV had already been provided given that Jarnail Singh

   appears to have forwarded my email and both CV's to Hugh Flemington later

   that afternoon.

120.      I have been provided with a copy of an Agreement to Appoint an Expert

   (POL00210444). The agreement was between Post Office Ltd and IC

   Consultants Ltd and was made on 28th April 2014.

121.      Professor Jeff Kramer and Dr. Naranker Dulay prepared an Initial

   Review: Proposal for investigation into the integrity of the Post Office Horizon

   Online accounting system on 26th June 2014 (POL00125569). This document

   set out a proposal for work described as `Phase 2' and sought clarification from

   Post Office Ltd as to which version(s) of the Horizon system should form the

   basis of the report. I was provided with a quotation for the cost of the Phase 2

   work on 8th July 2014 (POL00325919). The quotation was in the sum of

   £116,250 plus VAT plus expenses and described the work in Phase 2 as "Report

   preliminary results and recommendations on Horizon and, if necessary, define

   work for final phase."

122.      It would appear to be the case that Jarnail Singh forwarded a copy of the

   Initial Review to Andrew Parsons and a number of people at Post Office Ltd on

   4th July 2014 (POL00148714). I was copied into that email.




                                  Page 32 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




123.      On 9th July 2014 Andrew Parsons of Messrs Bond Dickinson sent an

   email to Jarnail Singh and numerous other people (POL00148714). He

   questioned whether ICL should 'look at old Horizon as well as Horizon Online.

   He observed that it was unlikely that Post Office Ltd would be looking to

   prosecute `any old Horizon cases'. He also made the suggestion that Cartwright

   King or Post Office Ltd might 'wish to vet any material before sending it to ICL'.

124.      I responded to Mr. Parsons later that morning pointing out that Cartwright

   King would not wish to vet any information prior to it being sent to ICL. I also

   said that, "I would not advise that the experts be instructed to look at the old

   Horizon system. If the experts were to consider the old system, depending on

   their findings, disclosure issues could well arise in historic cases. In any event

   cases now being investigated and considered for prosecution will involve

   Horizon on Line (sic), which was rolled out during 2010."

125.      At the time when I sent the email to Mr. Parsons I believe that I had been

   informed that the previous version of the Horizon system was not available for

   examination and that important documentation relating to its design was also no

   longer available. In those circumstances I suspect that I would have been

   concerned that it would not have been possible for the experts to properly

   assess the previous system and that it would have been problematical if they

   sought to caveat their findings due to the absence of documentation. I was also

   aware that Simon Clarke had advised that the experts consider Horizon Online

   and that Brian Altman KC had advised that there was no requirement for Post

   Office Ltd to seek out cases prior to 2010.

126.      It would appear from the documentation which I have had sight of that

   Cartwright King provided draft instructions for ICL and that Andrew Pheasant of


                                  Page 33 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                  WITN09680200




   Messrs. Bond Dickinson advised Jarnail Singh by email on 16th September 2014

   (POL00325918) that further Non-Disclosure Agreements should be entered into

   by Professor Kramer, Dr. Dulay and any others who might work with the data

   provided. On 1St October 2014 Andrew Pheasant advised with regards to the

   amendment of the draft instructions.

127.        It is evident from the documentation provided with the Request, that ICL

   did not receive the material which they had expected to receive from Post Office

   and/or Fujitsu in a timely fashion. In my email to Paul Cray at ICL of 291h January

   2015 (POL00325994), I indicated that I hoped to hold a conference call with

   Post Office Ltd the following week. I am unable to recall whether that call took

   place.

128.        I also note that in my email of 2nd February 2015 within the same chain,

   I referred to a face-to-face meeting with Post Office Ltd on 10t11 February 2015.

   Due to the passage of time, I am unable to recall whether the meeting took

   place.

129.        I have been provided with a copy of an email which I sent to Rodric

   Williams on 8111 July 2015 (POL00318211) and into which I copied Simon Clarke

   and Harry Bowyer. In the email I commented that I had been attempting to set

   up a meeting with the experts for some time and I referred to a meeting which

   had been arranged for 29t1i July 2015. I can recall attending Post Office Ltd for

   a meeting and anticipate that it may have been on this occasion, but I cannot

   recall the conversation. I believe that I would have taken notes but have not

   been provided with a copy of them.

130.        I am unable to recall whether either Professor Kramer or Dr. Dulay

   provided any opinion orally or in writing on either a provisional or final basis. I


                                   Page 34 of 57
                                                                                        WITNO9680200
                                                                                      WITN09680200




     do not think that Post Office Ltd proceeded with the Phase 2 instruction — I have

     a recollection of being informed at some point that Post Office Ltd was

     considering the procurement of a different IT system.

Dealing with the Procurator Fiscal

  131.       Following the publication of the draft Second Sight Interim Report, Simon

     Clarke and I attended the Offices of the Procurator Fiscal on two occasions on

     behalf of Post Office Ltd. According to the Meeting Report prepared by Simon

     Clarke (POL00139879), the first meeting took place on 5th September 2013, the

     day after Simon Clarke and I met with lawyers from BTO — the agents instructed

     by Post Office Ltd in Scotland. During the meeting with BTO there was a

     discussion about Scottish criminal law and procedures. The file review process

     was also discussed.

  132.       Whilst I do not recall having received any written instructions prior to this

     meeting from Post Office Ltd, it was my understanding that Post Office Ltd had

     expressed concern that the Procurator Fiscal was intending to terminate cases

     on the basis that the Horizon system was allegedly unreliable. It was in those

     circumstances that Simon Clarke and I had been asked to travel to Scotland to

     meet with the Procurator Fiscal.

  133.       I took notes during the meeting on 5th September 2013 but do not have

     copies of them. Jarnail Singh was also present at the meeting. It is evident from

     the Meeting Report that Mr. Clarke provided a broad overview of the HOL

     difficulties (absent any direct or indirect reference to the role of GJ or Fujitsu)'.

     During the meeting it was explained that Post Office Ltd proposed to obtain

     expert evidence and I believe that Mr. Clarke also explained that Cartwright King

     had been reviewing the case files relating to a number of prosecutions.

                                     Page 35 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




  134.      I have been asked to consider my email of 24th September 2015 to Laura

     Irvine (POL00104198) which refers to a meeting with the Procurator Fiscal which

     was to take place on 6th October 2015. I can recall that Simon Clarke and I were

     in attendance at the meeting. Rodric Williams attended too. Unfortunately, I

     cannot at the present time recall the meeting itself. I do not have access to my

     notes of the meeting.

The Mediation Scheme

  135.      I have been asked to set out the nature and extent of my involvement

     with the Mediation Scheme and/or Working Group. The Mediation Scheme had

     been set up by Post Office Ltd. During the conference which took place with

     Brian Altman KC on 9th September 2013 concern was expressed with regards

     to permitting convicted applicants into the scheme. I believe that Mr. Altman KC

     advised that Cartwright King would need to be made aware of the material being

     sent to Second Sight — it would need to be shared, audited and properly

     recorded.

  136.      From memory, it was subsequently determined that there should be a

     single point of contact at Cartwright King and at Bond Dickinson and I was the

     main point of contact at Cartwright King. It is difficult to recall the process in

     detail due to the length of time which has since elapsed. I believe that I would,

     however, receive Post Office Investigation Reports (POIR's), underlying

     material and proposed responses. In relation to convicted applicants to the

     Mediation Scheme, it is my recollection that I would generally forward such

     requests for consideration to either Simon Clarke or Harry Bowyer.

  137.      I have been asked to consider my email to Andrew Parsons of 8th May

     2014 (POL00168949). I noted that Cartwright King had advised that, as a matter

                                    Page 36 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




   of principle, investigation and offender-type reports should not be disclosed. I

   believe it was the view within Cartwright King that such reports should not be

   disclosed if they contained details of investigative methods or weaknesses

   identified in Post Office Ltd's processes (which might be exploited should that

   information become more widely known) or opinions of investigating officers with

   regards to the evidence or the merits of the case. On the basis that such reports

   would not ordinarily be disclosed during the course of a prosecution, it was

   suggested that if they were to be disclosed, they should be redacted accordingly.

138.      It is evident that Harry Bowyer had previously looked at material provided

   in relation to the case of Mr. Hughie Thomas and I suspect that I referred to his

   earlier work in order to make suggestions with regard to redaction. I have been

   asked to comment on the suggested redactions, although I am unable to recall

   this case due to the passage of time.

139.      I anticipate that the suggested redaction of the sentence "If Mr. Thomas

   has paid out funds in respect of the above transactions and a loss occurred,

   then this is down to incompetence and not the failings of the Horizon IT system"

   may have been on the basis that it was the investigating officer's opinion.

140.      The paragraph starting with the words, "Mr. Thomas was adamant when

   questioned...." Contained details of investigative methods. Similarly, the "In

   conclusion" section contains opinion and details of investigative methods.

141.      I have been asked to consider my suggested redaction of the sentence

   "I am currently awaiting the results of the tests by Fujisu (sic) on the Horizon

   system." This sentence relates to a method of investigation. In my email to

  Andrew Parsons of 8th May 2014 I indicated my concern that if the test results

   could not be found, that sentence could lead to a request for disclosure or result


                                  Page 37 of 57
                                                                                     WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




   in a suggestion that the investigation which had been carried out almost 10 years

   previously had been inadequate or incomplete (irrespective of whether that had

   actually been the case).

142.       I have been provided with a copy of the Advice of Simon Clarke of 15k"

   July 2014 (POL00148720). This document considered the appropriateness of

   mediating claims made by persons who stood convicted of criminal offences

   committed against Post Office Ltd and an alternative approach to such

   applications. Due to the length of time which has since elapsed I am unable to

   say to what extent, if any, I may have discussed or contributed to this Advice.

143.       I have been asked what my view was of the decision of Post Office Ltd

   to mediate the cases of people who had not been convicted of a criminal offence.

   I am unable to recall my view of Post Office Ltd's decision to launch a mediation

   scheme. I can recall thinking, however, that Post Office Ltd could potentially run

   into difficulties as a result of the non-availability of information due to data-

   retention policies.

144.       I have also been asked to what extent, if at all, I believed that the fact

   that someone who had been convicted of a criminal offence relating to a

   discrepancy in branch accounts was a reason not to investigate and/or mediate

   their case because it may doubt the safety of the conviction. I was aware that

   Mr. Altman KC had advised that convicted applicants should not be permitted to

   enter the mediation scheme and as was usually the case, it is unlikely that I

   would have disagreed with Mr. Clarke's advice. With hindsight, I can understand

   the argument that the potential to identify grounds to doubt the safety of a

   conviction may well be a proper reason to allow applicants into the Mediation

   Scheme.


                                  Page 38 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                  WITN09680200




  145.      I have been asked to consider Simon Clarke's Advice of 19th December

     2014 (POL00150390). Due to the length of time which has since elapsed I am

     unable to say to what extent I contributed to this advice or discussed the issues

     therein with Simon Clarke.

  146.      With the benefit of hindsight I now understand the argument that in a

     prosecution for false accounting, evidence which might suggest a lack of

     integrity in the Horizon system could be relevant to the issue of whether a

     Subpostmaster acted dishonestly, with a view to gain for himself or another or

     with intent to cause a loss to another' in circumstances where the

     Subpostmaster stated they believed the discrepancy was not a real loss but

     unexplained.

  147.      I have been provided with a copy of Simon Clarke's Advice of 16th

     February 2015 (POL00023832). Due to the length of time which has since

     elapsed, I am unable to say to what extent I may have contributed to this advice

     or discussed it with Simon Clarke.

  148.      Mr. Clarke advised that the offences of theft and false accounting were

     "both equal in law: both are offences of dishonesty and both carry the same

     maximum sentence." I do not believe that I would have disagreed with Mr.

     Clarke's advice. It would have been open to a Court on sentencing on a charge

     of false accounting to reach the conclusion that a defendant had been covering

     his or her own tracks.

Deloitte's Proiect Zebra and Remote Access

  149.      I am asked to describe the extent of my knowledge on Fujitsu's ability

     remotely to write, edit or delete entries in branch accounts and to set out any

     material changes to my knowledge during the relevant period.

                                    Page 39 of 57
                                                                                      WITNO9680200
                                                                                    WITNO9680200




150.       It is important that I first make reference to a document disclosed to me

   along with the Rule 9 request for my first statement. I was provided with a copy

   of an email of 27th November 2012 from Gareth Jenkins to Rachael Panter

   (POL00141471) in which he proposed an amendment to his statement in the

   case of R v. Wylie.

151.       It is evident from this email that in relation to the issue of remote access,

   Mr. Jenkins had suggested adding "...It is true that such access is possible;

   however in an analysis of data audited by the system, it is possible to identify

   any data that has not been input directly by staff in the Branch. Any such change

   to data is very rare and would be authorised by Post Office Ltd. As I have not

   had an opportunity to examine data related to this Branch, I cannot categorically

   say that this has not happened in this case but would suggest it is highly

   unlikely."

152.       Mr. Jenkins had set out his proposed amendment in a small font and I

   do not believe that I fully read the email. Miss Panter had responded to Mr.

   Jenkins on Mr Bowyer's behalf and referred to remote access in her emails, I

   had neither recognised nor understood the potential importance or significance

   of the phrase in terms of its relevance to other cases. I was not able to recall

   this email exchange when Mr. Clarke prepared his Advice of 27th March 2015

   entitled "Deloitte Report — questions for POL" (POL00021774).

153.       I have been asked to consider the Deloitte Horizon Desktop Review of

  Assurance Sources and Key Control Features, Draft for Discussion

   (POL00028062) dated 23rd May 2014 and Mr. Clarke's Advice of 27th March

   2015 "Deloitte Report — Questions for POL" (POL00021774).




                                   Page 40 of 57
                                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                                     WITN09680200




154.        I regret that I am unable to recall the telephone conversation with Rodric

    Williams and Andrew Parsons referred to in paragraph 6 of Mr. Clarke's Advice

    of 27th March 2015. In that paragraph Mr. Clarke noted that it was possible to

    `inject' a transaction unilaterally into the accounting records of a branch without

    the consent, approval or indeed the knowledge of the Subpostmaster and that

    an `injected' transaction could be a negative-value transaction.

155.        Mr. Clarke went on to note that it was not clear as to whether the

    `injected' transaction would be visible to the Subpostmaster or a defence expert

    witness. There was one recorded occasion upon which Fujitsu had used the

    procedure and there was no facility or capability to `edit' any existing transaction.

156.        In Paragraph 4 of his Note, Mr. Clarke explained that the material was

    potentially disclosable in cases where a convicted defendant had raised as part

    of his defence, either expressly or by implication, the suggestion that:

•   Post Office Ltd or some other third-party had manipulated, interfered with or

    otherwise compromised Horizon;

•   Horizon had created or was the victim of a system generated but inexplicable

    loss/entry/transaction; or

•   The defendant simply had no idea as to how the loss had arisen.

157.        It was Mr. Clarke's advice that it could not be determined whether the

    material was to be disclosed without further information. In Paragraph 8 he listed

    numerous questions in respect of which he sought answers in order to property

    advise. I had not previously considered the potential relevance of remote access

    to convicted Subpostmasters and given Mr. Clarke's seniority and experience

    did not disagree with his approach.




                                    Page 41 of 57
                                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                                   WITN09680200




  158.      I have been asked to consider an email of 5th May 2015 from Andrew

     Parsons to Simon Clarke and myself (POL00021781) to which a number of

     documents were attached. I am unable to recall reading this email and so it

    follows that I am unable to set out what my views were of the responses provided

     by Mr. Parsons. Similarly, I am unable to recall discussing this email with Mr.

     Clarke. I am therefore unable to say whether I felt that this impacted on the

     review of criminal cases which had been undertaken, whether it required

     disclosure or whether it was considered that more information was required.

  159.      I have also been shown a further email from Mr. Parsons of 11th May

     2015 (POL00151917) which was addressed to Simon Clarke and myself. It was

     entitled `Meeting with Cartwright King.' The body of the email reads "Meeting to

     discuss Balancing Transactions/Remote Access."

  160.      I regret that I do not have any recollection of this proposed meeting. I

     am unable to recall having any further involvement in understanding the nature

     and scope of remote access or with Project Zebra.

Ongoing Involvement

  161.      I have been asked to consider an email sent by Rodric Williams to myself

     on 30th June 2015 (POL00065434) which is part of a chain. One of the emails

     in the chain was sent by Rodric Williams to myself and Patrick Bourke on 26th

     May 2015. This particular email makes reference to Mr. Williams' understanding

     that `Simon' would be pulling together a list of cases in which disclosure would

     be required. This would have been a reference to Simon Clarke. Due to the

     length of time which has elapsed, am unable to describe any work which was

     carried out in relation to this email. It would appear from the chain that I was



                                    Page 42 of 57
                                                                                      WITNO9680200
                                                                                    WITN09680200




   awaiting a Disclosure Note from Simon Clarke.           I am unable to recall the

   conference with Brian Altman KC referred to.

162.      I have been provided with a copy of an email from Mr. Parsons of 15th

   July 2015 to myself and Simon Clarke (POL00029867). A document entitled 'Old

   Horizon' (POL00029868) appears to have been attached. I am unable to recall

   this email or the attachment. It follows that I am unable to describe any views

   which I had of the document, explain whether I gave any consideration to the

   disclosure of the document to convicted Subpostmasters or set out any advice

   provided by either myself or Simon Clarke.

163.       I have been asked to consider my email to Harry Bowyer of 21St August

   2015 (POL00092640). I note that Simon Clarke was also copied into this email.

   I indicated in my email that I would be unavailable for the weekly Horizon call

   scheduled to take place on 26 August 2015 and attached the notes of the

   previous call.

164.       I am unable to recall writing this email but note that I suggested that there

   were numerous issues raised on the previous call which were of concern. It

   would appear that I informed Mr. Bowyer that Andy Winn was still receiving

   requests to authorise FJ to correct problems - I used the initials 'FJ' to refer to

   Fujitsu. I also explained that I did not know whether Post Office Ltd had full

   visibility of the actions of Fujitsu and the ways in which they could correct branch

   data. I am unable to recall the internal view within Cartwright King of remote

   access at this point in time.

165.       I note that I sent an email to Andrew Winn on 30th March 2016

   (POL00140004) and referred to the 'bi-weekly conference call' on 23rd March

  2016. Upon reading this email I was reminded that at some point the Wednesday


                                   Page 43 of 57
                                                                                    WITNO9680200
                                                                                  WITN09680200




   weekly conference call became a fortnightly call. In my email, into which I copied

   Rodric Williams, Simon Clarke and Harry Bowyer, I made reference to the

   suggestion which had been made that a Transaction Correction which had been

   issued had been "undone" and the risk that Transaction Corrections may have

   similarly been issued to other branches which may have caused losses, possibly

   going back as far as 2005. I asked Mr. Winn to provide further information. Due

   to the length of time which has since elapsed I am unable to recall this email or

   whether I received a response. I am unable to recall whether I had any further

   involvement with the issue of potentially erroneous transaction corrections.

166.      I have been provided with a copy of an email of 25th April 2016 from

   Rodric Williams to Gavin Matthews and Andrew Parsons of 25th April 2016

   (POL00241079). I am unable to recall seeing this email. Similarly, I am unable

   to recall seeing the "Receipts/Payments Mismatch issue notes" (POL00241080)

   or the document "Correcting Accounts for "lost" Discrepancies" (POL00241081)

   which had been attached to it. I note that another document attached by Rodric

   Williams to his email was a note of Simon Clarke of 7th December 2015 relating

   to the case of disclosure in the case of Seema Misra (POL00241084). I can

   recall being informed that `disclosure was now a matter for the CCRC'.

167.      I have been asked to consider the email sent by Rodric Williams to

   Simon Clarke and myself on 7th September 2018 (POL00042015). I have also

   been asked to set out my recollection of the conference with Tony Robinson,

   Simon Henderson, Rodric Williams and Andrew Parsons. I can recall being in

   attendance at the conference with Simon Clarke but do not have access to any

   notes which I may have taken. I can recall that Simon Clarke explained his

   concerns about Mr. Jenkins' failure to refer to bugs in prosecution cases. I regret


                                   Page 44 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITNO9680200




    that I cannot recall any more detail about the conference itself. I do not recall

    reviewing the attachments to the email or reviewing any other documents in the

    GLO proceedings.

168.       I have been provided with copies of a number of documents and have

    been asked to say whether I have previously seen and/or read them:

•   Report by Detica dated 1st October 2013 "Fraud and Non-conformance in the

    Post Office; Challenges and Recommendations" (POL00029677). I do not

    recognise this report.

•   Report by Deloitte "Project Zebra — Phase 1 Report" marked as `Draft — for

    validation in advance of Board discussion on Wednesday 30th April'

    (POL00105635). I do not recognise this report.

•   Report by Deloitte "HNG-X: Review of Assurance Sources — Discussion Areas

    re: Phase 2 — Draft for discussion only." (POL00031384). I do not recognise this

    document.

•   Report by Deloitte "HNG-X: Review of Assurance Sources — Phase 1 — Board

    Update 13/5/14 — Subject to completion and delivery of our final report on 161h

    May 2014" (POL00031391). I do not recognise this document.

•   Report by Deloitte "HNG-X: Review of Assurance Sources — Board Update as

    at 16/5/14" (POL00029726). I do not recognise this document.

•   Deloitte Board Briefing Document 4       June 2014 (POL00028069). I do not

    recognise this document.

•   Second Sight Briefing Report — Part One dated 25th July 2014 (POL00004439).

    I do not recognise this document.

•   Second Sight Briefing Document — Part Two dated 9th April 2015

    (POL00021791). I do not recognise this document.


                                   Page 45 of 57
                                                                                  WITNO9680200
                                                                                WITNO9680200




•   "A Review on behalf of the Chairman of Post Office Limited Concerning the

    Steps Taken in Response to Various Complaints Made by Sub-Postmasters"

    dated 8th February 2016 (POL00006355). I do not recognise this document.

•   Sparrow - Interim Report — Draft for Discussion (POL00029984). I do not

    recognise this document.

•   Bramble — Interim Report — Draft for Discussion — 27th July 2016

    (POL00030009). I do not recognise this document.

    Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for Discussion — 31St October 2016

    (POL00031502). I do not recognise this document.

•   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for Discussion — 1st September 2017

    (POL00041491). I do not recognise this document.

•   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for Discussion — 3rd October 2017

    (POL00028070). I do not recognise this document.

•   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for Discussion — 15th December 2017

    (POL00029097). I do not recognise this document.

    Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for Discussion — 19th January 2018

    (POL00028928). I do not recognise this document.

169.       I have been asked with hindsight whether there is anything that I would

    have done differently in respect of the matters raised in my statement. Prior to

    advising Post Office Ltd in connection with cases being considered for

    prosecution, I had little relevant experience of prosecution work. I had not

    appreciated at the time that I had insufficient knowledge or experience to

    properly discharge my role. With hindsight I should have requested training,

    particularly with regard to disclosure. Similarly, with hindsight, I should have




                                  Page 46 of 57
                                                                                   WITNO9680200
                                                                                 WITN09680200




      realised that my work was not being adequately supervised - I am unable to

      recall any file reviews being undertaken in respect of this work.

  170.         One of the questions attached to the Request asked whether I thought

      that the file review process was adequately resourced. With hindsight, I do not

      consider that Cartwright King adequately resourced the work undertaken prior

      to the publication of the Second Sight Interim Report either. I believe that some

      files were transferred to Cartwright King's office in Nottingham in anticipation

      that the case would be prepared there, in a timely fashion under the supervision

       of in-house counsel, but external counsel were then instructed. I also take the

       view, again with the benefit of hindsight, that having multiple people working on

       a case file from different locations was unhelpful and made it more difficult, if not

       impossible, to maintain a proper overview. It would have been better for

       Cartwright King to have `ring-fenced' a dedicated team working from one

       location with supervision by a sufficiently experienced and competent director.

       This would undoubtedly have resulted in more appropriate requests being made

       for expert witness statements, the better identification of issues and the sharing

       of information.

Statement of Truth

I believe the contents of this statement
                                =-~._._._._._.. to be true.

Signed:           G      RO
                        _._._._._._._._._._._._.
Dated:                  fr             4           //f
              /,9




                                                         Page 47 of 57
                                                                              WITNO9680200
                                                                            WITN09680200




        Index to Second Witness Statement of Martin John Smith




No.   URN             Document Description                   Control Number

1     WITNO9680100    Witness statement of Martin Smith      WITNO9680100

                      of 21St November 2023

2     POL00099063     The Second Sight Interim Report        POL-0098646

3     FUJ00086811     Report of Helen Rose of 12th June      P01NQ0092982F

                      2013

4     POL00062162     Email of 5th July from Rodric          POL-0058641

                      Williams to myself and Simon

                      Clarke

5     POL00006365     Advice of Simon Clarke of 8th July     POL-0017633

                      2013

6     FUJ00084852     Peak Incident Management               POINQ0091023F

                      System Report

7     POL00006357     Advice of Simon Clarke of 15t1i July   POL-0017625

                      2013

8     FUJO0226331     Email of 1St October 2012 from         POINQ0232448F

                      Jarnail Singh to Gareth Jenkins

9     POL00142322     Transcript of telephone call with      POL-0143576

                      Gareth Jenkins on 28th June 2013

10    POL00083932     Note of Wednesday Horizon Call of POL-0080863

                      19th July 2013




                               Page 48 of 57
                                                                         WITNO9680200
                                                                       WITN09680200




11   POL00139731   Note of Wednesday Horizon Call of POL-0141432

                   24th July 2013

12   POL00066807   Advice of Harry Bowyer "Response POL-0063286

                   to the Interim Review of Cartwright

                   King's Current Process by Brian

                   Altman QC"

13   POL00139732   Note of Wednesday Horizon Call of POL-0141433

                   31St July 2013

14   POL00139745   Time Recording Note of 1St August     POL-0141446

                   2013

15   POL00325474   Email of 1St August 2013 from         POL-0172680

                   Jarnail Singh sent to myself and

                   Rodric Williams

16   POL00006799   Advice of Simon Clarke of 2nd         POL-0017591

                   August 2013 on the Duty to Record

                   and Retain Material


17   POL00139747   Email of Steven Gelsthorpe of 2nd     POL-0141448

                   August 2013

18   POL00139748   Attendance Note of 14th August        POL-0141449

                   2013

19   POL00083930   Note of Regular Call of 14th August   POL-0080861

                   2013.




                           Page 49 of 57
                                                                         WITNO9680200
                                                                       WITNO9680200




20   POL00006797   Letter of Susan Crichton of 16th      POL-0017615

                   August 2013 addressed to Andy

                   Cash

21   POL00039998   Email to Susan Crichton of 16th       POL-0036480

                   July 2013

22   POL00039993   Brief discussion of the CCRC's        POL-0036475

                   criteria

23   POL00039995   Draft response to CCRC                POL-0036477

24   POL00060715   Advice of Simon Clarke in the case    POL-0057194

                   of R v. Lynette Hutchings dated

                   19th July 2013

25   POL00040022   Advice of Simon Clarke in the case    POL-0036504

                   of R v. Samra dated 22nd July 2013

26   POL00133633   Advice of Simon Clarke in the case    POL-0138086

                   of R v. Wylie dated 23rd July 2013

27   POL00108042   Advice of Simon Clarke in the case    POL-0106209

                   of R v. Grech dated 23rd July 2013

28   POL00112905   Advice of Simon Clarke in the case    POL-0110310

                   of R v. Cleife dated 19th November

                   2013

29   POL00040095   Note prepared by Messrs. Bond         POL-0036577

                   Dickinson 'Civil Claims by SPMR's'

30   POLOO114253   Note of Advice of Mr. Clark of 12th   POL-0113180

                   September 2013




                              Page 50 of 57
                                                                         WITN09680200
                                                                       WITNO9680200




31   POL00006583   Brian Altman KC's Interim Review      POL-0017668

                   of Cartwright King's Current

                   Process

32   POL00066807   Response to the Interim Review of     POL-0063286

                   Cartwright King's Current Process

                   by Brian Altman QC by Harry

                   Bowyer

33   POL00006485   Note of a conference with Brian       POL-0017790

                   Altman KC on 9th September 2013

34   POL00139866   Note of a meeting on 9th              POL-0141042

                   September 2013

35   POL00006581   General Review of Brian Altman        POL-0017666

                   KC dated 15th October 2013

36   POL00112937   Brian Altman KC's `Review of Post     POL0110333

                   Office Ltd Prosecution Role' dated

                   19th December 2013

37   POL00040194   Carwright King Note "Observations     POL-0036676

                   and Analysis of the Cartwright King

                   Prosecution Review Process"

                   dated 5th December 2013

38   POL00133638   Advice of Simon Clarke in the case    POL-0138091

                   of R v. Hosi dated 1st May 2014

39   POL00145361   Email from Richard Boyce to Hugh      POL-BSFF-

                   Flemington of 11th July 2013          0004488




                             Page 51 of 57
                                                                         WITN09680200
                                                                       WITNO9680200




40   POL00113135   Advice Note of Simon Clarke dated POL-0110519

                   2' July 2014 "Securing Data for

                   Future Prosecutions"

41   POL00113136   Proposed Memorandum of                POL-0110520

                   Understanding

42   FUJ00000069   Contract HNG-X v9.0                   POINQ0006240F

43   POL00148748   Email from Jarnail Singh to Chris     POL-BSFF-

                   Aujard, General Counsel, dated        0007869

                   23rd July 2014

44   POL00148749   Advice of Simon Clarke — "Expert      POL-BSFF-

                   Report — Imperial College, London" 0007870

45   POL00040040   Draft Scope for computer experts      POL-0036522

                   dated 17th September 2013

46   POL00146545   Email to Jarnail Singh of 1st         POL-BSFF-

                   October 2013                          0005672

47   POL00210444   Agreement to Appoint an Expert        POL-BSFF-

                                                         0048507

48   POL00125569   Initial Review: Proposal for          POL-0130687

                   investigation into the integrity of

                   the Post Office Horizon Online

                   accounting system on 26th June

                   2014

49   POL00325919   Quotation for the cost of the Phase   POL-0173054

                   2 work of 8th July 2014




                            Page 52 of 57
                                                                          WITN09680200
                                                                        WITNO9680200




50   POL00148714   Email of Jarnail Singh to Andrew       POL-BSFF-

                   Parsons and others of 4th July         0007835

                   2014

51   POL00325918   Email on 16th September 2014           POL-0173053

                   from Andrew Pheasant to Jarnail

                   Singh

52   POL00325994   Email to Paul Cray at ICL of 29th      POL-0173105

                   January 2015

53   POL00318211   Email to Rodric Williams of 8th July   POL-BSFF-

                   2015                                   0156261

54   POL00139879   Meeting Report prepared by Simon       POL-0141055

                   Clarke

55   POL00104198   Email of 24th September 2015 to        POL-0103781

                   Laura Irvine

56   POL00168949   email to Andrew Parsons of 8th         POL-BSFF-

                   May 2014                               0132540

57   POL00148720   Advice of Simon Clarke of 15th July    POL-BSFF-

                   2014                                   0007841

58   POL00150390   Advice of Simon Clarke of 19th         POL-BSFF-

                   December 2014                          0009502

59   POL00023832   Advice of Simon Clarke of 16th         POL-0020311

                   February 2015

60   POL00141471   Email from Gareth Jenkins to           POL-0142856

                   Rachael Panter of 27 November

                   2012


                            Page 53 of 57
                                                                       WITNO9680200
                                                                     WITNO9680200




61   POL00021774   Advice of Simon Clarke of 27t11     POL-0018253

                   March 2015 entitled "Deloitte

                   Report — questions for POL"

62   POL00028062   Deloitte Horizon Desktop Review     POL-0023065

                   of Assurance Sources and Key

                   Control Features, Draft for

                   Discussion dated 23rd May 2014

63   POL00021781   Email of Andrew Parsons to Simon    POL-0018260

                   Clarke of 5th May 2015

64   POL00151917   Email of Andrew Parsons to Simon    POL-BSFF-

                   Clarke of 11th May 2015             0011029

65   POL00065434   Email of Rodric Willimas of 30th    POL-0061913

                   June 2015

66   POL00029867   Email of Andrew Parsons to Simon    POL-0026349

                   Clarke of 15th July 2015

67   POL00029868   Document - 'Old Horizon'            POL-0026350

68   POL00092640   Email to Harry Bowyer of 21st       POL-0092218

                   August 2015

69   POL00140004   Email to Andrew Winn of 30th        POL-0141180

                   March 2016

70   POL00241079   Email of Rodric Williams to Gavin   POL-BSFF-

                   Matthews and Andrew Parsons of      0079142

                   25th April 2016

71   POL00241080   Document — "Receipts/Payments       POL-BSFF-

                   Mismatch issue notes"               0079143


                           Page 54 of 57
                                                                         WITN09680200
                                                                       WITNO9680200




72   POL00241081   Document - "Correcting Accounts       POL-BSFF-

                   for "lost" Discrepancies"             0079144

73   POL00241084   Note of Simon Clarke of 7th           POL-BSFF-

                   December 2015 relating to the         0079147

                   case of disclosure in the case of

                   Seema Misra

74   POL00042015   Email of Rodric Williams to Simon     POL-0038497

                   Clarke and myself of 7th

                   September 2018

75   POL00029677   Report by Detica dated 1st October    POL-0026159

                   2013 "Fraud and Non-conformance

                   in the Post Office; Challenges and

                   Recommendations"

76   POL00105635   Report by Deloitte "Project Zebra —   POL-0104595

                   Phase 1 Report" marked as `Draft

                   — for validation in advance of

                   Board discussion on Wednesday

                   30th April'

77   POL00031384   Report by Deloitte "HNG-X:            POL-0028286

                   Review of Assurance Sources —

                   Discussion Areas re: Phase 2 —

                   Draft for discussion only."

78   POL00031391   Report by Deloitte "HNG-X:            POL-0028293

                   Review of Assurance Sources —

                   Phase 1 — Board Update 13/5/14 —


                             Page 55 of 57
                                                                        WITNO9680200
                                                                      WITN09680200




                   Subject to completion and delivery

                   of our final report on 16th May

                   2014"

79   POL00029726   Report by Deloitte "HNG-X:           POL-0026208

                   Review of Assurance Sources —

                   Board Update as at 16/5/14"

80   POL00028069   Deloitte Board Briefing Document     POL-0023072

                   4th June 2014

81   POL00004439   Second Sight Briefing Report —       VIS00005507

                   Part One dated 25th July 2014

82   POL00021791   Second Sight Briefing Document —     POL-0018270

                   Part Two dated 9th April 2015

83   POL00006355   "A Review on behalf of the           POL-0017623

                   Chairman of Post Office Limited

                   Concerning the Steps Taken in

                   Response to Various Complaints

                   Made by Sub-Postmasters" dated

                   8th February 2016

84   POL00029984   Sparrow - Interim Report — Draft     POL-0026466

                   for Discussion

85   POL00030009   Bramble — Interim Report — Draft     POL-0026491

                   for Discussion — 27th July 2016

86   POL00031502   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for   POL-0028404

                   Discussion — 31St October 2016




                            Page 56 of 57
                                                                        WITNO9680200
                                                                      WITN09680200




87   POL00041491   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for   POL-0037973

                   Discussion — 1St September 2017

88   POL00028070   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for   POL0023073

                   Discussion — 3rd October 2017

89   POL00029097   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for   POL-0025579

                   Discussion — 15th December 2017

90   POL00028928   Bramble — Draft Report — Draft for   POL-0025410

                   Discussion — 19th January 2018




                           Page 57 of 57
