                                                                                                                                 W I TNO4390100
                                                                                                                           WITNO4390100




                                                                                   Witness Name: Adam Crozier

                                                                                 Statement No.: WITN04390100

                                                                                          Dated: 28 February 2024


                                  POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY



                       FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF ADAM CROZIER




I, ADAM CROZIER, WILL SAY AS FOLLOWS:


 1.         I held the position of Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") of                                    Mail Group Ltd

                                                                                                Royal
            and was a director of Royal Mail Group Ltd and Royal Mail Holdings plc' from




 2.         I make this statement for the purposes of the Post Office Horizon IT Public

            Inquiry (the "Inquiry") and in particular, in response to the Inquiry's request

            for evidence under rule 9 of the Inquiry                              2006 in its letters to me of 31
                                                                         Rules




            August 2022 and 6 December 2023 (the "Requests"). I have received legal

            assistance from Cooley (UK) LLP in the preparation of this statement.


  3.        This statement is divided into the following sections identified by the Inquiry in

                  Requests:
            its




            3.1       Background;




'Unless otherwise specified, where I refer to "Royal Mail" in my witness statement, this is in respect of both Royal Mad Group
Ltd and Royal Mail Holdings pic.

                                                        Page 1 of 37
                                                                                  WITNO4390100
                                                                               WI TN04390100




     3.2   Corporate structure of Royal Mail;


     3.3   Role as CEO of Royal Mail;


     3.4   Government oversight;


     3.5   Oversight of Horizon;


     3.6   Bugs, errors and defects in Horizon;


     3.7   Prosecutions;




     3.9   The IMPACT programme; and


     3.10 Reflections,


4.   I have referred to documents disclosed by the Inquiry to me as part of the

     Requests, in the manner prescribed by the Inquiry's Updated Protocol on

     Witness Statements. I do not personally hold any relevant documentation from

     my tenure at Royal Mail, due to my obligations to return all IT and documents

     on my departure. Therefore, all documents referred to in my statement are

     documents already disclosed to the Inquiry and so I refer to their Unique

     Reference Number as assigned by the Inquiry.


5.   I have sought to respond to the Inquiry's requests in the order they have been

     raised. However, before turning to the specific questions, I would like to

     express my heartfelt sympathies to the individuals and families of the

     individuals who were so wronged and for whom justice has been denied for

     so long. I can only imagine the immense and continued suffering they must
                                                                                       W ITN04390100
                                                                                     W ITN04390100




     have faced over many years. I feel deeply sorry for those whose lives were

     ruined and I am grateful for the opportunity to assist in any way I can to help

     ensure that vital lessons are learnt. As I explain in this statement, it is a matter

     of huge regret for me that I was not aware of the tragic situation for Post Office

     sub-postmasters and their families during my time at Royal Mail.


6.   It is against this backdrop that I answer the Inquiry's questions to the best of

     my knowledge and recollection in light of the passage of time.


BACKGROUND


7.   Prior to my tenure at Royal Mail, I held a number of senior roles at the

     international marketing and advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising

     between 1988 and 1999, including that of Joint Chief Executive from 1995 to

     1999. Following that, I served as Chief Executive of the Football Association

     (the "FA") between 2000 and 2003. In both these roles, I led major commercial

     transformations which included stabilising and modernising the companies

     during significant periods of change. I believe my roles at Saatchi & Saatchi

     Advertising and the FA equipped me for my role at Royal Mail, in particular

     this experience of managing challenging transformations in times of instability.


8.   In 2003, I joined Royal Mail as CEO. I discuss my appointment and role further

     below. I stayed at Royal Mail for seven years until April 2010, when I joined

     the media group IN plc as CEO. I left ITV plc in June 2017, retiring at that

     stage from full-time executive roles.


9.   Since leaving ITV plc, I have held various non-executive Chairman roles,

     including with Stage Entertainment BV (until late 2018), Vue International


                                   Page 3 of 37
                                                                                    WITNO4390100
                                                                                  W ITN04390100




      (until 2020) and ASOS pic (until 2021). 1 was also a non-executive director of

      The Sony Corporation in Japan between June 2020 and December 2021.


10.   1 am currently the non-executive Chairman of Whitbread plc, Kantar Group Ltd

      and British Telecoms Group plc, I have held             roles since April 2017,




                                                      these
      February 2020 and November 20,21, respectively.


CORPORATE STRUCTURE OF ROYAL MAIL


11.   Whilst I have tried to address as best I can my recollection of the corporate

      structure of Royal Mail and the separation of much of the Post Office Limited

      ("POL") governance within this, I must stress that my responses are not in any

      way intended to detract from the fact that it is clear to me now that this

      structure did not help facilitate vital information regarding Horizon and the

      conduct of criminal proceedings reaching me or the board of Royal Mail as it

      should have done.


 Overview


12.   Royal Mail Holdings plc, which was directly owned by HM Government (the

      "Government"), was the ultimate parent company of Royal Mail Group pic

      (the "Group"). Royal Mail Holdings plc was set up as a public corporation (a

      form of "arm's length body"), to ensure that the Royal Mail letters and parcels

      business ("Royal Mail Letters") could be transformed and modernised to

      become a commercially focused company operating successfully in a

      competitive market.




                                   Page 4 of 37
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   WI TN04390100




13.   As Royal Mail was state-owned during my time as CEO, it had a single

      shareholder (the Government). For most of my tenure at Royal Mail, the

      shareholder body was referred to as the Shareholder Executive.


14.   Royal Mail was organised in a way which separated out parts of the business

      as operating units. I recall that these included Royal Mail Letters, Royal Mail

      Logistics (later subsumed into Royal Mail Letters), GLS, Parcelforce and POL.

      These operating units were not all separate subsidiaries; for example,

      although Parcelforce was a unit within the Group, it was not a subsidiary.


15.   POL, on the other hand, was a legally separate entity within the Group and it

      was run in a "semi-detached" way from the rest of Royal Mail. In particular,

      POL had a governance function that was largely separate to the Royal Mail

      governance system, with its own:


      15.1 Independent board (and its own non-executive directors) (the "POL

            Board");


      15.2 Chairman (Sir Michael Hodgkinson until 2008, and subsequently from

            2009 Donald Brydon, who became Chairman of the Group and also

            took on the role of Chairman of POL, as I believe was agreed with the

            Shareholder Executive);


      15.3 Until 2005, CEO David Mills, who reported to Allan Leighton, and

            subsequently          Cook         took over as Managing Director from
                           Alan




                                         who




      15.4 Executive management team (the "POL Executive Team");



                                   Page 6 of 37
                                                                                   WITNO4390100
                                                                                 WI TN04390100




       15.5 Risk and Compliance Committee;


       15.6 Regular meetings and information-sharing with Government and the

              Shareholder Executive; and


       15.7 Annual Reports_
                                       I



 16.   Importantly, the POL Chairman and POL CEO/Managing Director both sat on

       and represented.POL matters at the Royal Mail Holdings plc board (the "Royal

       Mail Board"). The POL CEO/Managing Director also sat on the Royal Mail

       management board (the "Royal Mail Management Board"), given the

       significant commercial agreement between Royal Mail and POL for the

       services POL provided in respect of the Royal Mail letters and parcels

       business.


 17.   As far as I can recall, there were no material changes     to




                                                                       the corporate

       structure of Royal Mail between 2003 and 2010.


The Royal Mail Board


 18.   As CEO, I was a director of Royal Mail Holdings plc, and attended all Royal

       Mail Board meetings.


 19.   The Royal Mail Board comprised of non-executive directors including the

       Chairman Allan Leighton, the Executive Deputy Chairman Elmar Toime,

       myself as CEO, Group Technology Director David Burden, Chief Financial

       Officer (CFO) Marissa Cassoni (and later, Ian Duncan), Group HR Director

       Tony McCarthy, POL Chairman Sir Michael Hodgkinson, and POL Managing

       Director (David Mills and later, Alan Cook). Royal Mail Board members, as
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   WI TN04390100




      well as Company Secretary Jonathan Evans, attended all Royal Mail Board

      meetings. Depending on the agenda item, direct reports and key team

      members would also attend to present on particular matters.


20.   The Royal Mail Board met roughly ten to twelve times a year. The agenda for

      each meeting would be determined by the Chairman, Allan Leighton, with

      input from me, the CFO and the Company Secretary. If the POL Chairman or

      POL CEO/Managing Director had anything to raise, this would also be

      included in the agenda, although I recall this was relatively infrequent, as most

      decisions could be made by the POL Board under delegated powers of

      authority without reference to the Royal Mail Board.


21.   My recollection is that the Royal Mail Board was very inquisitive and given the

      depth of knowledge and experience in corporate transformations, its members

      were very action-orientated, keen to identify and resolve problems, and very

      focused on improving compliance across the company. In preparing for this

      statement, I reviewed the following Group Annual Reports:


      21.1 Royal Mail Holdings plc Accounts 2002-2003;


      21.2 Royal Mail Holdings plc Accounts 2004-2005;


      21.3 Royal Mail Holdings plc Accounts 2006-2007; and


      21.4 Royal Mail Holdings plc Accounts 2008-2009.


22.   Whilst significant time has passed since I was involved with these processes,

      the Annual Reports reflect my recollection of the corporate governance

      processes in place at the
                                  time.




                                          Page 7 of 37
                                                                                               WITNO4390100
                                                                                             WI TN04390100




    23.     The Royal Mail Board subcommittees included the Audit and Risk Committee,

            the Remuneration Committee, the Nominations Committee and the Corporate




    24.     The following would be considered by the Royal Mail Board:


            24.1 Minutes of all the operating unit board meetings, including in no

                     particular order, POL, Royal Mail Letters, Royal Mail Logistics




                                                                                       and
                     Parcelforde, the Royal Mail Management Board and from time to time,

                     the GLS Board;


            24:2 The Group's monthly financial reports; and


            24.3 Other ad-hoc reports on various issues, such as on health and safety

                     and employee engagement.


    25.     In addition, all committee heads would provide verbal updates on any items of

            note from the respective committee meetings.


    26.     I have been asked by the Inquiry about the level of technical IT expertise of

            those attending the Royal Mail Board. The levels of expertise varied across

            board members, but I recall that all board members had some experience of

            the use of technology in modernising organisations they had led. David

            Burden, as Group Technology Director, had particular in-depth experience of

            transformations that involved technological modernisation and therefore had

            a specific role in advising the Royal Mail Board on technology as a specialist.


    Post Office Limited Board


2   do not recall the specific terms of reference for these subcommittees.
                                                  Page 8 of 37
                                                                                                                     W ITN04390100
                                                                                                                   W ITN04390100




27.   The POL Board was chaired by Sir Michael Hodgkinson., Allan Leighton, Sir

       Michael Hodgkinson, Elmar                                       2004) and David Mills (until 2005) sat




                                                Toime




                                                              (until
      on both the Royal Mail Board and the POL Board, and they would present

       POL issues at Royal Mail Board level. This                                 also the case with              Cook




                                                                            was




                                                                                                           Alan
      when he joined as Managing Director. Jonathan Evans                                          attended both the




                                                                                          also
              Mail and POL Board meetings. I did not attend POL Board meetings
      Royal




      (except                   roughly two or three occasions) and at no time was I a director of
                          for




      POL.


28.   1 believe the POL Board met around six                                eight times          year. I expect that it
                                                                       to




                                                                                           a
      would have been David Mills, and later Alan Cook who determined the agenda

      of the meetings. In addition to the POL Board, POL had their own Risk and

      Compliance Committee, which I do not recall ever attending.


29,   l have been shown various documents by the Inquiry where specific POL

      items were brought to the Royal Mail Board. The key matters which would be

      discussed at the Royal Mail Board level by the POL Executive Team or POL

      Board                         related to POL funding arrangements or changes (see, for
              typically




      example RMG00000032 — Royal Mail Holdings pie Board of Directors Meeting

      Minutes of 10 January 2006                              RMG00000039 — Royal Mail Holdings plc
                                                        and




      Board of Directors Meeting Minutes of 27 January 2010) including in respect

      of updates on negotiations with WHSmith and the Bank of Ireland

      (RMG00000029 — Minutes: Royal Mail Holdings plc Minutes of Board of

      Directors meeting of 06 February 2007). This is because the strategy and

      development of POL funding affected the solvency of the Group as a whole.




                                                Page 9 of 37
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   W ITN04390100




 Management Boards


 30.   As I referenced above, Royal Mail had its own Management Board which sat

       under the Royal Mail Board. The function of the              Mail Management




                                                            Royal
       Board was to oversee the day-to-day operation and execution of the business

       plan as agreed with the Royal Mai) Board, within delegated authority levels set

       by the Royal Mail Board. It was also responsible for allocating resources

       across the Group. The overall objective was to ensure that Royal Mail was

       modernised to enable it to compete commercially in an open and competitive

       market, improve quality of service for customers and meet the targets agreed

       with the regulator at the time, Postcomm, and with Postwatch, and to ensure

       that POL could become a sustainable public service. As                   of the




                                                                         part
       modernisation, there was an inherent recognition that there was a need for

       transformation and the Royal Mail Management Board was encouraged to

       seek, identify and resolve issues.


 31.   POL had its own management team (the POL Executive Team, referenced

       above) which sat under the POL Board in terms of structure. The POL

       Managing Directors (David Mills and later, Alan Cook) were during my tenure

       members of the POL Executive Team and also the Royal Mail Management

       Board, as mentioned above.


ROLE AS CEO OF ROYAL MAIL

Appointment


 32.   1 joined Royal Mail in February 2003, after my appointment as CEO by Allan

       Leighton, the Chairman of Royal Mail. Both the Royal Mail Board and the

       Government at the time approved my appointment. As background, at the time

                                    Page 10 of 37
                                                                                 WITNO4390100
                                                                               W ITN04390100




      of my appointment, Royal Mail had approximately 205,000 employees, and

       POL had approximately 14,000 employees and approximately 14,000 sub-

      postmasters (as set out in the respective Annual Reports).


33.   The CEO appointment process itself was run by the international executive

      recruitment firm Heidrick & Struggles. The initial interview process was

      conducted by Heidrick & Struggles, following which I was interviewed by Allan

      Leighton • Part of the process included meeting with a Government panel

      which had been set up to oversee the appointment, and current Group

      executives, including Jonathan Evans (the Company Secretary of Royal Mail)

      and Marissa Cassoni (the CFO of Royal Mail). I believe I also met Elmar

      Toirne, who had previously held the position of CEO at New Zealand Post

      Limited from 1993 to 2003, and who was joining the company as Executive

      Deputy Chairman at around the same time.


34.   I invested the first months of my role as CEO in understanding both Royal

      Mail's structure and also the postal industry itself. I spent time with key

      personnel in the business as part of my induction. At the same time, I also

      learnt from working with Elmar Toime, who had a wealth of experience in the

      postal Industry.




35.   Upon appointment, and in line with the governance structure in place at the

      time, Elmar Toime, David Mills and I split the role of our predecessor John

      Roberts, in the following way:




                                  Page 11 of 37
                                                                                           WITNO4390100
                                                                                         WI TN04390100




      35,1 Elmar Toime was appointed as Royal Mail's Executive Deputy

            Chairman and Chair of the Royal Mail Management Board. He was to

            focus on the Royal Mail Letters division, given his experience of the

            industry.


      35.2 I was responsible for Group strategy and modernisation, the Royal Mail

            subsidiaries, Royal Mail Logistics (later subsumed into Royal Mail

            Letters), Parcelforce, and Group functions such as finance and

            marketing.                Allan Leighton chaired the                 GLS; I then
                         Initially,




                                                                   board




                                                                           for
                   over the chairing of the GLS board in around 2006 or 2007.
            took




      35.3 David Mills continued in his role as CEO of POL.


36.   I believe the intention was that Elmar Toime would bring knowledge of the

      postal industry to the role, and I would bring marketing, consumer and

      transformation experience given my over eight years of experience at Saatchi

      & Saatchi Advertising and the FA.


37.   Elmar Toime, David Mills and I all reported directly to Allan Leighton. When

      Elmar Toime left in October 2004, I took over responsibility for Royal Mail

      Letters, and POL continued to be run by its then CEO, David Mills.


38.   My role at Royal Mail was to ensure we transformed the way we worked at a

      critical time for the company, with a particular focus on the modernisation of

      Royal Mail Letters which accounted for the vast majority of the Group, as well

      as introducing improvements in the way of working across the Group. Such

      improvements included ways to:




                                       Page 12 of 37
                                                                                    WITNO4390100
                                                                                  W ITN04390100




38.1   Develop, communicate and execute Group-wide strategy to modernise

                  transform the business, in order to deliver a world class Universal


       and
       Service for post in the UK;


38.2 Automate and modernise the Royal Mail Letters business to improve

        its efficiency;                    A




38.3 Transform the shape of the Royal Mail centre network;


38.4     Improve our operational efficiency, to deliver against the business°s

         Quality of Service targets in respect of the Universal Service Obligation,

       which had not been met for many years, and return the business to

             profitability         focus in this regard was on Royal Mail Letters,
                             (my




             Parcelforce, GLS), while maintaining the strong social function of Royal

             Mail;


38.5         Ensure that Royal Mail was able to build a parcel delivery business that

             could successfully compete with existing market players as online

             shopping increased and letter volumes declined;


38:8 Ensure that the Royal Mail. Letters business was fit to compete in
                                                                                    a




             market that was being opened up to competition by the postal regulator

             for the first time in its history;


38.7 On behalf of the Group, work with the POL Executive Team in respect

             of securing government funding for the network in order to ensure that:


              •       The Group remained solvent and a going concern; and
                                                                                     W ITNO4390100
                                                                                   WITNO4390100




                 •    The Government subsidy would, support a network size that

                      allowed us to meet the regulatory targets for proximity to a Post




39.   Additionally, when Elmar Toime left in late 2004, l took over the chairing of the

      Royal Mail Management Board qind, as mentioned. I also took on the role of

      CEO of Royal Mail Letters, which at that stage was continuing to fail its Quality

      of Service targets. Once we had addressed this and met the relevant targets,
                        e




      I appointed Ian Griffiths and subsequently Mark Higson to lead Royal Mail

      Letters.




      paragraph 38. 1 appreciated that whilst I could not have direct involvement in

      the day-to-day operations of the Group and functions would be delegated out

      to key individuals who I trusted were competent and responsible, these

      functions would need to be suitably supervised by me and by the Royal Mail

      Board. The same applied to the delegated responsibilities of the Board

      committees.


41.   As we were ultimately responsible for supervision, each of the directors had

      clear responsibilities for the area which they held expertise in, as well as



      far as I can recall:


      41.1 Oversight for criminal prosecutions and civil proceedings brought by

             POL would have sat with the POL legal team, and oversight for

             prosecutions brought on behalf ofthe rest of the Group would have sat

             with the Group legal team. I believe both legal teams would have

                                    Page 14 of 37
                                                                                             WITNO4390100
                                                                                           W ITN04390100




             ultimately been under the supervision of the Company Secretary,

             Jonathan Evans;


      41.2 Oversight of Group IT would have been under the supervision of the

             Group Technology Director, David Burden (who was already in the role

             when I joined Royal Mail) pnd from 2007 Robin Dargue


      41.3 Oversight of any accounting system would have been under the

             supervision of the Group CFO and Group Technology Director for any

             Group-wide systems, and the POL Technology Director, POL

             Operations Director and POL CFO for any POL-specific systems such

            as
                 Horizon-,




      41.4 Oversight of the Group's compliance with the            Relations Act 1978
                                                            Race




             would have been under the supervision of the Group HR Director,




                                                                                     who
            was a member of the Royal Mail Board. I have also been specifically

            asked about compliance with the Equality Act 2010, but as this did not

            come into force until after I left Royal Mail, I am unable to confirm.


42.   The Group Technology Director and the Group CFO both sat on the Royal

      Mail Board, and the Company Secretary attended these meetings and

      produced the minutes of these meetings. My oversight of the Royal Mail legal

      department and investigations undertaken by Royal Mail would have been

      through the reporting of the Royal Mail Company Secretary, and similarly, my

      oversight of IT was reliant on reporting by the Group Technology Director.


43.   POL had their awn legal and technology directors and teams. I fully trusted

      David Mills and subsequently Alan Cook, as well as other POL Executive


                                   Page 16 of 37
                                                                                            W ITNO4390100
                                                                                           WITN04390100




      Team members including Sir Michael Hodgkinson, to raise any significant

      systemic or reputational issues relevant to POL that would have had an impact

      on the Group at either the Royal Mali Management Board meetings or at the

      Royal Mail Board meetings.


44.   Overall, the Royal Mail Board hail to satisfy itself each year, through a




                                                                                  skills
      analysis, that it had -the knowledge, talent and experience required to run the

      business. I recall that, in addition, the Royal Mail Board's performance, as well

      as the performance of its committees was appraised annually, and feedback

      was given on areas for improvement. Alongside this, I (or the appropriate

      Royal Mail Board member) assessed each member of the management

      team's performance. The Royal Mail Board also appointed a number of

      independent non-executive directors. The Royal Mail Board was supported by

      external specialist advice and, as I set out below, there was regular

      communication with the Shareholder Executive.


45.   It is fair to say that there was a recognition by the Royal Mail Chairman and

      the Royal: Mal Board, as well as the Shareholder Executive, that Royal Mall

      was in need of significant reform and that the plan for transformation was not

      without difficulty due to the lack of modernisation and investment in the

      institution over many decades. Given this major transformation and the

      relationship with the Government as sole shareholder, I was very cognisant

      that openness and accountability were key


46.   The Royal Mail Board was used to receiving and dealing with difficult issues

      on a fairly regular basis as a result of the constant encouragement across the

      Group to openly and transparently raise issues as they arose; I encouraged


                                    Page 16 of 37
                                                                                            WITNO4390100
                                                                                          W ITN04390100




      all our leaders at every level to be open and transparent about the issues they

      faced in trying to deliver the Group transformation plan, as I considered this

      necessary and was keen to emphasise that issues should be identified,

      quickly communicated and directly confronted. This was so we could ensure

      our focus was on resolving matters to enable us to improve the performance

      of the company, particularly for consumers. For example, along with Allan

      Leighton, I regularly met with all Royal Mail Letters front line managers

      (approximately 2,500 individuals). We would use these sessions to get

      detailed feedback on what needed resolving or improving in our operations,

      and also to update our teams on strategy, changes and improvement on

      issues previously raised.


Group objectives


47.   Whilst there was a need for cashflow and profit           maintain the viability of the
                                                           to




      Group, there was recognition by the Royal Mail Board that this was not the

      Group's sole objective. It had a mixed set of objectives to be delivered in the

      Group's best interests, which I was mindful of. For instance, it was critically

      important that we delivered on the Universal Service Obligation and                 our
                                                                                    met




      Quality of Service targets; similarly, Post Office branches across the country

      had a social purpose and were critical to local communities, and there was a

      clear intention         there to be a branch within distance of every member of the
                        for




      public. While there was of course a need for efficiency in order to future-proof

      the company, particularly during a time when mail volumes were decreasing

      year on year (and the market was being opened up to competition for the first

      time), I did not consider there to be tension between objectives: it was not


                                        Page 17 of 37
                                                                                      WITNO4390100
                                                                                   W ITN04390100




      possible to invest in the network (and deliver on the Universal Service

      Obligation) without the generation of profit, but the generation of profit was

      precisely for this purpose.


48.   That is not to         that there were not a huge number of key priorities to be
                       say




      executed — as with any compar)y, particularly one going through a major

      transformation, there was an extensive list of priorities. However, my firm

      understanding was that the central objective at all times was to deliver a better

      Group for all stakeholders.


GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT


49.   Royal Mail (through myself as CEO, along with the CFO and Company

      Secretary) met with the Shareholder Executive on a roughly quarterly basis.

      During my tenure,               were also various meetings and interactions with
                              there




      other members of the Government. I believe Allan Leighton, as Chair of the

      Group, had meetings with the Shareholder Executive and various ministers

      from time to time, as well.


50.   The regular meetings with the Shareholder Executive involved Royal Mail

      receiving feedback and providing thorough reviews and updates on a variety

      of matters, including:


      50.1   Financial performance;


      50.2 Quality of Service performance;


      50.3 Progress on programmes of modernisation;


      50.4 Relationships with the unions; and

                                        Page 18 of 37
                                                                                   WITNO4390100
                                                                                 WI TN04390100




      91     tiwir     •   •   s   •



51.   As Royal Mail was state-owned, operating in a competitive and regulated

      industry and undergoing substantial modernisation, there was understandably

      considerable Government oversight and a need to ensure compliance with

      relevant legislation and guidance. During my tenure I considered the

      Government's oversight of the business to be sufficient and certainly (and

      understandably)-more than that of shareholders of a commercial public limited

      company.


52.   The Shareholder Executive rarely attended Royal Mail Board meetings save

      for when particular topics needed their specific input or approval as

      shareholders. These were generally focused around two key matters:


      52.1 Funding of POL (and related size of the network) and the impact on the

             solvency of the Group as a whole; and


      52.2 Future ownership structures (including potential employee ownership,

             which was at one stage mooted).


53.   1 do not recall discussing Horizon, or any problems with it, during my meetings

      with Government, or during meetings which were attended by the Shareholder

      Executive.


54.   My recollection is that the POL Board, through the POL Managing Director

      and POL Executive Team, met with Shareholder Executive and various

      departments and teams within Government even more regularly than the

      Royal Mail team did, given the importance of the Post Office network to

      Government policy and the services POL provided on behalf of Government

                                   Page 19 of 37
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   W ITN04390100




      agencies. Of the subsidiaries of the Group, only the POL team met separately

      with Government and the Shareholder Executive (the remainder of the Group

      was represented by the Royal Mail management team alone).


55,   1 do not know whether Horizon was ever discussed in these meetings.




56.   To the best of my knowledge, I believe the Horizon system was first piloted in

      1995 and rolled out in 2000 with ongoing development thereafter. The system

      was therefore relatively established when I arrived in 2003.


57.   1 recall this relationship would have been run by the POL Operations Team,

      supported by the POL IT Team. The Operations Team was led by Dave Miller

      (followed by Ric Francis and then Paula Vennells who joined the POL Board

      in early 2007), and I think that the IT Team was led by Dave Smith. I recall

      that the POL Finance Director, Peter Corbett, was also very involved in the

      business case for Horizon.


58.   It made sense therefore that the ongoing relationship with Fujitsu was owned

      and led by POL. All operational, development             execution meetings were,
                                                         and




      as far as I                 jointly held between POL management and the relevant
                    am




                         aware,




      Fujitsu team, and I was not involved in the implementation of the system or its

      operation or development.


59.   1 do not recall receiving any training or instruction on how to use the Horizon

      system, and I would not have expected to have been involved in this level of

      detail. I was of course aware that the system was an accountancy tool for POL.

      branches, but I did not have any meaningful understanding of the detail of its
                                                                                                   WITNO4390100
                                                                                                WI TN04390100




      technical operation, nor the detail of any of the specific #software releases.

      Were there to be a                           any technical input generally during my time as




                           need




                                             for
      CEO, I understood that that would have been requested from and given by

      David Burden, who was the Group Technology Director (and in later years, by

      his successor, Robin


                                  Dargue).
                                                       A


60.   I have already described in brief the corporate governance structures that

      were in place at POL, and that there were specific teams at POL who took

      ownership of the implementation and operation of the Horizon system. I would

      have retied on these structures for information to reach me.


The Horizon contracts


61.   1 believe the contract itself was negotiated and run by POL teams, who had

      ownership of the system itself, and I do not recall being briefed on the terms

      of the contract between POL and Fujitsu.


62.   1 have been asked by the Inquiry to consider the Second Supplemental

      Agreement between POL and Fujitsu, dated 24 September 1999

      (POL00090428). This preceded my tenure at Royal Mail by over three years,

      and I am not aware that this was ever brought to my attention. Similarly, the

      Inquiry has asked me to consider clause 5.3 of the Third Supplemental

      Agreement, dated 19 January 2000 (FUJ00118186). I was not aware of this

      clause or what it provided for in the relevant circumstances.


Operation of Horizon


63.   1 was not aware that there were any widespread issues of                         kind with the
                                                                                 any




      system, and I had no sense at that time from anyone involved with the Horizon

                                                   Page 21 of 37
                                                                                       W ITN04390100
                                                                                     W ITN04390100




       system, or the oversight of the system, that they believed there were any

       significant issues with its functionality. Whilst it has been over 13 years since

       I left Royal Mail, I certainly do not recall any such issues with Horizon being

       brought to my attention during the course of my time as CEO, by the POL

       Executive Team, POL Board, POL Risk and Compliance Committee or the

       National Federation of Sub-postmasters.


 64.   1 do not recall being briefed on issues with the Horizon system when I arrived

       at Royal Mail in 2003, and I was also not engaged with the detail of any

        upgrades to the Horizon system during my time at Royal Mail.


 65,   1 would have expected at the time that overall monitoring of Horizon and any

       issues raised by users during roll-out and implementation would be

       investigated and discussed by the joint working groups from POL and Fujitsu,

       with oversight from the POL Executive Team and POL Risk and Compliance

       Committee. Similarly, I believe the relevant POL teams would have met with

       the National Federation of Sub-postmasters on a reasonably regular basis and

        had the opportunity to discuss any relevant matters raised by its members

        during these meetings.


Working with Fujitsu


 66.   The Inquiry has referred me to slides of a PowerPoint presentation titled "The

        Story of Horizon and Horizon        line" which appear to be authored by a Dave
                                       on




        Smith (FUJ00098040). I had not seen these slides before their disclosure to

        me by the Inquiry and I note that they are dated September 2010 (some

        months following my departure) and also that they refer to a large period of

        time that preceded my tenure at Royal Mail.
                                     Page 22 of 37
                                                                                            WITNO4390100
                                                                                         WITNO4390100




67.   1 appreciate that this is a substantial slide deck, and that the Inquiry has

      directed me to a short subset of the same (in particular pages 107 to 112). 1

      have outlined the context behind this           of slides to the best of        ability




                                                                                 my
                                                set
      below, and I would be happy to assist should the Inquiry have any further

      specific questions.


      47.1   Relationship with Fujitsu: Whilst it is possible I may have come across

             some of the individuals from Fujitsu who are named in the slides, I do

             not recall doing so and therefore I am not in a position to comment on

             their relationship with POL. As to whether the slides provide an

             accurate representation of the Horizon project, given I was not involved

             in the project's implementation, roll-out or any subsequent upgrades, I

             am similarly unable to comment.


      67.2 Use of screens: I note that there is a reference to a request from Allan

             Leighton (the Royal Mail Chairman), supported by me, to put in place



             way of reaching our people; Allan, as an ex-retailer, was leading on this

             issue and I had no reason not to be supportive, particularly having seen

             its effectiveness in various other contexts.


68.   My involvement with individuals at Fujitsu was very limited and I only recall

      meeting Simon Blagden (non-executive Chairman at Fujitsu) on one occasion

      for a relationship building meeting. Given my involvement with Fujitsu

      personnel was so limited, I am not able to comment on the nature of the

       relationship between Fujitsu and POL.


POL Board minutes
                                     . f    f
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   WI TN04390100




69.   The Inquiry has provided me with minutes of a POL Board meeting on 20 April

      2006 (POL00021492). I believe that throughout my years at Royal Mail, I

      attended in total around two        three POL Board meetings. In this instance, I




                                     or
      believe I would have attended as there was to be an update on solvency and

      funding issues, which were relevant to the Group as a whole.


70.   I can see that during this POL Board meeting, a "Horizon S90 Release" was

      discussed ("POLB06/46"). I note that the minutes state that "The release

      continued to make good progress. There had been a number of issues in the

      pilot but these had been quickly diagnosed and resolved", which I expect

      would have suggested to me that the issues had been dealt with, although I

      do not recall the particular discussion that took place on this item.


71.   I have also noted that a further item relating to Horizon was discussed:

      "Horizon Next Generation" ("POLB06/52"), by Ric Francis and Dave Smith.

      Given the passage of time, I cannot recall the paper presented here by Ric

      Francis but the minutes would suggest that the business case appeared to be

      one in which Fujitsu offered cost savings and improved system efficiency in

      return for an increased length of contract. This would be reasonably normal

      practice and, given the level of investment involved, it appears that the POL

      Board was required to approve further investment to deliver the system and

      that Ric Francis had ownership of this item as the POL Operations Director.


72;   The Inquiry has also disclosed to me a number of minutes of Royal Mail Board

      meetings (RMG00000033 — Royal Mail Holdings plc Board of Directors

      Meeting Minutes of 27 April 2006; RMG00000030 — Royal Mail Holding Board

      of Directors Meeting Minutes of 2 August 2006 and RMG00000029), which


                                   Page 24 of 37
                                                                                       WITNO4390100
                                                                                    WI TN04390100




       show that the Horizon contract was brought to the Royal Mail Board, too. I

       believe it would have only been necessary for the Horizon contract to be

       presented to the Royal Mail Board and approval sought from the Royal Mail

       Board for delegated authority because of the size of the investment (this was

       normal practice for multi-year contracts that exceeded a certain level of

       investment), which was beyond the levels POL could approve (due to the

       financial position of the Group). This is reflected in the minutes.


BUGS, ERRORS AND DEFECTS IN HORIZON

Correspondence from Mr Bilkhu


 73.   1 have been shown correspondence by the Inquiry from Mr Bilkhu, who I

       understand was a sub-postmaster of Browburn Post Office (POL00001304 —

       Correspondence between POL and Mr Bilkhu between 15 November 2007

       and 1 December 2008). I understand from that correspondence that Mr Bilkhu

       wrote a letter addressed to me in June 2008 in respect of numerous significant

       issues he was experiencing with Horizon.


 74.   By way of background, I should clarify that in any given week I would receive

       hundreds of letters, and as a result I could not read every letter, and inevitably

       I would have to promptly pass on correspondence to others. My team would

       assist me with this. The letters would typically be split between:


       74.1 Customer complaints, which would be directed to the Customer

              Services team to be investigated and then responded to; and


       74.2 Correspondence or complaints that were relevant to other teams and

              functions, which would typically either be brought to my attention if
                                                                                               WITNO4390100
                                                                                         WI TN04390100




             serious, or sent directly to the most relevant teams within Royal Mail. If

             the question or matter related to POL, it would be passed on to the

             Managing Director of POL's office and ask them to ensure their teams

             investigated fully and responded directly to the person or group who

             had raised the issue. I trusted the team and fully expected that my

             direction would be followed and any investigation would be carried out

             fairly.


75.   The team with responsibility of the issue would set up a case file and would

      track the issue's progress up until its resolution.


76.   1 have read the correspondence provided by the Inquiry from Mr Bilkhu. Given

      the passage of time, I have no recollection of reading this correspondence




                                                                                          at
      the time, however I appreciate it is possible I may have done so. I expect that

      given its nature, it would have been passed on to the office of the POL

      Managing Director (at the time, Alan Cook), who wilt have been asked to


                                                                                  look
      into Mr Bilkhu's matter comprehensively and to provide Mr Bilkhu with a

      response as soon as was possible. The same approach will have been

      followed as with any such correspondence. It would have been the POL team

      who assigned the case to Michele Graves.


77.   1 do not believe I would have seen the response at the time, as POL was

      dealing with it. I did not typically get involved in responses that were sent;

      given my role, it would not have been possible for me to review each response

      prepared and sent        customers or partners. However, I would have certainly
                          to




      fully expected the respective teams to get to the bottom of any issue and that




                                     Page 26 of 37
                                                                                       WITNO4390100
                                                                                     W ITN04390100




       those who raised any issues, such as Mr Bilkhu, would •have been treated

       fairly.


78.    Reading this correspondence now in the context of recent judicial findings and

       with a greater understanding of what happened, I offer my utmost sympathy

       to Mr Bilkhu for the serious injustice I now understand he must have endured

       over a substantial period of time, and the impact it must have had on his life

       and that of his family.


 79.   1 do not recall receiving other letters from sub-postmasters on this topic.


 80.   I note that the Inquiry has also separately asked that I consider a document

       titled "Initial Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme" which relates to Mr

       Bilkhu (POL00034875). I am not able to comment on this as I was not involved

       in the mediation scheme which it appears to relate to.


Computer Weekly article of May 2009


 81,   l have been asked to consider an article titled "Bankruptcy, prosecution and

       disrupted livelihoods — Postmasters tell their story" published in Computer

       Weekly on 11 May 2009 (POL00041564). While I did of course do my best to

       monitor press updates in the national media, I do not believe I read this article

       at the time I was at Royal Mail


 82.   As outlined above, I was not aware of any widespread issues with the

       functionality of Horizon during my tenure.


PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                                        WITNO4390100
                                                                                                      W ITN04390100




83.   Generally speaking, responsibility for criminal prosecutions which POL

      brought would have sat under the relevant POL Executive Team members

      under the oversight of the POL Executive Team as a whole, the POL Risk and

      Compliance Committee and POL Board. Were there any major or systemic

      concerns, I would have expected these bodies to have reported or highlighted

      any such issues to                of the following, the Royal Mail Board, the Company
                                  all




      Secretary, the Royal Mail Management Board and the Shareholder Executive.

      As far as I am aware, I was not alerted by any party in the POL governance

      system that there was a concern over a high number of prosecutions against

      sub-postmasters, the conduct of civil proceedings relating to sub-postmasters

      or any widespread concerns over the performance of the Horizon system.


84.   In response to the questions I have been asked by the Inquiry, I should add

      that I do                  having involvement in or knowledge of the oversight of the
                  not




                        recall




      investigations and prosecutions brought by POL against sub-postmasters,

      either for theft, fraud and false accounting for alleged shortfalls in branch

      accounts, or for the recovery of such alleged shortfalls through the use of             civil




      proceedings.


85.   As far as I can recall, I also did not                 knowledge of or involvement in the
                                                     have




      policies, guidelines and practices followed by POL when pursuing a                    action
                                                                                    civil




      against a sub-postmaster or in the investigation of alleged offences and

      bringing of criminal prosecutions. The same is true for the conduct of audits of

      the sub-postmasters' branch accounts, and the practices and policies which

      POL adopted in respect of suspending or terminating sub-postmasters'




                                             Page 28 of 37
                                                                                             W ITN04390100
                                                                                           W ITN04390100




       contracts. I was not aware of any systemic issues in respect of these matters,

       and I cannot recall these being brought to                attention.




                                                            my
86.    The Inquiry has also requested that I clarify the extent to which (a) I passed

       on information about any concerns as to the reliability of data produced by the

       Horizon IT system and (b) I fnanaged or arranged the distribution of

       information relating to the reliability of the Horizon IT system within POL. I was

                aware of any widespread concerns regarding the reliability of the Horizon
       not




       IT system, and therefore was not in a position to manage any information in

        respect of it.


87.    To the best of my knowledge, I do not recall reports of the number of

        prosecutions being brought by POL against sub-postmasters being escalated

       to me, nor the fact that there were systemic issues impacting the Horizon

       system. I                  do not recall hearing from any level of the organisation that
                      similarly




       there were prevalent concerns with either such prosecutions, or any

       widespread issues with the Horizon system.


Inquiry Discosure


 88,    1 was directed by the Inquiry to consider the Royal Mail Holdings plc Report

        and Accounts for the year ended 29 March 2009 (the "Report')

        (FUJ00116857).


 89.    1 would have considered the contents of the Report carefully and would have

         believed that there were no material omissions or misleading statements

        within it. I would have also been fully aware that before the draft version of the

             Report was shared with me, the CFO's team, supported by the Corporate


                                            Page 29 of 37
                                                                                    WI TN04390100
                                                                                  WI TN04390100




      Affairs team, would have gone through a number of iterations, including

      reviews by the senior management team to ensure that their views of risk were

      being properly expressed.


90.   The "Principal Risks and Uncertainties" included in the Report would have

      been carefully assessed (both irY scale and impact), by all relevant parties, to

      represent the key risks for the Group, following a carefully formulated risk

      framework.


91.   The Report outlines how risk was controlled internally (see page 35 of

      FUJ00116857). This aligns with my recollection of the risk management

      controls in place during my tenure. For example, a key way in which risk was

      controlled was through the work of the Audit and Risk Committee, which was

      assisted by internal and external auditors. It was in this forum that auditors

      would report any Group risks. The Audit and Risk Committee also regularly

      reviewed the Group's risk profile to ensure the Royal Mail Board spent

      sufficient time considering major risks facing the Group and the procedures in

      place for managing them.


92.   The Inquiry has also provided me with meeting minutes of the Royal Mail

      Holdings plc Audit and Risk Committee on 10 November 2008

      (RMG00000001). I note that there is a reference within it to the "POL Risk &

      Compliance report" (ARC08/41), presented by Peter Corbett (POL Finance

      Director) and Keith Woollard (POL Head of Compliance). In particular, at point

      (e), the following is noted: "Losses: POL's forecast for losses from controls

      and compliance failures for 08109 was £17.25m. This was broadly in line with

      previous years and in our plan for this year, but within that losses through


                                   Page 30 of 37
                                                                                          WITNO4390100
                                                                                      WI TN04390100




       physical crime (robberies etc} were down whilst the discovery of sub

       postmaster fraud had increased".


93.    The item says that losses were "broadly in line with previous years" and

       importantly, that steps had been taken to address conformance and

       compliance (at point (f), in fespect of the "POL Network Efficiency

       Programme"). I would have therefore had no reason to believe that this was

       not being sufficiently addressed within the POL governance structures and

       that it required intervention at the Group level, from the           Mail Board,




                                                                    Royal
CIVIL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST MS WOLSTENHOLME


94.    1 have been asked by the Inquiry to consider three documents relating to the

               proceedings against Ms Wolstenholme who I now know was the sub-
       civil




       postmaster at the Cleveleys Post Office (POLOO142503 — Email

       correspondence from Rod lsmay to Donna Parker and others between 2 April

       2004 and 26 July 2004; POL00118229 — Advice on Evidence and Quantum

       by Mr Brochwicz-Lewinski dated 26 July 2004; POLOO120833 — Sheet on

       "Risk-Opps" in Excel spreadsheet). I do not recall being aware of these

       proceedings at the time or having seen the documents which the Inquiry has

       now provided to me.


 95.   To provide context, individual legal cases from any business unit would not

           have been escalated to the Royal Mail Board level, unless the matters in

       question represented matters which the respective heads of teams considered

       to be systemic or wider issues that the Royal Mail Board needed to be

        appraised of,
                                                                                         WITNO4390100
                                                                                       WI TN04390100




THE IMPACT PROGRAMME


96.   I have been asked to confirm my involvement with the design and

      implementation of the IMPACT programme. I do not recall having any

      involvement with this, and I also cannot recall the Royal Mail Board (or the

      POL Board) discussing the fact tat sub-postmasters would no longer be able

      to place disputed discrepancies in a local suspense account and                into a




                                                                              roll
      new trading period as a result of the IMPACT programme.


REFLECTIONS


97.   1 have                   concerned by what I have read regarding the findings of
               been




                      deeply




      wrongful convictions by POL and the immense struggle so many have

      endured in seeking justice.


98.   I have sought to be as helpful as possible to the Inquiry in reflecting on what

      could have been done differently and have shared my insights below.


      98.1 Corporate structure: I did not have cause to question the corporate

               structure of Royal Mail during my tenure. As context, this was a

               challenging time during which Royal Mail (including Royal Mail Letters,

               Parcelforce and GLS) needed to adapt to become a commercial

               company in a market that was rapidly being exposed to competition on

               all fronts. It therefore seemed appropriate to me that this required

               commercial leadership from individuals with in-depth experience of

               transformations and modernisation. POL had a different set of

               objectives and priorities, given its recognised role as the "front window"

               of Government services. Additionally, this explained why POL was


                                       Page 32 of 37
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   W ITN04390100




      funded by Government subsidies to support the network and therefore

      why there was a need for the Shareholder Executive to be kept

      informed by the POL team on how this public funding was being utilised

      and how network changes were progressing. It made sense at the time

      that POL had a largely separate governance function, and that those

      on the POL Board had particular expertise and capabilities in working

      with the Shareholder Executive to deliver the recognised objectives.

      With hindsight, however, I believe that the corporate structure in place

      at the time did not encourage the escalation of key information on

      Horizon and prosecutions reaching me or the Royal Mail Board as it

      should have done.


98.2 Transparency and due process: During my tenure, the Group was

      undergoing a major transformation and consequently, there was a clear

      understanding from the Royal Mail Board downwards that there was a

      lot to be addressed, and that this would require openness and

      transparency about any problems that existed or that arose. My view

      was and has always been that the more openly problems are raised

      and confronted, the better chance we have of                           While the
                                                            fixing




                                                                     them.




      culture improved over time within Royal Mail Letters, Parcelforce, GLS

      and the Group generally, it is now clear that there must have been a

      marked lack of transparency within POL which meant that serious

      failings at POL took far too long to surface        senior management.
                                                     to




98.3 Horizon system: As I mentioned above, during my time at Royal Mail, l

      do not recall any evidence being raised at the Royal Mail Board level


                            Page 33 of 37
                                                                                       WITNO4390100
                                                                                     W ITN04390100




                 that suggested a widespread issue with Horizon was impacting the

                 POL network and sub-postmasters. In the absence of such evidence,

                 it would therefore have been difficult for the Royal Mail Board to

                 challenge POL's decision-making. However, over the last decade, it

                 has become reasonably standard practice, or at least common, to

                 introduce third party validation partners to assess the performance of

                 largescale IT programmes. With hindsight, this is something that POL

                 should have done at an earlier stage.


 99.      If there are any additional documents that shed any further light on the issues

          the Inquiry is reviewing, I would be very willing to review correspondence and

          assist the Inquiry further in that regard.


Statement of Truth


I believe the content of    f s statement,-to_be,true.



Signed:   -J        G RO
Dated: 28 February 2024




                                         Page 34 of 37
                                                                                     WITNO4390100
                                                                                   WI TN04390100




Index to First Witness Statement of Adam Crozier

 No.        URN             Document Description                   Control Number

    1.      RMG00000032     Royal Mail Holdings plc Board of VIS00007440

                            Directors Meeting Minutes of

                            10/01/06
                                       I

    2.      RMG00000039     Minutes:               Mail Holdings plc VIS00007447




                                           Royal
                            Board of Directors Meeting

                            Minutes of 27/01/10

    3.      RMG00000029     Minutes: Royal Mail Holdings plc VIS00007437

                            Minutes of Board of Directors

                            meeting of 06/02/2007

    4.      POL00090428     Annex to Second Supplement             POL-0087397

                            Agreement

       5.   FUJO0118186      POCL and ICL Pathway 'Third            POINQ012435OF

                             Supplemental Agreement'

    6.      FUJ00098040      Presentation on Horizon and            POIN00104211F

                             Horizon Online

       7.   POL00021492      Minutes: Minutes of POL Board          POL0000025

                             meeting on 20th April 2006

       8.   RMG00000033      Minutes: Royal Mail Holdings plc VIS00007441

                             Board of Directors Meeting

                             Minutes of 27/04/06

       9.   RMG00000030      Minutes: Royal Mail Holding            VIS00007438

                             Board of Directors Meeting

                             Minutes of 02/08/06


                                 Page 36 of 37
                                                                                   WITNO4390100
                                                                                 WI TN04390100




10,   POL00001304   Documents consisting of 'tab 3' - VIS00002318

                                   part of            bundle -




                    possibly




                                              wider
                    relating to Bowburn Post Office

11.   POL00034875   Post Office Initial Complaint                 POL-0031810

                    Review and Mediation Scheme

                    Investigation report (Mr Rajinder

                    Bilkhu)

12.   POL00041564   Bankruptcy, prosecution and                  i POL-0038046

                    disrupted livelihoods -

                    Postmasters tell their story;

                    reported by Rebecca Thomson

13.   FUJO0116857   Report and Accounts Year                     POINQ0123028F

                    ended 29 March 2009 including

                    Post Office revenue

14.   RMG00000001   Minutes: Royal Mail Holdings plc VIS00007409

                    Audit and Risk Committee

                    minutes of 10/11/08

15.   POL00142503   Email from R Ismay to D Parker, POL-BSFF-

                    M Talbot and others; 'Legal                  0001779

                    case - Cleveleys PO 153 405

                    Mrs J Wolstenholm'

16.   POL00118229   Advice on Evidence and                       POL-0120149

                    Quantum by S.A Brochwicz-

                    Lewinski in POCL v Julie




                               Page 36 0137
                                                                   WITNO4390100
                                                               WI TN04390100




                    WolStenholme, Case No,

                    CR101947

17.   POL00120833   IT Spend - P12 Reconciliation    POL-0126849

                    with Next Steps; Risk-Opps and

                    Forecast Analysis.




                       P990 37 of 37
