Witness Name: Jeremy Peter Folkes
Witness Number: WITN0597
Statement Number: 1

Exhibits: WITN0597_01/1-50

Dated: 07 September 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY
FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF JEREMY PETER FOLKES

|, Jeremy Peter Folkes, will say as follows:

1. This is my response to the Rule 9 Request Number 1 dated 26" July 2022 from
the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry, regarding Phase 2 of that Inquiry. It covers my
involvement in the Procurement of the initial Horizon service from Pathway
between 1994 and 2000. During this period, | was employed by the IT Department

of The Post Office but effectively seconded to Post Office Counters Ltd (POCL).

Professional Background

2. | have been asked to set out a brief professional background. | have worked in
information technology, and specifically software development, for my entire
career, from 1978 to 2021. This included working pre-University for the R&D unit
of British Gas, and then after graduating working for Logica (a then major UK
software house) on software projects for major ‘blue-chip’ companies including
Shell and IBM. _ In these jobs | had various technical roles as developer, designer
and latterly team leader. | hold a BA Hons in Mathematics from University of

Oxford.

Page 1 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
3.

| joined the Post Office in 1987 and worked primarily on projects in Post Office
Counters throughout my 13 years there. Before BA/POCL (Horizon), these
included ECCO+ (Electronic Cash Register at Counters — Plus) which was a cash
account/balancing system specifically aimed at Crown (not Sub) offices, and the
APT (Automated Payments Terminal) which was a payment-accepting terminal
designed for use by Subpostmasters in otherwise non-automated offices, to
process the emerging bill payment/meter top-up business which could not be done

manually.

| was also involved when | first joined the PO on the Thames Valley Project in
1987, which was a pilot of full automation of counters in a specific geographical
region (and which was never rolled out nationally); my role here was fairly junior
but | mention this project as | believe it influenced POCL’s future decisions on

automation.

| joined the BA/POCL Programme in 1994 where | worked through its various
guises until | left The Post Office in early 2000. | was dedicated to the Programme
throughout this time apart from a brief period in late 1998 when | was involved
back on the APT2000 project (advising on reactivating production of the APT to
mitigate the delays in the Horizon rollout), plus some minor involvement in the

PO's Y2K work.

On leaving The Post Office in 2000, | continued to work in postal counter
automation internationally, joining a start-up company (Anshe Ltd) based in

Dublin, which was then subsequently acquired by Escher Group Ltd. | worked for

Page 2 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
Escher on counter automation projects worldwide, involved with around 20 Posts

big and small over that period, until my retirement in 2021.

Background to Involvement in BA/POCL Programme

7.

| have been asked to set out the background to my involvement in the Pathway
Project/Horizon IT System. | joined the BA/POCL Programme, which morphed
into the Horizon Programme, in 1994. | believe | was asked to join given my
background as a technical person with counters experience from my time on
ECCO+ and the APT projects, and although employed by the Post Office IT
Department | was fairly well known around POCL having worked on their projects

for around seven years.

Note that the BA/POCL Programme was run, in the Post Office, by POCL itself
and not by the IT Department. A number of people from PO IT were seconded
over the course of the Programme, but this was a POCL initiative and was not
outsourced to or managed by PO IT. As we will see it was far bigger than just an

IT system.

Background to the BA/POCL Programme

9.

Before moving onto my involvement in the project it is worth outlining the
environment in which the procurement was being performed. Firstly, this was a
procurement not of a system, but of services to be provided on a PFI basis by the
selected Service Provider (SP) for a period of time (5 or 7 years | think). The PFI
required the Service Provider to fund the development of the constituent systems

and services, provide and install hardware in offices, and to then run the systems

Page 3 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
10.

11.

and services, and additionally to take on project risk, with payment only being
received on a “per transaction” or “per customer” basis once deployed. There
was also the concept of fraud risk transfer (specifically around benefits payments)
to the Service Provider, so that they were expected to take on the risk if payment
fraud occurred. This was a lot more complicated than simply procuring an IT

system. [I will talk about the effect of PFI in detail later].

Secondly this was a joint procurement between the BA (Benefits Agency) and
POCL as Contracting Authorities, for a complex set of services — for POCL,
automation of the counter network, including a new automated benefit payment
services for their client (the BA); for BA, automation of benefit payments, including
payment in Post Offices (to be performed by POCL staff and agents, under a
POCL-BA contract) but also including card issuance etc outside of POCL etc.
The Programme also involved the SSANI (Social Security Agency) in Northern
Ireland, who | believe were a separate agency, but were generally represented on

the Programme by BA.

As a result of this some requirements (and therefore solutions) were for BA, some
for POCL and some for BA and POCL jointly; there were to be three contracts with
the Service Provider (one with BA, one with POCL and one overarching one with
BA/POCL jointly). |The overall landscape was subdivided into multiple “services”

(e.g. EPOSS was the EPOS Service, APS was the Automated Payments Service,

OPS was the Office Platform Service, and so on) with similar complexity on

contractual ownership and interest between BA and POCL. There were also

complexities around the three-way relationship regarding ownership of data and

Page 4 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
12.

13.

for financial settlement between BA and POCL for benefits paid out at the counter

through the proposed system.

The BA/POCL Programme was established in its own offices in Terminal House,
near Victoria Station in London, and at peak | believe had around 100/150 staff —
from BA and from POCL/PO, consultants from a variety of consultancy firms, and
various contractors. | remember PA Consulting, French Thornton and later on
Andersen Consulting (now Accenture) being involved, plus Kermon, a specialist
procurement consultancy. —_| believe the Programme was initially headed by a
representative from BA (Andrew Stott), but the hierarchy had representatives from
both sides. Teams were established with members from both organisations (and
at a working level relationships were good despite having quite different

backgrounds).

The team in Terminal House was known as the PDA (Programme Delivery
Authority). The PDA was effectively the group which sat between the Supplier(s)

and the two Sponsors (BA and POCL).

Procurement of BA/POCL Service (“Horizon”)

14.

| have been asked to describe and explain my involvement in the procurement of
the Horizon IT System. My involvement in the BA/POCL Programme covered a
number of phases over a period of over 5 years. At the point | joined there were
five prospective service providers (BT, CardLink, EDS, IBM, and Pathway) who
had responded to the original OJEC notice and been allowed to tender. The five

original Service Providers had described their solutions in their responses to the

Page 5 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
15.

16.

17.

18.

original tender. Each SP had provided extensive responses, with details of their

overall solutions together with responses to individual requirements.

The first major event for me was the detailed evaluation of these five initial
responses (primarily a paper review exercise from what | remember), performed
at the Post Office Conference Centre at Rugby (and hence known as the “Rugby
Evaluation”) over several days, which resulted in BT and EDS eventually being

eliminated.

By July 1995, following the Rugby evaluation, the three candidate service
providers were CardLink (a consortium including UNISYS and Andersen
Consulting), IBM (as a single company) and Pathway (at that time a consortium)
and they were invited to go forward to the next stage. Note that to reach this point
all three had had to meet certain “Pre-ITT hurdles”, so that all of them were meant

to be credible.

The Procurement moved into what was called the Demonstrator Stage. This took
place during the second half of 1995, and was intended to allow the SPs to clarify
their understanding of requirements, to allow us to explore the proposed solutions,
and to identify and mitigate risks against each supplier, prior to them submitting
their formal ITT responses. “Objectives of the Demonstrator Stream”

(WITN0597_01/01, WITN05970101) contains an extract of the objectives.

A number of Demonstrator Streams were set up, and | was Group Leader

responsible for the POCL Infrastructure; we gave each SP one day a week over a

Page 6 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
19.

20.

21.

number of weeks in late 1995. It was planned to give them equal time and be as
fair as possible. This process generated input to and updates to the Service
Provider Risk Register (SPRR), as well as queries back to the Requirements
teams. In December 1995 a number of site visits were organised where

necessary to gain information on the proposals, for each of the SPs.

A summary of the POCL Infrastructure Demo Stream is attached - “POCL
Infrastructure Demo Strand - Summary of Demonstrator Activity”
(WITNO0597_01/02, WITNO5970102). | discuss this is more detail in the context

of Pathway later.

A formal ITT was issued in early 1996 to the three candidate SPs, and their paper
responses were then evaluated in February/March 1996, in an exercise
codenamed Amazon. This involved both a quantitative financial and risk transfer
evaluation (“Contracts Stream”) and a qualitative business/technical evaluation
(‘Demo Stream”), based on pre-defined “Value Factors”, together with other

streams looking at Partnerships etc.

This was a very formal exercise, with detailed scoring against pre-defined criteria,
involving the teams working away offsite for a very intensive two-week session,
and | even remember the suppliers being given codenames (Tom, Dick and Harry)
so that outside experts could be used without fear of bias. | The process is
described in detail in “Supplier Score in Respect of Value Factors”
(WITN0597_01/03, POL00031154). It is worth stressing that the Demo Stream

and the technical evaluation was only one part of the overall process. The entire

Page 7 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
22.

23.

24.

process was very strictly managed for fairness and compliance with procurement

law, overseen by observers from each Contracting Authority.

In addition to the Demo Stream and the Evaluation, | was involved at various times
in assisting with the requirements (leading to the Statement of Service
Requirements or SSR), assisting the Contracts team with requirements, and much

liaison with POCL.

Requirements were meant to originate from the Sponsor organisations (with the
PDA then tasked with delivery), but we in the PDA had to ensure that they were

coherent and workable (and not conflicting) and be able explain them to the SPs.

| have been asked to outline my understanding of the objectives of POCL in
procuring the Horizon IT System. My understanding of the objectives for POCL,
at a high level, of the procurement of the BA/POCL Service were as follows. The
first objective was to automate its network of 20,000 outlets/40,000 counters,
noting that at that point only around 600 Crown offices performed automated
accounting using ECCO+, and only around 7,000 offices could do Automated
Payment transactions with the APT or ECCO+. All other transactions were
performed manually, and paper cash accounts submitted weekly to Chesterfield,
and without automation it could not take on new business. POCL wanted and
needed a platform on which to build new business, much of which required

automation (e.g. banking).

Page 8 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
25.

26.

27.

The second objective was to retain the business of the Benefits Agency in
payments of benefits and pensions over the counter, which amounted to a
significant amount of POCL’s revenue and footfall. | This required both a new
automated Benefit Encashment Service (BES) for POCL at the counter, but also
for there to exist an entire “back end” procured for BA under the Programme for
handling card issuance, payment management, helpdesks, fraud risk
management etc with which BES would interact. These BA parts included the
CMS (Card Management Service), PAS (Payment Authorisation Service), and

FRMS (Fraud Risk Management Service).

POCL were scared that the BA would take their business elsewhere (as they
eventually did, into the banking system) which would dramatically reduce POCL’s
revenue stream, and that this would threaten the whole future of POCL (and in
particular the role of POCL as the front office of government). So for POCL the
success of the overall Benefits Payment Service was as important as the other,

POCL-centric, services.

| have been asked to explain why POCL decided to procure the Horizon IT System
under the Private Finance Initiative. The BA/POCL Programme was procured
under PFI rules, and | believe PFI compliance was a requirement within the
Evaluation process (as described in “Final Evaluation Report’, WITN0597_01/04,
POL00028152). By the time | joined the Programme PFI was a fundamental
given, and | believe the decision to use PFI and for it to be a joint procurement
from BA and POCL had been brokered at government level (presumably between

the two sponsoring departments - DSS and the DTI - and the Treasury).

Page 9 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
28. In the mid-1990 PFI was “flavour of the month’ although | believe it was more
commonly used for things like schools and hospitals, rather than complex bespoke
IT projects such as this. PFI saved the organisations from up-front funding, and
also was supposed to transfer the risk of a project to the private sector. In my
view this was rather naive for a project as “core” as this to an organisation, where
failure would have such a massive effect on the businesses, but these were the

rules.

29. My understanding was that PFI (and this arrangement with BA) was considered
potentially the only way for POCL to afford automation and retain the BA business;
the earlier Thames Valley Pilot project in the late 1980s had shown that full
automation would be expensive, and the Post Office would not be able to afford
to finance it conventionally. | know the government had set Negative External
Financing Limits (Negative EFLs) on the Post Office in the 1990s, effectively taking
a return from the PO each year, but | do not know how this affected the PO’s ability

to invest itself and fund automation conventionally.

30. From a BA point of view, a key objective was fraud risk transfer for benefit
payments, moving the risk for encashment fraud from BA (or POCL) to the service
provider, in addition to any funding issues. They also had objectives around
financial control and auditability of the payment of benefits in the UK which the

Programme was designed to resolve.

31. A newspaper search around 1994 shows reports of ‘government ... inviting formal

tenders to build and run a new computerised method of paymen? and it being a

Page 10 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
32.

33.

34.

35.

“privately run system”. This was announced by Peter Lilley in May 1994 at the

Subpostmasters conference, and | think shows the government influence.

| believe that the other stated advantage of PFI, apart from funding and risk
transfer, was that the private sector would bring innovation to the table, and
suggest innovative solutions leveraging their experience elsewhere. Whilst a
laudable aim, there were relatively few organisations in the private sector with this
kind of experience, so any innovation had to be balanced by their lack of subject
matter expertise. | do remember it being painful having to, at times, ‘teach’

potential SPs about Post Offices.

PFI brought a number of immediate challenges, before then causing major long-
term detrimental effects on the Programme. Immediately, there was very little
experience or understanding of PFI on the POCL side at least, so there was a
steep learning curve for both the staff on the PDA and in the Sponsors (and in

particular POCL).

One key effect of PFI was that requirements had to be presented as high level
“Output-Based Specifications’ so as to not constrain the Service Providers, that is
stating the “what” but not the “how’, and at the level of the Service rather a system.
This was contrary to most experience where specifications would be far more

detailed and include some ‘how’.

The other key aspect of PFI was that of Risk Transfer. Whilst there was an explicit

and well-defined attempt at Risk Transfer for certain types of Benefit Payment

Page 11 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
36.

37.

38.

Fraud by BA, there were of course many Risks which could not be transferred to

a Service Provider, as POCL has found to its cost over the years.

Outsourcing a major part of your core business (and the transaction
processing/counter system for a Post Office is about as core as it gets) does not
remove the risk to that business if the counter system (or service) does not
perform. Paraphrasing somewhat, the ethos was that risk was transferred to the
Service Provider, and so we should not worry about it. If they failed it was at their
cost. | think this was a fundamental issue — whatever idea there was of Risk
Transfer in specific areas, POCL still needed assurance in the quality and fitness
of the service being developed and provided by the Service Provider, to manage

the risk to their business.

As the Project progressed, it appeared that the effect of PFI was that we were
expected (by the SP) to treat the underlying solution as a “black box”. The Service
Provider's job was to ensure it created the right outputs but the contents of the box
were not available for scrutiny — either how it worked or how it was being built. As
| will cover later, this had major effects on POCL’s ability to gain assurance on the

solution and to inform later activities.

Put informally, the approach seemed to me a case of “Trust Me, I’m a Doctor’ —
having told them at a high level what we wanted the Service to do, we were meant
to trust them as the experts to create and run the Service. | We would have

Acceptance at the very end, but we would have no visibility of what was ‘in the

Page 12 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
39.

40.

41.

42.

box” or how it had been built, and only be able to perform Acceptance based on

those output-based specifications.

| have been asked to describe how ICL Pathway demonstrated the suitability of its
proposed technical solution. As introduced earlier, each of the three SPs took
part in the so-called Demonstrator Stream, in the second part of 1995. This
activity consisted of 6 groups — POCL Applications, POCL Infrastructure, Benefits
Payment Service, Implementation/Management, End-to-End and Security, each

with a group leader and team members.

We were starting at this point from solutions that they had each submitted as part
of the original tender (and with which we were familiar from Rugby), so that the

Demonstrator “drilled down” from there.

| was the Group Leader for the POCL Infrastructure strand, which covered the
Technical Infrastructure (Office Platform, WAN (Network), TMS (Transaction
Management Service) and System Management) and Support Services for POCL
(Helpdesks etc). A suitable expert from POCL managed the Support Services
side (Helpdesks not being my speciality), whilst | focussed on the Technical

Infrastructure supported by a technical team member.

For the POCL Infrastructure strand, we had a series of meetings with each SP,
which involved a “deep dive” into the relevant parts of their solution. We set an
agenda for each session, specific to each SP’s proposed solution (based on our

analysis of their proposals from Rugby), so that they could assemble the relevant

Page 13 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
43.

44.

45.

experts or set up demos, and then had a full day per session on their site. Each
candidate SP was offered an equal amount of time | believe, so that the process

was and could be seen to be fair.

It was of course up to the SP how effectively they used that time to their benefit,
and whether this was treated as an opportunity or a chore; my internal meeting
notes from the time (WITN0597_01/05-11) indicate that at times Pathway seemed
defensive and keen to avoid scrutiny, whereas the other two SPs were more open

and used the sessions to talk up their offering.

For Pathway, the POCL Infrastructure Strand had majored on the use and role of
the Escher Riposte product as a core part of their infrastructure, as well as
covering a range of other topics. Presentations and papers were produced on
specific topics, further questions asked, demos seen and risks raised. We tried
to make these sessions as interactive as possible to understand both the SP and
their solution. The SPs could also raise questions of us, which we then took back
to the Programme (and Sponsors if needed) for resolution. At least one of the
Pathway sessions included representatives from Escher, to answer specific

questions we might have there.

Internal notes from the individual Pathway sessions are attached in a series of
seven “POCL Infrastructure Demo — Meeting Notes” (WITN0597_01/05-11),
covering an introductory session together with six substantive meetings
(WITN05970140, WITNO5970106, WITNO5970107, WITN05970108,

WITN05970141, WITN05970109, and WITN05970139). These notes cover

Page 14 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
46.

47.

48.

49.

topics, risks and questions raised, plus a commentary on the SP’s behaviour and

are therefore fairly “frank” in places.

In addition to the meetings with Pathway, we also visited An Post in Dublin (the
Irish Post Office), where the Escher Riposte product was already in successful
use for automation of their counter network (and still is), including the payment of
benefits in Ireland, and saw their system in operation in two live Post Offices in

addition to meeting An Post management.

| also visited Escher Group Ltd in Boston in December 1995, along with the group
leader of the End-to-End Demo Stream (Naresh Mohindra), to get more details on
the Riposte product, the organisation, their plans and their relationship with
Pathway, as part of managing that risk. Notes from that session are attached in
“POCL Infrastructure/End-to-End Demo — Meeting Report — Escher Site Visit”

(WITNO597_01/12, WITN05970142).

For the avoidance of doubt, the same process was followed with the other two
Service Providers, including Demo meetings and site visits where relevant, and

risks were raised and discussed with those SPs too.

| have been asked to describe and explain the risks identified in ICL Pathway’s
proposed technical solution. Risks were raised against each of the three Service
Providers during the Demonstrator Stream and continued once the formal ITT

responses were received. | think Risks from earlier phases (including the Rugby

Page 15 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
50.

51.

evaluation of the original responses) were also inherited into this phase for

continuity.

Risks were shared with the respective SPs to give them a chance to mitigate or
respond. A formal SPRR (Service Provider Risk Register) was managed by the
PDA, to which individual teams could input, giving programme-wide visibility. The
Risk Register could also be used to raise Questions which might then

subsequently be cleared or converted to real Risks.

| do not have access to the full Risk Register but from the notes | have | know the
risks we raised on Pathway during the Demonstrator phase (even if subsequently
cleared) included:

a. Risks relating to the use of the Escher Riposte product — from what |

remember there were several:

i. PWY002 - one “commercial” covering the size/stability of Escher

(given the dependency that POCL/Fujitsu would have on them)

ii. PWY009 — that Riposte was unproven at this scale, covering the

scalability/manageability of Riposte (including regarding changes

that we were told would be needed or were planned)

iii. PWY057 - one covering Pathway’s ability to manage Escher and

the contractual relationships

Page 16 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

iv. PWY059 — that Pathway may not be able to maintain a

development path for Riposte in line with POCL’s needs

b. Risk on EPOS: “The EPOS package appears to need significant
development to meet the POCL requirements. The timescale of Q1 1996
may not be achievable’. Note this was not strictly part of the POCL
Infrastructure scope (EPOSS was Application) but | believe | raised it
due to the relationship with Riposte (see “note on splitting Pathway Risk

re EPOSS” (WITN0597_01/13, WITN05970110)).

c. PWY011 - Risk on use of touch screen and effect on transaction timings

d. PWY048 - Risk on software distribution solution

e. PWY064 — Robust Storage of Data in Single Counter Post Office

f. PWY066 — Potential use of Dongles on Counter PC.

52. The document “Risk Register Analysis” (WITN0597_01/14, POL00028150)
created by the Procurement Team in February 1996 provides the status of the
uncleared risks against the three Service Providers as of the end of Stage 3 of the
procurement (effectively after the Demonstrator). This includes risks from the
Requirements/Solution team and CNT (Core Negotiating - Commercial) team as
well as from the Demonstrator activity. For Pathway, this includes risks PWY002

(“Size of Escher”), PWY009 (“Riposte is Unproven”) and PWY066 (“Strong

Page 17 of 75
53.

54.

55.

Sequence Numbering” /“Dongles”) mentioned above, as well as a number of other

risks from other strands.

Similar risks were raised against the other Service Providers, so the presence of
these on Pathway was not, per se, surprising. This was a mechanism for formally
recording concerns and giving the SPs the chance to provide more information or
reconsider, before reaching the formal ITT. We received papers or presentations
from the various SPs which enabled some risks to be downgraded or cleared. |
remember that | thought this process was good in theory in that it incentivised the
Service Providers to “take us seriously’, in that they knew that outstanding risks

could count against them.

The Inquiry has provided two Pathway Risk Responses for which | was the
BA/POCL Risk Owner, which are useful examples of the process and the use of

the Risk Process to bring clarity/remove ambiguity from the solution.

Risk PWY064 sought to gain clarity on Pathway’s solution for robust storage of
data in single position offices (where there would be no second PC to which
Riposte would replicate data), and where data may be exposed should the link to
the centre be down. Pathway had made a number of statements about options
for the use of a removable second hard disk and a Mirror Service during the
Demonstrator meeting but we used the Risk Process to have this formalised — we
could not evaluate it purely based on verbal statements in a meeting on what they

‘could do’. Once Pathway produced this paper (“Pathway Risk Response —

Page 18 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
56.

57.

58.

PWY064”, WITNO597_01/15, FUJ00078025), | believe the risk was cleared (and

this went forward into their solution).

Risk PWY066 related to a case where, in Demonstrator meetings, there appeared
to be contradictions between Pathway and their subcontractor (Escher) over the
proposal to use “dongles” (small plug-in secure storage devices) to mitigate a
particular multiple failure scenario. In this case we raised a risk to get clarity as
to what Pathway was proposing and actually going to implement, and therefore on
what basis we should be evaluating the solution. Pathway’s response (“Pathway
Risk Response — PWY066”, WITN0597_01/16, FUJ00078026) shows that they
were proposing a solution which did not include the “dongle” solution, and gave

their detailed reasoning.

Some risks were not cleared and therefore were fed forward into the Evaluation
and Selection decision; those for Pathway were, once the contract was awarded,
then carried forward into the next phase of the project for monitoring and
mitigation. For the Escher/Riposte related risks, for instance, this continued to
be tracked throughout the Programme. Document “Escher Dependency — An
Analysis” (WITN0597_01/17, WITN05970117) shows the state of this Risk area in

April 1998.

The Inquiry disclosed a “Top Ten Pathway Risks : Status 8.9.95” document, as
part of FUJ00078000 (WITNO597_ 01/18), which appears to summarise Pathway’s
internal view of the Risks (both those raised by BA/POCL and those by Pathway).

1 do not believe | would have seen this document at the time but it provides a useful

Page 19 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
59.

60.

61.

summary of risks across all areas from the Pathway viewpoint, during the pre-

award stage.

| have been asked to describe and explain how ICL Pathway’s bid for the project
was evaluated against the technical, management and commercial criteria used
during the procurement process. Once the Demonstrator Phase had been
completed, a new ITT was issued and for functional/technical evaluation the SPs
submitted their responses, still based on the requirements in the Statement of
Service Requirements (SSR). The SSR has several hundred numbered
requirements, spread across the various Services (e.g. OPS, APS, EPOSS, BES
etc), and the SPs provided responses for each SSR question. | think the SSR was
updated where needed prior to the ITT (based on clarifications from the SPs in the

Demonstrator).

Once the three SPs submitted their response to the ITT, they were reviewed and
evaluated by the Demonstrator Stream (from a functional/technical viewpoint), in
parallel with other groups covering Contracts, Financial, and Partnership
evaluation. | do not believe the Demo team had any involvement in those aspects

outside of the functional/technical.

For the functional/technical review, the solutions were evaluated as part of a
detailed two-week (I think) off-site workshop known as Amazon, scoring the
responses against 44 Demonstrator topics across the 6 Demonstrator Steams (for
instance, there were 8 topics in the POCL Infrastructure group). There were also

inputs from other groups such as a “IT Strategic Concurrence” from the Strategy

Page 20 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
62.

63.

64.

65.

Group in POCL, for instance see “Fax from Bob King” (WITN0597_01/19,

POL00031277).

These 44 topics had been mapped in advance to 10 “Value Factors”, so that the
scores could then be summarised up into 10 “Value Factors” per SP. This whole
scheme was managed by the Procurement team, with the job of the individual

Demonstration Stream evaluations to score the responses.

The process is described in detail in “Final Evaluation Report” (WITN0597_ 01/04,
POL00028152) and “Supplier Scores in Respect of Value Factors”

(WITN0597_01/03, POL00031154) created by the Procurement team.

For contractual reasons there was actually a second ITT which took place in 1996,
although | do not remember this changing the technical solution at all — this was
all related to risk transfer and commercials. The formal decision was, | believe,

taken based on this second ITT, but this was all handled on the Contracts side.

| have been asked about my understanding of the reasons for ICL Pathway being
selected as the chosen provider of the automated accounting system. Pathway
was selected as the Service Provider as part of an overall evaluation and selection
process which included not only Value Factors (coming out of technical evaluation
of the solution by both parties) but also a Commercial, Risk Transfer and
Partnership evaluation by both BA and POCL, covering both Benefits Payments

and Post Office services. The overall process is described in the “Final Evaluation

Page 21 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
66.

67.

68.

69.

Report” (WITN0597_01/04, POL00028152), and the decision was taken by an

Evaluation Board with senior representatives from each Sponsor.

My understanding from reading document “Final Evaluation Report”
(WITN0597_01/04) is that Pathway were the only one of the three SPs who were
considered PFl-compliant regarding fraud risk transfer for BA; the other two SPs
were not PFl-compliant. Ironically of course, BA then withdrew from the project

in 1998/1999 rendering this factor in the decision rather irrelevant.

| think it is important to note that this process resulted in BA and POCL jointly
selecting Pathway as the overall Service Provider for the entire set of BA and
POCL services; it was not POCL selecting a supplier purely for its “automated
accounting system” as has been suggested. The procurement was for a complex
package of services for two Contracting Authorities, and what became the Horizon
EPOSS system was only one constituent part. Put simply, there was no

opportunity for “pick and mix’.

| think it would be fair to say that the majority of the technical evaluation focussed
on the Technical Solutions being offered, rather than the Service Provider's
capabilities, although some of risks raised did show we did consider to some

degree soft aspects of the SP and their relationships with suppliers.

Technically, the Pathway solution had some considerable advantages for POCL
over those offered by IBM and CardLink. Specifically, the underlying Pathway

solution allowed offline/disconnected operation with automated resynchronisation

Page 22 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
should communications not be available, including off-line benefit payment, which
in a network of 20,000 sites with the communications available in the late 1990’s
was very important. | believe it was also the only solution of the three based on
software in use in another country’s Post Office at the time (and of course later
versions of the underlying Riposte have been used and are still in use in many

Post Offices across the world to this date).

70. However, the underlying technology of the POCL components was only part of the
offering, and the whole programme depended on the overall Service Provider.
Looking back, if a bad decision was made on selection, | believe it may have more
been about the Service Provider in a PFI environment, rather than the technology
they were using. As | raise later, this is where | feel the contract was weak and

let us down.

Development and Assurance

71. | have been asked to describe and explain my involvement in the development
and assurance of the Horizon IT System. Once the contract had been awarded to
Pathway, the Demonstration Team migrated to new roles to provide Technical or
Product Assurance of the emerging Pathway solution. This was arranged in a
similar manner to the Demonstrator, with teams for various areas, and | was
allocated the “POCL Infrastructure” as before, so responsible for the OPS (Office
Platform Service) and TMS (Transaction Management Service), whilst others

covered POCL Applications (including EPOSS) and the various BA services.

Page 23 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
72. As | remember it, our role in Assurance was to try to monitor the development of
the service to gain increasing confidence in the emerging Pathway solution, to
assure its performance/security, whilst also trying to support them by providing
access to resources in BA or POCL where needed (admittedly that was more

relevant for the Applications teams).

73. In addition to de-risking the project and facilitating the flow of information, we were
also mindful of the fact that eventually there would need to be both a contractual
acceptance of the solution/services and Release Authorisation decisions, and that
gaining confidence and knowledge throughout the process should make this

simpler — basically it was a means of avoiding surprises downstream.

74. We attempted to engage with Pathway in a number of ways at various times, and
for me both as responsible for POCL Infrastructure and during a stint when | was
on the (BA-led) Fraud and Security Group. __ In particular, to give structure to the
activity we provided various papers over time to our Pathway contacts on what
information we needed, we had meetings with Pathway, and even for Technical
Assurance set up a “Technical Assurance Forum” with Pathway with regular

meetings with pre-set Agendas.

75. The Terms of Reference for the Technical Assurance Forum explain our reasons
to engage with this activity to inform Acceptance and Release Authorization. See
draft version “Terms of Reference - Technical Assurance Forum”
(WITN0597_01/20, WITN05970138) and an exemplar Agenda (for a session on

Integrity in 1998) (WITN0597_01/21, WITNO5970129).

Page 24 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
76. A number of papers from across that period explain our approach to Assurance,

including:

a.

“The Level of Information Needed for Technical Assurance”,
(WITNO597_01/22, WITNO5970113), from 1997. | do not recall whether
| was explicitly asked to produce this paper by management or whether
this was at my own initiative as part of setting up the Technical
Assurance function (which was a reincarnation of the Design Assurance
group). [This paper would have certainly been shared within the
Assurance Teams in the PDA and | expect PDA management but | do

not have access to email records to show how much further it went.]

“Assuring Integrity, Accuracy and Robustness of the Service”
(WITN0597_ 01/23, WITN05970116) which was shared with Pathway in
1998, when trying to assure End-to-End operation. | believe it was
produced at Pathway’s request to justify/explain our call for information,
and was intended to show that our request was not unreasonable or
unduly onerous. _ It is likely that this document was shared at least with
Dick Long of Pathway (who was my contact at this point) although | do

not have access to the email records to confirm this.

“Route to Acceptance through Assurance and _ Testing”
(WITNO597_01/24, WITN05970115) (draft), from early 1998 which
outlined why reliance purely on Testing would be insufficient, and
proposed closer working between Testing and Assurance. This paper

was produced following a request from the PMT (PDA Programme

Page 25 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
Management Team) in December 1997. [Although | only have a draft
and do not have access to email records, | presume a completed version

would have been shared in some form with the PMT].

77. | have been asked to describe and explain the challenges that we faced in assuring
the quality of the Horizon IT System. We hit problems early on in that Pathway
refused to disclose certain documentation — especially design documentation - to
the Assurance Team. They repeatedly claimed that this was because of the PFI
rules — we were procuring services and had no rights of access to design or
development documentation, and they were taking on the risk. This was the

PFI “black box” problem mentioned earlier emerging.

78. Anumber of the technical staff, at least those | dealt with, were helpful and in some
cases more than happy to share information informally and take comments (after
all, we had common aims and were fellow IT professionals). However, Pathway
management obstructed such access, refusing access to documentation and |

believe even cancelling meetings in some cases.

79. | have been asked how we became aware of this obstruction by Pathway
management. The problem hit us all the time but | remember in particular a
meeting with Terry Austin (the Pathway Development Manager or similar) where
he stated that he was prevented by the contract from sharing documentation. |
also remember getting a call from Martin (or Martyn) Bennett, Pathway’s Security
and Risk Manager, questioning (and | think cancelling) a meeting that his staff had

set up with me to go through a particular technical security concern. However,

Page 26 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
80.

81.

82.

83.

these are just a couple of examples of an ongoing problem throughout the

development phase of the project.

Rather perversely, we did make some progress on the POCL Infrastructure side
(I say perversely as you might expect that the deeper into the software stack, the
furthest from the application, the more reticent they might be, but the opposite
seemed true) with Pathway people providing ‘informal’ access to a document
known as the TED (Technical Environment Description). This technical
infrastructure area was making progress and did not expose major problems,
which might explain why the people here were more open. We also had more
success in the underlying Security areas, as we had a specific requirement which

required Pathway to create a Security Functional Specification (SFS).

We also had some successes on the Infrastructure side through initiatives such
as the Technical Assurance Forum, as mentioned earlier, although from what |

remember some of these initiatives were sometimes rather short lived.

In other areas however, in particular in the POCL Applications side, there was
explicit refusal to allow access to design documentation for much of the time. 1
suspect this was largely because such documentation did not exist at the time or
that it was of such quality that opening it up to us would have exposed Pathway in

this area.

It may also have been as the POCL Infrastructure side was strict technology

(hardware, protocols, communications, etc) based on integration of products

Page 27 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
84.

85.

86.

(albeit niche ones like Riposte), and so easier to handle, whereas the POCL
Applications were bespoke, effectively ground-up developments, and Pathway

were maybe more exposed.

The result was that, except in areas where we had an explicit right in the Contract
to a document (such as the SFS), we only had limited or partial visibility of the
emerging Pathway systems, or of their design/development approach. This
meant that we could not gain confidence of what Pathway were creating (or its
suitability or fitness for purpose), or have confidence in how Pathway were

developing (and therefore what Quality mechanisms were in place).

One specific gap was any access to Software Quality information or metrics, such
as number of bugs found in testing or the amount of rework being done, both of
which are good indicators as to the stability or maturity of a product. We also
had no real visibility of what design documents existed or in what state, even if we
were not able to access the documents; this mean that we could not assess
whether Pathway actually had created solid design documentation or had gone
through a design process before commencing coding, or whether standard

artifacts (like Data Dictionary documents) even existed.

The POCL teams were involved in Joint Working with Pathway at various times
(primarily in the Applications rather than Infrastructure area), to try to progress the
project. Whilst this was beneficial overall, | remember flagging dangers there that
Pathway could point to us having business representatives on-site to give false

credibility to claims that Technical Assurance was being performed (when largely

Page 28 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
87.

88.

89.

what was happening was Issue Management). | remember raising this
internally in a paper in 1998 “Product Assurance — A ReThink” (WITN0597_01/25,
WITNO05970118). This would have certainly been shared within the Assurance
Team but | do not recall how much further this went within the Programme, and

again do not have access to email records.

During 1997 there was a process by which Pathway issued draft Acceptance
Specifications for the PDA’s review. This allowed Pathway to state, for each area,
how they were meeting each Requirement, and point to the evidence or proposed
evidence (e.g. a planned future document or test). One of these specifications
was for the “POCL Infrastructure”, and although | do not have access to the actual
document | reviewed, my comments to version 1.0 dated May 1997 are in exhibit
WITNO0597_01/26 (“PDA Quality Review Comment Sheet - POCL Infrastructure
Acceptance Specification”, FUJ00078984). These Acceptance Specifications

continued to be updated and reviewed intermittently through to March 1999.

My review comments provide a useful example of the problems we had, even for
Acceptance, in the low level of information detail by Pathway. As just one
example, for Requirements regarding an audit trail, it seems Pathway tried to
satisfy by pointing to how the audit trail was stored/protected, but not what
information was stored or what events were audited (see comments 14 and 21 in

that review).

| have been asked to what extent did POCL have adequate oversight of the design

of the Horizon IT system. POCL had very limited oversight of the application

Page 29 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
90.

91.

design of the system; formally we had access to a very few documents, informally
to specific versions (not maintained) of a small number of other documents, and
otherwise we had rather bitty information that we managed to obtain from specific
activities or if we had raised specific risks in the evaluation (where maybe a paper

might be provided).

The team did the best we could but were very much dependent on the goodwill of
individual team members in Pathway; for instance having “corridor discussions”
with people we knew when visiting Pathway’s offices, or by information passed on

by team members involved in “joint working” on the Pathway site in Feltham.

However, it was obviously difficult to progress concerns which were based on
information which came from these unofficial sources; it was very easy for
information to be dismissed if we did not have evidence, with the ‘PFI card” applied
again by Pathway. | seem to remember feeling that some of the DSS/BA people
had greater comfort with the Pathway PFI approach than those of us from POCL,
perhaps reflecting the difference in impact of the Contract to the two organisations
(BA were contracting a relatively well-defined service and could more easily walk
away if Pathway failed, whereas POCL were staking their entire future and could
not easily walk away). | remember the phrase “The Absence of Evidence is not
the Evidence of Absence’ being quoted when seeking help on this, | believe from
someone on the BA side but | cannot recall who. However, what information we
did get was reported within the PDA to try to build up a picture of the development,

within the Assurance teams and to the PDA management.

Page 30 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
92.

93.

94.

There were at times opportunities for workshops to see the emerging product, and
we made full use of these when we could, even if this tended to be “too late”
compared with seeing upfront designs. Looking at my notes from early 1998 it
seems | was involved in two workshops on EPOSS organised by Product
Management (I believe by that point we had re-organised into a Technical Team
— the old Infrastructure - and a Product Team — the old Applications), which
included identifying non-compliances in the emerging EPOSS. My “Fortnightly
Report - period to 19/01/98” (WITN0597_01/27, WITN05970143) refers. | cover
EPOSS in more detail later. [The Fortnightly Reports in early 1998 were
commissioned by and provided to John Meagher, who headed the Assurance
Team at that point, and were most likely shared the rest of the Assurance team,
with information then being fed up the management chain to the Programme

Management Team (PMT).]

| have been asked what issues did the lack of oversight create in relation to
assuring the quality of the end product. The challenges and blockers to our
Assurance activity from Pathway’s interpretation of PFI had a major impact in our
ability to formally either assess the design or the quality of the emerging system
being created by Pathway. By blockers, | mean the ongoing refusal by Pathway

to share or provide information that we needed to fully do our job.

It meant that the Pathway solution remained a “black box” in many respects (in
particular in some of the applications), and | believe that had effects all the way
through to Acceptance and beyond. It also forced an undue reliance on Testing

to provide confidence in the system, and put a major, back-loaded, reliance on the

Page 31 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
95.

96.

97.

Acceptance Activity to demonstrate compliance. We raised our concerns in the
paper “The Route to Acceptance Through Assurance and_ Testing
(WITN0597_01/24, WITN05970115), as | felt strongly that Quality could not be
assured purely through Testing, and Quality could not be retrofitted through
Testing (a view | hold to this day after 40 years in IT). This document was
written at the request of the PDA Programme Management Team (PMT), and,
although | do not have access to the email records, | presume the completed
version was provided to them. There is mention in my Fortnightly Report from
19% Jan 1998 (WITN0597_01/27, WITN05970143) that this document was about

to be sent to other relevant groups for review/comment.

In some areas where we did manage to get access for Assurance, our confidence
increased, to everyone’s benefit. As an example, as noted earlier we had raised
a number of risks regarding Escher/Riposte, and were able to use these to get
access to Escher and information on the Riposte product, and understand their
development plans, which boosted confidence in the state of that product (and
enabled us to reduce those risks accordingly) in the areas we were allowed to

probe.

One specific gap was that we had no visibility of quality or problems that occurred
during Development, and therefore no formal means of managing POCL'’s risk

from this — whether this be bugs, rework, or over-runs etc.

It is worth mentioning specifically EPOSS, given its importance to this Inquiry.

EPOSS was far more than a simple “point of sale” system, in that it had to be

Page 32 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
capable of performing and recording a large range of transactions (from a stamp
sale to a car tax renewal), along with cash/stock management and both individual
teller (stock unit) and office accounting, including producing the cash account
report each week. Much of this is peculiar to Post Offices and the exact rules

specifically POCL, rather than just being another flavour of retail POS.

98. Pathway’s ability to complete EPOSS in time being a risk which we had flagged in
the Procurement stage. During 1997 the PDA became aware that work on
EPOSS had been moved from Pathway to Escher in Boston “for completion’,
suggesting that there were potential issues with the progress in Pathway (EPOSS
had been listed as a Pathway, not Escher, creation). |am not sure how we found
this out, but it is mentioned in an internal “Programme Review — Brainstorm on

Suggestions” document dated October 1997 (WITNO597_ 01/25, WITN059701 14).

99. As mentioned earlier, in early 1998 we had managed to get visibility of the
emerging EPOSS and | assisted Product Management with reviewing via a series
of workshops. | remember that we identified a number of issues, both around
the application itself and Pathway’s design approach, which did not appear
suitable for something of this complexity and importance, and also their

consideration of Failure Conditions.

100. 1! do not have access to documentation to show how these concerns were
explicitly taken forward by Product Management, but my regular reports to my
team leader (John Meagher) from the time covered this in some detail and | am

confident that this information would have been reported upwards to Programme

Page 33 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITN05970100

Management. For instance, my “Fortnightly Report — Period to 19" January 1998”

(WITNO0597_01/27, WITN05970143), included mention as follows:

a. EPOSS - application: Evidence emerging from the EPOSS
workshops that the emerging product is likely to be non-
conformant in a number of areas, and will miss the
(possibly unwritten) business rules in a larger number of
areas. The product does not appear to be at the stage one
would expect given the closeness to its entry to a testing
phase - Pathway admitted to several “holes” where they
don’t yet have a solution (eg Cash Account).

b. EPOSS - design approach: Very concerned about Pathway’s
(apparent) design approach for EPOSS, which is totally
inappropriate for an application of this complexity -
appears to be based on reverse engineering a product which
has been cobbled together first by someone who is no longer
with Pathway (and left little documentation) and since by
Escher. This a very dangerous approach for a product of
this nature and importance, and I do not believe that the
risk can be adequately mitigated through testing alone.

c. EPOSS - failure conditions: Significant concerns re
operation of EPOSS - and the office platform in general -
during ‘everyday’ failure conditions, such as loss of a
terminal or of LAN connectivity, but similar issues likely
to emerge in non-failure conditions with shared stock
units. Pathway’s problem is basically that Riposte gives
high integrity for data held on a “per terminal” basis -
whereas the business requirement is for data to be
accounted for on a “per SU” basis; they need to build the
integrity for the latter using the facilities provided by
the former. Trying to meet this need without a rigorous
design method, and without proper failure analysis, is
unlikely to succeed. Pathway appear not to understand the
business impacts of failure of the accounting process (as
opposed to failure of a transaction) and appear to want to
rely on the “it’s not going to happen” philosophy. [Same
may be true of other applications, given Release lc
experience, but have less visibility].

101. | have been asked to expand on the last paragraph in that excerpt where |
stated “pathway appear not to understand the business impacts of

failure of the accounting process (as opposed to failure of a

Page 34 of 75
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

transaction) and appear to want to rely on the “it’s not going to
happen” philosophy.”. | believe by this | meant that Pathway did not
demonstrate an understanding the importance of the accounting role of EPOSS
(including the balancing of cash/stock in each office) to POCL but were more
focussed on what would happen to an individual customer transaction in times of
failure. For example, if the system failed when performing a specific transaction
it might affect the specific customer at the time but equally disastrous would be if
that failure adversely affected the cash position at the end of the week. Rather
than conducting a rigorous analysis of failure scenarios and showing that their
design and solution would maintain integrity, they took the approach of
undermining our suggested failure conditions (for instance, multiple concurrent
failures in an office). With a target estate of 20,000 offices and 40,000 terminals
such multiple failures were likely to be happen and, in my view, needed to be

properly considered.

102. | mention other issues on Quality in the section on the “Bird & Bird” review later.

103. Finally on Assurance, | believe that Pathway viewed our desire for visibility and
assurance as inappropriate and contrary to PFI. However, from our Assurance
point of view, our experience was that Pathway’s approach to PFI had the effect
of hiding deficiencies in their development approach from us. Given the delays
and Quality problems which became visible in latter stages of the Programme, our

attempts at Assurance seem fully justified.

Page 35 of 75
104. Note that a number of documents referred to in the Rule 9 Request relate to the
so-called Release 1c or Congo. This was very much a “vanity” release of certain
benefits payment functionality in a small number of offices, using a very early
version of the software, without much of the contracted POCL functionality (e.g.
EPOSS, Security) and from Assurance point of view largely a distraction from the
main event. However, | do remember that despite its heavily cut-down nature
there were problems with Release 1c around duplicates, with Recall and Reissue

of benefits etc.

Treasury Review

105. | have been asked to describe the nature of my involvement in the Treasury
Review of the Horizon IT System. | have very little recollection of the “Treasury
Review” as a major project event, or of its objectives. There were a number of
reviews from different bodies and outfits over the project and | was interviewed by

a number, and this may have included the “Treasury Review”.

106. However, | have found mention in a fortnightly report of mine from the time of
assisting with discussions over Contract Realignment, specifically around the
PAS/CMS boundary with POCL, in November 1998 related to the Treasury
Review, and around the same time also looked at the PAS/BES boundary (that is,
between the BA and the POCL side of benefit payments), but | cannot recall further
details of the Review itself. From this is seems likely that | was called in to assist
on some specific technical/system issues but did not have great visibility of the

wider review.

Page 36 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
107. | have been asked to what extent (if at all) the Treasury Review considered
issues relating to the quality or fitness for purpose of the Horizon IT system. | was
not aware of any consideration by the Treasury Review of the quality or assurance
issues with Pathway, but as stated earlier | have little recollection of this review.
However, if | had been interviewed, | am sure that | would have raised this

vociferously, given what | had been flagging during 1998 in particular.

108. | have been asked whether the Treasury Review was effective in considering
such issues. | do not remember any significant changes or improvements in
Pathway’s behaviour or attitude to Assurance or Quality emerging from the
Treasury Review. | have checked my later fortnightly reports from end-1998 (at
which point my function had been renamed from Technical Assurance to Service
Characteristics, but was still attempting to gain assurance of the solution), and that
in 19th December 1998 | reported: “We are still finding that Pathway are unwilling
or unable to provide any detailed documentation to support our work, although
they seem happy to provide information verbally via the Forums. Although better
than nothing, this is not particularly efficient and should not be seen as a

replacement for a proper Design Assurance process’.

Proposed Weakening of Acceptance

109. | have been asked what my understanding was of ICL Pathway’s proposals
around acceptance in autumn 1998. In 1998, there was a suggestion that
Contractual Acceptance (which would have opened up revenue for Pathway —
noting that at this stage they were running significantly late and presumably over-

budget) be tied to the Release Authorisation for a major release known as “New

Page 37 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
Release 2” or NR2, rather than doing through the formal acceptance process. |
do not know where this suggestion originated, whether it was from Pathway or

from the aforementioned Treasury Review.

110. I viewed this suggestion as quite dangerous and wrote a one-page paper with
my reasons (“Acceptance at Release Authorisation’, WITN0597_01/29,
WITN05970119/POL00028503). | presume this paper was provided into the
Contracts team or other Programme Management, and although | do not have
access to the email records, | can be confident it was received by POCL
management this was disclosed to the Inquiry by POL (and by the Inquiry back to

me).

111. My primary objection was that | felt Pathway had largely obstructed our
attempts on performing detailed Assurance during the course of the project,
through “playing the PFI card’, and even by then | felt that some aspects of the
development had a somewhat chequered history. By ‘playing the PFI card” |
mean they used the fact that this was a PFI contract to deny us access to timely
technical information and documentation on the solution or development activity,
and repeatedly refuted such requests as being incompatible with the PFI. As a
result, the Acceptance process had become even more important as a backstop
for issues with the Assurance process. Signing away any contractual ability to get
Assurance by giving Acceptance on the basis of one software release (which by
nature excluded a number of deliverables and gave no control over quality) would

remove that last protection.

Page 38 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

112. It would also have provided for Acceptance on the basis of a decision to
authorise a release, before that release had been deployed and therefore trialled

in the live environment.

113. Ihave been asked whether ICL Pathway’s proposals were acceptable to POCL.
| cannot remember exactly what, if anything, was done with my recommendation,
but from reading “Acceptance Board Minutes” (WITN0597_01/30, POL00028367),
Acceptance was tied to the Live Trial and a release known as “CSR” (Core System
Release), with no subsequent Acceptance of future releases. Reading the
“Briefing on the New Contract” (WITN0597_01/31, WITN05970136) it would
appear that my recommendation was maybe not fully accepted. _| would defer

to the Contracts team for more info on this.

Bird & Bird / Project Mentors Review

114. There was a review performed of the Programme by Bird & Bird (POCL’s legal
firm) and a consultancy called “Project Mentors” in March 1998, for which | believe
| was interviewed. The Bird & Bird report itself is exhibit WITN0597_01/32,

POL00038828.

115. |cannot remember seeing the report at the time it was produced, but was invited
to comment on it by POCL management in Jan 1999, and largely supported its
findings. My notes from reviewing the report are present as “Notes from reading
the Bird & Bird/Project Mentors Report” (WITN0597_01/33, WITN05970121). |
cannot remember who in POCL invited me to review this, but | presume it was at

Programme Director or Contracts team level.

Page 39 of 75
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

116. The invitation to comment on the Bird & Bird report appeared to give me the
opportunity in WITN0597_01/33 to (re-)flag and summarise many of the problems
that we had seen from Pathway in the application design point of view, which had
affected the Quality of the solution. Although there was nothing new in my
document (we had been flagging this throughout) it is a fairly succinct summary
which may be of use to the Inquiry. These observations included:

a. Horizon (POCL) being denied visibility especially of application design,
meaning we had no opportunity for independent “verification and

validation” (V&V) or evidence that Pathway were doing any formal V&V

b. Absence of high-level designs, and evidence of problems from a lack of

design (even in Release 1c)

c. Pathway adopting an “end of pipe” approach to quality, relying on “fix on

fail’ for the applications.

d. Little evidence of consideration of exception conditions or failure

e. Over simplification of requirements and lack of understanding of the

complete requirement set

117. | have been asked to explain what | meant by ‘exception conditions’ in point d.
above. In software engineering, this term is used to describe any set of events
which do not represent the “happy flow” or normal expected operation. In the case

in question, | would have been expecting that “exception conditions” considered

Page 40 of 75
might include power failure, local and wide area network failure, hardware failure
of a terminal or device in an office, unexpected restarting of a terminal, a failed

software update and the like, together with unplanned user activity.

Withdrawal of Benefits Agency

118. By 1998 it was obvious that the project was seriously behind schedule. There
was some finger pointing between the parties — including between Pathway and
BA regarding the readiness of a BA system CAPS. | do not remember all of the
politics here with BA but it was clear that BA was losing patience with Pathway
and it seemed the non-delivery by Pathway was seen as a reason for them to be
able to withdraw from the Programme. There was of course also a change of
government with Labour winning the 1997 General Election under Tony Blair (and

the BA/POCL Programme was a creation of the previous regime).

119. BA had always been a slightly reluctant partner in the Programme (given the
relatively high cost of paying benefits through POCL, compared with other options)
and the delays gave them the opportunity to re-consider other options, in particular

driving Automated Credit Transfer (ACT) bank payments as the primary route.

120. POCL, on the other hand, was still desperate for much needed automation at
the counter, providing a platform to move forward their business, and even more
so if a proportion of BA business was being lost, and some form of continuing with

Pathway was the only option without returning to square one.

Page 41 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
121. From what! understood there were discussions on whether to cancel the whole
Programme (and this presumably led to work such as the Bird & Bird report
mentioned earlier, to prepare a negotiating position), although in the end it was
decided that POCL would go ahead with Pathway despite BA’s withdrawal. [See

next section on Project Emerald].

122. A deal was brokered, | believe by government, between BA, POCL and
Pathway, and in 1999 a new, non-PFI contract was signed between Pathway and
POCL, without BA, based on the slimmed down set of requirements having
removed the BA-specific services (PAS, CMS, BES and FRMS | believe), and that
this deal allowed BA to “walk away”. | have since become aware of documentation
from National Archives which suggest much senior government involvement in this
deal, however | cannot remember having any visibility of this wider political

involvement at the time and therefore will not comment further.

123. A useful briefing to POCL on the new Contract was issued by the Horizon’s
Commercial team (‘Briefing on the New Horizon Contract”, WITN0597_01/31,

WITN05970136).

124. The new Contract was based on the same set of Requirements and sadly did
not improve our ability to perform Assurance on the solution. By the time that the
new Contract was finally signed in mid-1999, the system was already claimed to
be fully developed, and in many ways therefore ‘the damage was done’ regarding
Assurance (and | fear Quality). The Contract was signed as Acceptance activities

were taking place and the Contract had no facility for us to go back and revisit the

Page 42 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

problems of the previous few years, nor, as far | can remember, did it give us any

further access to detailed documentation.

125. The new Contract did not appear to be a particularly good deal for POCL, both
commercially (largely taking back volume risk from Pathway and increasing
POCL’s costs), and | think contractually weakening of the thresholds for
Acceptance, and with Acceptance now tied to the Live Trial (Core System
Release). However, this did allow POCL to continue with automation rather than

having to start all over again, which was | believe seen as an advantage.

126. In hindsight, POCL missed an opportunity to force an in-depth review of the
emerging system, including examining all aspects of how the system had been
created, to mitigate the gap caused by the earlier PFI approach, and to require
Pathway to open up to POCL. As it happened, POCL were restricted to running
the Acceptance activity with the same (BA-requirements removed) basis as

existed in the original contract.

127. In June 1999 | did look at potential exposures from the removal of BA
requirements and schedules from the contract, with my findings documented in
“Potential Exposures from Removal of DSS Requirements and New Contract”
(WITNO0597_01/34, WITNO5970127). | cannot recall who commissioned this
work or received my note but | presume it was done for the Contracts team. This
flagged a few places where POCL were dependent on BA requirements or
services (which would no longer exist). One | noted was that POCL had not

contracted to obtain fraud information directly from Pathway, but were apparently

Page 43 of 75
intending to use BA’s Fraud Risk Management Service (FRMS) if they needed
such information, and that therefore POCL would need to either now raise a
Change Request to get this information or to source it “in-house” from TIP. | do

not know what action POCL took here but this may be relevant later in the Inquiry.

128. Whilst the withdrawal of BA did not affect the technical viability of the solution,
this was fairly disruptive during 1999, just at a time when focus was needed on
getting the project “over the wire”. This included, of course, the transition to

being a wholly POCL project and the handover from BA people.

129. POCL also kicked off early work on Network Banking, which was the proposal
to add Banking functionality to the system to facilitate cash withdrawal at the

counter, to try to “retain” the footfall for benefits recipients now paid by banking.

130. More importantly, it did mean that a very large amount of effort and focus had
been spent during the preceding 4 years on functionality and requirements which
were no longer relevant, all the way back to selection of Pathway partly based on

BA's risk transfer requirements.

The Horizon IT System and Project Emerald

131. | remember also getting involved in 1999 in a number of ‘what if?” or feasibility
exercises in POCL looking at options for going forward with or without Pathway.
This included an exercise known in POCL as “Project Emerald”, which | think was
led by the Commercial team in POCL (rather than the Horizon team itself) but was

drafted in for my Horizon knowledge. There were a number of ‘Option B’

Page 44 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
proposals which | think kept the Pathway Horizon system but had different ways
of handling benefit payments (including an Electronic Money Box proposed by
Pathway, various aspects on using a Banking partner, as well as what POCL

finally signed).

132. However, | remember specifically looking at an Option C, if we terminated the
contract with Pathway, exploring whether we could ‘salvage’ parts of the Pathway

solution for a future automation initiative.

133. “Option C - Considerations Around Future Use of Aspects of ICL Pathway
Solution” (WITN0597_01/35, WITN05970146) which | drafted in May 1999 looked
at some of the issues associated with potential future use of what Pathway had
created and defined 5 possible levels of re-use of Pathway’s solution. In so doing
it again raised concerns about the Pathway development approach, including
around EPOSS, and the potential dangers should we look to take on aspects of
their solution (including our lack of design knowledge and information on what we
might be taking on). It also suggested some of the non-technical considerations
(e.g. including “- does POCL have sufficient faith in Pathway to deliver?’, and “-
are ICL Pathway “fatally wounded’?”) which are perhaps indicative of the

sentiment in mid-1999.

134. | cannot remember exactly what decision-making process happened with
Project Emerald — this would have been above my level and may have included
government - but in the end such esoteric options around cancellation were

dismissed and POCL signed up the new ‘non-PFI’ contract with Pathway (and BA

Page 45 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

were allowed to walk away), and as discussed as far as | remember earlier this

contract did nothing to resolve the Assurance problems with Pathway.

Live Trial (1999)

135. | have been asked to describe and explain my involvement in the Live Trial of
the Horizon IT System. For the Live Trial my role was in analysis and review of
relevant Incidents that had been raised, as part of the overall Acceptance Process.
| believe that the Live Trial was run by Business Service Management (BSM) in

POCL, given it was “Live” and processing business transactions.

136. | have been asked whether | considered the acceptance timetable to be
sufficient. The Live Trial was defined within the Contract, with a specific duration
of 8 weeks from May-July 1999. | believe the Live Trial was intended as the main
input to Acceptance; however of course not all Acceptance Criteria were relevant
or could be tested via the Trial (for instance, adherence to specific standards,

delivery of documents).

137. The Live Trial (and subsequent Acceptance process) would obviously have
been of a major milestone to the Programme under normal circumstances, but for
this PFI contract (based on a “black box’ approach by the supplier) with the
challenges we had had with ongoing Assurance with Pathway, it took on greater
importance. _ | think it is fair to say we had significantly less confidence on entry
to Live Trial than we might have done had we been allowed to perform effective

iterative Assurance throughout the Programme.

Page 46 of 75
138. Of course, monitoring of live operation in a relatively small set of offices for a
small number of weeks did not make up for this lack of Assurance during

development. However, this appeared to be the best that the contract could offer.

139. | think it was important to view the Live Trial not as a one-off activity but as one
step in an incremental process of increasing office numbers, increasing
functionality and moving to full “live” processes, with appropriate ongoing
monitoring. So although the Live Trial informed Acceptance, | believe it was

generally accepted that this was not the end of the process.

140. | do remember making writing a paper “Live Trial Stressing — A discussion
paper” (WITN0597_01/36, WITN05970147) in January 1999 which proposed
deliberately introducing certain failure scenarios into the Live Trial environment, in
acontrolled manner, to help prove the service in a more representative and lifelike
environment. The intention of this was to get maximum benefit out of the short
duration Live Trial and improve the quality of decision on which the National
Rollout would be authorised. _| only have a draft of this paper and as | do not
have access to email records, | cannot be sure how widely it was circulated or
what reception it was given, however | do not believe that this approach was ever
followed. | am aware that the proposal might have been seen as radical and
disruptive, however it was a genuine attempt to make up for the earlier deficiencies

and lack of visibility we had suffered.

141. | have been asked to describe my understanding of the nature, cause and

severity of the Acceptance Incidents identified during the Live Trial. | remember

Page 47 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

the Live Trial exposed many issues with Horizon, as supported by
POCL00028357, “Pack of Al Forms” (WITN0597_01/37). These become visible
to us via Acceptance Incidents (Als). These spanned a variety of areas, from
training and helpdesk through accounting in EPOSS down to the underlying

system stability, and included the interface to the POCL backend system TIP.

142. Als were assigned out to owners in POCL or the Horizon Programme, and |
remember specifically being involved (as owner or advisor) on Als regarding
System Stability (Al298) regarding lockups and screen freezes, Software Updates
(AI372) and the Feed to TIP (Al378). 1 know that there were also Als relating to

EPOSS and the Cash Account in the POCL Applications area.

143. My view was that these incidents were of significant severity, especially those
which rendered the system unstable and by nature ‘encouraged’ the user to
reboot. | remember we argued that the number of such incidents reported by
users would be likely to be only a subset of the actual happening as once users
learn the “turn it off and on again” approach they will not “waste” 15 mins ringing
helpdesk with an office full of customers. Internally in POCL, these arguments
can be seen developing in the working document “Al 298 — System stability” (“Al
298 vO06d j”) (WITNO597_01/38, WITN05970120) which had multiple contributors
from across the Acceptance Team and wider POCL. | believe these similar
arguments were used in the Acceptance Workshops which took place with

Pathway in 1999 when agreeing or disputing severity of incidents.

Page 48 of 75
144. Pathway were required to either fix or otherwise mitigate each incident, and |
believe there was significant activity by Pathway to try to fix the problems. There
was also additional functionality (for instance on EPOSS-TMS-TIP reconciliation)

proposed to mitigate the problems around AI378.

Acceptance

145. | have been asked to describe and explain the nature of my role in acceptance
of the Core System Release (CSR). For the Acceptance Process, | was one of a
number of ‘Technical Experts’ assigned individual Acceptance Incidents,
responsible for analysis of incidents, examination of evidence and rectifications
plans provided by Pathway, allocating severities and recommending the action.
This was a fairly reactive role considering incidents as they came in and were

allocated to the relevant ‘expert’.

146. By August 1999 there were a number of Als where adequate resolution had not
been agreed and where they were “in dispute”. For these Als, there were a series
of Al Dispute workshops. Between POCL and Pathway, and also attended by an
independent expert, | believe a consultant from PA Consulting (Peter Copping),

acting as a kind of adjudicator.

147. The Als for which | was down as Technical Expert in POCL Infrastructure

included:

a. AI372 — System Management (software upgrade in the field had failed

in some offices during the Live Trial)

Page 49 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

b. Al391 — Physical Security deficiencies at central sites (Bootle and

Wigan), identified from an Acceptance site inspection

c. Al298 — System Stability (Lockups/Freezes)

148. There were also Als in the POCL Applications area including:

a. AI376 (Cash Account problems)

b. Al378 (EPOSS-TIP feed for Cash Account),

although | was not the “Technical Expert” on these. Further information on

these incidents is contained in “Acceptance Incident Workshop 25 and 26

August” (WITN0597_01/39, POL00028478)

149. | have been asked for my assessment of ICL Pathway’s rectification plans and

whether my assessment changed over time. | remember that it seemed Pathway

were more interested in talking down severity of Als, rather than actually trying to

engage to resolve issues, in what it felt was a war of attrition. This may have

been connected with the fact that there were thresholds set in the Contract on the

number of Als of each severity to allow Acceptance to be given.

150. However, once it became clear that POCL would refuse Acceptance, | believe

they did attempt to address issues more seriously and created more credible

Page 50 of 75
rectification plans. For instance, on Al378 they did propose (and | presume

implemented) a new reconciliation process to detect errors.

151. | have been asked what concerns | had about the accounting integrity of
Horizon at the point at which CSR was accepted. Once Acceptance had taken
place, there were further monitoring and mitigation activities in place to continue
to gain confidence in the system. My view at the time was that we had dealt
satisfactorily with each of the issues which had been found, but the overall stability
of the system and integrity in the full live operation had still to be proven. So my
concern was generally about the “unproven” nature of the system rather than
knowledge of specific faults (outside of those where we had rectification plans

agreed) — in other words what we still did not know.

152. As discussed throughout this statement, the problems we had with Assurance
during the Programme had restricted our ability to gain incremental confidence in
the system, and the number of Acceptance Incidents in 1999 had further reduced
our confidence, and indicated problems with Pathway’s approach to Development
and Quality. We were also aware, at least informally, that Pathway had had
problems with EPOSS and had sought help from Escher during development (as
noted in “Programme Review — Brainstorm on Suggestions, (WITN0597_01/28,
WITN05970114) and had concerns with the Quality of EPOSS (as described in
“Fortnightly Report — period to 19/01/98” (WITN0597_01/27, WITN05970143) and
elsewhere). But again, these concerns were of the unproven nature and of its

chequered development history, rather than having knowledge of specific issues.

Page 51 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
153. My expectation was that, as with any new system, there would be ongoing
monitoring to build up confidence as the rollout progressed in 2000, and serious
volumes of offices/transactions were achieved, and that if issues did appear then
they would be investigated by Pathway and POCL. This process would hopefully

allow confidence to be earnt and the system to be proven at scale.

154. As | left the Post Office in very early 2000, | do not have visibility of whether this

happened, and what monitoring was actually performed.

Suspension of the Roll Out

155. | have been asked to describe and explain my role in monitoring ICL Pathway’s
compliance with the conditions imposed on acceptance of CSR.1 believe that
POCL gave Contractual Acceptance in September 1999, however there was an
agreement that certain “hangout” activities, linked to Als, had to be completed by
November 1999. From what! remember, it seemed likely that Pathway would not
complete these activities by this time and therefore POCL prepared to apply

pressure by suspending the rollout, an option allowed in the Contract.

156. There were two specific Als where | was involved (Al298 System Stability and
AI376 EPOSS-TIP Data Integrity) which fell into this category, together with an
issue with Reference Data integrity which emerged during the trial. The
Reference Data issue did not have an Al number as it was raised after Acceptance
but was still considered by POCL to be a non-compliance with one of the formal

requirements (although | am not sure Pathway agreed).

Page 52 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
157. For Al298 on System Stability the information provided by the Horizon System
Helpdesk (HSH) was insufficient to be able to facilitate the analysis of faults in this
area, and we recommended additional monitoring and better recording, at
Pathway’s expense. We also looked at comparable systems to define a metric
for acceptable level of reboots, so we had something which could be measured —

| believe we settled on something like one reboot per 3-4 months per terminal.

158. There are a number of documents which provide more detail on what we did
around AI298. | believe a similar approach would have been followed for the other

Als by other members of the team.

159. Document “Incident 298 (System Stability)” | (WITNO597_01/40,
WITN05970125) contained an analysis | performed, based on the concern that
Pathway had not put forward a Resolution Plan at this point, but were rather relying

on individual fixes to improve the figures.

160. Document “Al298 — System Stability” (“Al 298 vO06d j”) (WITNO597_01/38,
WITN05970120) contains a markup with comments of a document created by the
Acceptance Team regarding the status of A298 as of the 20" Aug 1999. This

included defining the problem, the business impact and the business severity.

161. Document “Al 298 — comments on Pathway’s 2-9-99 plan” (WITN0597_01/41,
WITN05970145) contains the output of more detailed analysis of failure statistics
for a 4-week monitoring period. This showed mixed results, with some issues not

reducing in number of occurrences even after applying a fix.

Page 53 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
162. Document “Acceptance Headlines (input to HMT 20/10/99)” (WITN0597_01/42,
WITN05970130) provided an update on the activities from the Acceptance

Resolution plan, including updates on the monitoring activity for Al298.

163. My document “Al298 - Approaches to Restoring Stability and Integrity” from
September 1999 (WITN0597_01/43, WITN05970133) recommended that in
addition to fixing the individual problems which had been identified, and then
monitoring, that we needed to proactively re-visit the product (a kind of
retrospective Assurance); it also recommended that we re-visit the development
approach which had contributed to this problem in the first place, so that we

avoided further problems.

164. The “ICL Pathway Action Record” dated 17/9/99 (WITNO597_01/44,
FUJ00079174) records that (for Al298) Pathway had work underway to ‘analyse...
to establish what changes to the development and testing strategies might be
appropriate to mitigate the risks of similar incidents occurring...”. | cannot
remember the details of what was eventually proposed but this appears a case
where the leverage we had in Acceptance process forced Pathway to do more (or

give us visibility of more) than just follow a “fix on fail” approach.

165. | have been asked what checks were put in place to monitor the data integrity
issues and whether we considered them satisfactory. For Al376 on the Integrity
of Data to EPOSS-TIP, Pathway were required to develop new integrity controls.

Note that this Al related to integrity of the feed from EPOSS to TIP (that is,

Page 54 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

exported from Horizon), rather than specifically around integrity within the EPOSS

system within Horizon.

166. Document “Rollout Decision — Demand Position Paper” (WITN0597_01/45,
POL00028551) contains details of what we required here in November 1999.
Note that this paper shows we had clearly tried to learn from the problems of the
PFI days by making very explicit what visibility we needed, not just a “fix”,

including:

a. “logical assurance of authorised design document’,

b. “analysis of all previous root causes to determine that errors would be

detected”
c. “Testing to a jointly agreed strategy and high-level test plan”
d. Dual running including under stress conditions, failure conditions etc.
167. As far | can remember we considered that these additional controls would be
satisfactory, for the purpose of the integrity of the feed of EPOSS to TIP and to
meet the needs of the specific Al. The inclusion of point b. above was intended

to ensure that the new controls were satisfactory to pick up all known problems,

rather than following the “fix on fail’ approach we had seen in the past.

Page 55 of 75
168. | have been asked to describe the problems which emerged relating to
reference data, including effect on accounting integrity and their mitigation. There
were problems identified with Reference Data processing, that is importation of
data created by POCL which defined products and/or the cash account detail.
Others were more closely involved in this but from what | remember this related to
problems when POCL submitted changed reference data (something which might
happen when new products are introduced, or the cash account lines to which

products report change), and how the Pathway system reacted to this.

169. | remember a series of workshops were organised between various POCL
groups (noting that the POCL central systems here were outside of the remit of

Horizon) and Pathway to jointly work up solutions.

170. | believe that the Reference Data issue could, at times, produce problems on
the EPOSS-TIP interface (similar to Al376), specifically during a change to

reference data.

171. | cannot remember the detail of the resolution on the Reference Data issue but
| believe although POCL cooperated in the solution this was viewed as a Pathway
issue as the Contract required them to integrate with the POCL reference data

feed.

172. It is probably worth mentioning that in early 1999, | remember being tasked with
looking at what options might exist for going live without a working TIP interface,

effectively having the Horizon offices produce a paper cash account and paper

Page 56 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
feeds and these being processed as if the office was still manual. This was one
of several attempts by POCL to decouple the rollout from known problem areas in
Horizon, should Pathway fail to solve these in time. Clearly this was seen as a
risk area at the start of 1999, some months before Acceptance. Document
“Contingency Options for Non-Availability of EPOSS Feed to TIP”
(WITN0597_01/46, WITNO5970122) was my report from this exercise. | cannot
recall who was sent this document, and do not have access to email records of
the time, but | presume that it would have included the Programme Director and/or
team, and together with colleagues in TIP who helped with the report. However, |
do remember it was considered ‘sensitive’ and may not have been widely

circulated.

173. There was another incident related to Pathway processing of reference data
updates of which | have no recollection from the time but for which it appears that
| was asked by POCL management to review Pathway’s explanation. In document
“ICL Pathway Progress Summary for Input to Horizon/Pathway Delivery Meeting
27" October 1999” (WITNO597_01/47, FUJ00079184) (Page 15-18) it appears
that a potentially serious bug had emerged in live running in October 1999 which
had potential to affect the Accounting Integrity in live offices (at that point around

1000 offices | believe).

174. The bug was apparently caused by the application of incorrect reference data
to the live estate, which revealed a design/code fault which meant that Internal
Transfers (movement of cash/stock between Users in the office) were incorrectly

processed, and specifically that invalid data was written by EPOSS.

Page 57 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
175. This was a case where Pathway had to fix the operational impact of at the bug
by injecting additional ‘correction’ messages (data) into this office to restore the
accounting position, in addition to fixing the reference data/software to avoid a re-

occurrence.

176. From the narrative in WITNO597_01/47 it appears that | had been asked to
review this issue by someone from POCL who was present at the regular
“Horizon/Pathway Delivery Meeting” (I do not believe that was a meeting series |
attended). | cannot recall who asked me to review this issue, and how we had
been informed of the issue, or even whether we had been proactively officially told
of it and the resolution, or whether it only emerged through questioning at this
meeting. [For the avoidance of doubt, the initials “JF” used in that document

appear to refer to an attendee from Pathway and not me.].

177. Asa result it seems | raised a number of questions/concerns with Pathway
about how it had happened, what they have done to fix it and (specifically) around

what controls were in place around applying a “fix” to live data.

178. | suspect this was the first time that the need for Pathway to make adjustments
to live office data had been reported to POCL and the need for such intervention
was Clearly of concern to POCL. The notes record that POCL Audit were being
asked to review, however | do not have visibility of any outcome of that review, or

whether this such centrally inserted corrections became a regular event.

Page 58 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
179. The answers from Pathway (which were copied into the meeting notes in
WITN0597_01/47) suggest that Pathway had already applied the fix (the past
tense was used in their response). The notes says that Authorization to insert
correcting data was given in Pathway by their Customer Service Director, and
does not mention any prior agreement from POCL. Note that the fix was applied
centrally (not via explicit remote access to the counter terminal) but still obviously

affected the data in offices, as was required to resolve the problem.

End of Involvement

180. Ihave been asked when my involvement in the Horizon IT System came to an
end. | left the Post Office at the start of February 2000, as the Horizon Programme
was wound down and moved to business as usual. At this point the responsibility
for managing Pathway had migrated to the “Business as Usual” units which had
been set up in POCL — for instance | believe there was the Business Service
Management group managing and monitoring day-to-day operations. Work had
started at that point on New Products, including Network Banking, but again in a

“Business as Usual” manner, with new groups in POCL working on these.

181. In my last few weeks at The Post Office | wrote, at the invitation of the MD of
the Post Office Network Unit (the owning business unit), a brain-dump paper which
| called “A Reflection on the Last 5 Years: Lessons, Issues and Key Points’, and
covered my outgoing view of Horizon (WITN0597_01/48, WITN05970123). This
document is, | believe, useful as a contemporaneous view of the state of Horizon
at that point, as well as trying to learn from the problems we had experienced in

the previous five years.

Page 59 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
182. For completeness, | should mention that during my subsequent time working
for Escher Group Ltd (who acquired Anshe Ltd, the company | joined after leaving
the Post Office), | did have occasional, rather superficial and intermittent, contact
with Fujitsu mostly in support of certain attempts by Escher to sell further software
to them for use in POCL/POL. | believe this included (unsuccessfully) attempting
to sell an Escher accounting module (known as “Asset Manager”) to Fujitsu,
probably in around 2003, amongst others. At that time | believe that during

meetings with Fujitsu the Horizon system was portrayed as being fairly successful.

Concerns when Rollout Restarted

183. | have been asked what concerns | had about the accounting integrity of
Horizon when rollout recommenced in or around January 2000. | cannot
remember any concerns specifically around Accounting Integrity itself when the
rollout recommenced around January 2000, with the exception of the Als which
were already in progress on Data Integrity for EPOSS-TIP. | believe we followed
due process on dealing with Acceptance Incidents and Rectifications, and
everything that had been discovered had been progressed and fixed or had a plan

to be fixed.

184. | did of course still have general concerns around the unproven nature of
system, based around the challenges that we had had with attempting to gain
Assurance throughout the previous few years, and which | have covered in detail

earlier in this statement.

Page 60 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
185. | believe that the feeling in POCL was that, despite all the problems and delays,
we had finally, several years late, got to a system which could move to the next
stage with rollout, and POCL could actually see how it worked for real.’ This did
not mean that people felt the system was perfect, and certainly | had concerns
about the lack of Assurance and how they had got to this point, but in the
circumstances going cautiously to the next stage was maybe not unreasonable.
The question to ask is maybe whether due caution was applied once rollout

recommenced.

186. Personally, it felt unsatisfactory that due to the PFI contract and Pathway’s
interpretation, we had such a difficulty in providing assurance, with the problems
with Acceptance proving the point and justifying our concerns. So my general
feeling was that the system was not yet “proven” but that such proof would now
have to come (or not) in live operation. To a degree, we had lost the previous

battles and the only option was now trialling in live operation.

187. | have been asked what action | took to report concerns to others in POCL. My

general concerns etc are documented in some detail the Horizon “brain-dump”
document “Lessons, Issues and Key Points’ (WITN0597_01/48, WITN05970123)
mentioned earlier. The concerns about the lack of Assurance had been

documented many times throughout the project and | am sure were well known in

POCL.

Page 61 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
188. However, that document had a Section C “Future Risk Areas’, and within that

a topic “C6. Some technical capability still to be proven’: The introductory

paragraphs to that section states:

a

“This section outlines a number of technical areas which it would be wise
to “watch”, although they are not the subject of any outstanding
Acceptance Incidents. They should not be taken as predictions of things
which are yet to go wrong, more as a list of possible areas of weakness
which could ‘trip us up” in the future, especially as the number of offices

increases at the planned rollout rate up to the target full population.”

“There is an argument, based on the same principles as used to justify,
albeit not to great effect, the need for assurance during development,
that states the need for ongoing assurance during the live operation of
the service and associated system. We do not appear to have any
contractual basis to seek such involvement, however we may wish to
negotiate with Pathway at the relevant time to seek some confidence

that these issues are indeed under control.”

189. | think itis important to note that there should have been no surprises to anyone

in POCL in that document — this was my attempt to bring together the big issues

(as | saw them) in a single place for future use. | have no visibility of whether the

information or suggestions in that document were taken forward by POCL.

Page 62 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
Looking Back — POCL Scrutiny of Testing, Trial and Acceptance

190. | have been asked to look back and consider the effectiveness of POCL’s
testing, trial and acceptance of the Horizon IT System. Looking back, | feel that
POCL performed as effective a scrutiny as was supported by the Contract,
however that throughout the project we had been let down by the Contract, and in
particular the influence of PFI. The replacement of the original Contract in mid-
1999 with a non-PFI version, once the vast majority of the development had been
completed without our scrutiny, could not cure those problems. As discussed
earlier, the new Contract in 1999 did not open up any additional avenues for
Assurance, and no opportunities for a pause for a full technical/design review were

offered.

191. | believe that individual POCL staff generally did the best they could do given
the nature of the contract(s) with Pathway and with Pathway’s behaviour and

attitude towards POCL, and towards Assurance in particular.

192. Looking at the documents for that time, it appears that POCL took a reasonably
‘hard line’ with Pathway during the Acceptance Process in 1999, at least as hard
a line as the Contract allowed. | am sure at that point there was desire within
POCL to get the project moving, and pressure being applied from Pathway, but

POCL did hold out on the outstanding Als to get a resolution.

193. I did not have any visibility of the final decision-making process which led to the

rollout restarting.

Page 63 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
194. The Acceptance Incident process, including the Dispute Process, was | believe
followed rigorously by POCL, and Pathway did fix a large number of issues with
Horizon during 1999. Sadly, Acceptance could only be withheld based on
uncleared Acceptance Incidents or unmet Requirements, rather than unproven

reliability characteristics.

195. In summary, | felt that the team did as well as could have been done given the

Contract, but that the Contract was inadequate.

196. We had a Service Provider who largely blocked and dismissed our attempts at
Assurance, and the nature of the contract prevented POCL from having adequate
visibility of the problems it seems Pathway were having in Development. The
Assurance Team members consistently flagged the problems with Assurance to
the PDA and subsequently POCL Horizon management, and worked persistently
and doggedly to get what they could from Pathway, but sadly it appeared that we

were constrained by the Contract and no long-term solutions were found.

197. We know that in its submission to the DTI in 1999 Pathway continued to claim
that the PDA had been “managing ... in a manner inconsistent with the principles
of PFI’, and claiming “huge amount of senior management time being devoted to
issues which were constantly raised by the PDA” (WITN0597_01/49,
WITNO05970144). | believe that the problems with Horizon show that more, rather

than less, Assurance activity by the PDA was needed.

Page 64 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

198. Looking back | also find it somewhat surprising that despite the number of
outside experts and reviews from various consulting firms, a “PFl-suitable”
contract was not implemented — something which met the requirements of PFI but
also allowed the PDA to effectively “police” the provider. Sadly, despite all the
outside experts, | do not remember any such advice on how to manage Assurance
in a PFI environment being given to us. In trying to manage our part of an IT
procurement of this complexity under PFI rules it felt at times as if we were

“bleeding edge’.

199. In particular, | believe we should have had further contract requirements around
“characteristics” around reliability, integrity etc with measurable targets, and more
onus on the Service Provider to actively prove compliance, as well as explicit
requirements for the Service Provider to provide visibility of design documentation,
fault logs, etc in a timely manner during development. The contract that we had
gave Pathway every incentive to keep us shut out, treating our attempts at
involvement for assurance as an unwelcome distraction, leaving us unsighted and

Pathway free to make their own decisions on Quality.

200. 1|do remember, in 1999 perhaps, performing some research looking at industry
standards for software characteristics, what we might call the “ities”, and in
particular looking at a standard ISO9126. This covered characteristics such as
reliability, usability, efficiency, maintainability etc. If we had had some contractual
support to evaluating Pathway against such characteristics, we might have had

more success.

Page 65 of 75
201. | also do remember raising a concern that there was not adequate “hostile
testing” or stress testing visible to us, and wrote a paper proposing that we
undertook a programme of “hostile testing”. The draft document “Hostile Testing”
dated 6/10/1999 (WITN0597_01/50, WITN05970124) refers, although sadly |

have not been able to locate a completed version.

Looking Back — Fitness for Purpose at Rollout

202. | have been asked to look back to consider whether the Horizon IT System was
fit for purpose at the point it was rolled out, and if not, why it was accepted and
rolled out. Looking back, given the somewhat chequered history of the
development of Horizon, including the problems with Assurance, the withdrawal
of BA, the number of Acceptance Incidents, the number of late changes to Als,
and the need for the Suspension of Rollout to get remediations completed, it would
be hard to argue that the system or Pathway’s overall service would have
magically become “fit for purpose” for a full national rollout and immediate switch

to Business as Usual.

203. However, the expectation was, | believe, that there would be extensive

monitoring/handholding during the rollout and first national running.

204. | do believe there was also a general view in POCL that they had to get this
system into real live operation in a representative number of offices to really see
how it operated, and therefore that it should commence rollout and then use the
live operation for monitoring and to build up confidence in the system — and that

they would not benefit from holding it back once known problems were fixed (even

Page 66 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

if they could). | was not directly involved in the decision, which was taken at a far
higher level, but that was my assumption. [I have been asked who | considered
held this expectation; | cannot point to a specific individual or individuals, but |
believe it was widely held that real experience of the system in live was needed to

move the project forward.]

205. From a Contractual point of view, | am not sure whether POCL could have
prevented rollout once Pathway had completed the Al remedial actions. | have
seen that there was some opportunity for a “veto” from POCL on specific grounds

but do not know what those grounds were.

206. Given the problems in 1999 from Acceptance, and throughout the project, |
believe clearly that the system (and Pathway) had some significant way to go to
gain confidence — to a degree in 1999 this was a classic “don’t start from here”
situation. It is very difficult to retrofit quality to an IT system, and it would appear
from our experience that Pathway had applied a ‘fix on fail’ approach to some
areas (e.g. EPOSS), with many fixes being applied in 1999 to get it through

Acceptance.

207. This was not an ideal basis from which to move forward and it would have been
appropriate to apply some healthy scepticism to the operation of the system over
the first few years. | think a key question for the Inquiry to ask is what gave POCL
such confidence in Horizon to start using it for prosecutions of Subpostmasters,
especially after the rather chequered history of the system from 1996-2000 and in

particular the experiences of 1999.

Page 67 of 75
Other Matters to Assist the Chair
208. There are a number of other points which | would like to raise in this statement

which | hope may assist the chair.

209. Firstly, much was made in the litigation and by Fraser J of the issue of “remote
access” by Fujitsu to Horizon counters. | have no recollection of this being
discussed by Pathway during the procurement or being documented by them in
any of the documents such as the SADD (Service Architecture Definition
Document), the SFS (Security Functional Specification) or the TED (Technical
Environment Description) version of which we had sight during the procurement.
| obviously do not have access to these documents but it would be illuminating to
know whether this access was documented and how/when it was introduced in to
Horizon — and whether any form of change control or impact assessment was
performed. There was also a Penetration Testing exercise undertaking by, |
believe, PA Consulting on behalf of the Programme around 1998, and it would be

useful to know whether that feature was present at that time.

210. Secondly, | believe that significant changes were made to the accounting and
reporting requirements on Horizon in the first few years of live running, including
the removal of the Cash Account and replacement by a Branch Trading Statement
in the early 2000s. _ | believe it would be beneficial for the Inquiry to investigate
what changes were made and what, if any, improvements to working practices
were introduced before these changes were implemented to avoid the quality

problems that we had seen in 1998/9.

Page 68 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
211. Thirdly, from my later experience with implementing counter automation
systems for other Posts using the underlying Riposte product, | know the power of
the “audit trail” provided by Riposte Message Server and what investigations can
be performed by analysing the available data. Whilst | realize that Pathway’s
EPOSS was a bespoke application, and | do not know in detail what data EPOSS
stored in Riposte, | am surprised that more has not been made of the availability

of this data in investigations regarding discrepancies in offices.

212. From what | recollect from the procurement, the Pathway solution was
supposed to archive detailed message data to WORM (Write Once Read Many)
disks for longer term retention, such that data would be available should it be
needed for investigations or legal use. This should have made the provision of
underlying office data for analysis relatively straightforward if required. This
archive capability should have been described in the Pathway TED (Technical
Environment Description) document, although | do not have access that document

to check.

213. Fourthly, | would hope that the Inquiry will investigate why/how unexplained
discrepancies and subsequent prosecutions occurred under two totally separate
versions of Horizon — the original Horizon procured by the PDA as discussed in
this statement, and the later Horizon HNG-X which had a totally different online
architecture and was introduced around 2009. HNG-X was, | believe, a complete

bottom-up redevelopment at the front end (counter) at least.

Page 69 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
WITN05970100
WITNO05970100

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true

Signed

Dated 7 September 2022

Page 70 of 75
Index to First Witness Statement of Jeremy Peter Folkes

— Meeting Report #7”

No | Exhibit Number Document Description URN

01 > WITNO597_01/01 “Objectives of the WITNO5970101
Demonstrator Stream”

02 ~=WITNO597_01/02 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITN05970102
Strand — Summary of
Demonstrator Activity”

03 =WITN0597_01/03 “Supplier Score in Respect | POL00031154
of Value Factors"

04 = WITNO597_01/04 “Final Evaluation & POL00028152
Selection: Final Team
Report”

05 = WITNO597_01/05 POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITNO5970140
— Introductory Meeting

06 ~=WITNO597_01/06 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITN05970106
— Meeting Report #1”

07 | WITNO597_01/07 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITNO5970107
— Meeting Report #2”

08 WITNO597_01/08 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITN05970108
— Meeting Report #3”

09 = WITNO597_01/09 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITN05970141
— Meeting Report #4”

10 | WITNO597_01/10 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITN05970109
— Meeting Report #5”

1 WITNO597_01/11 “POCL Infrastructure Demo | WITN05970139

Page 71 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
12

WITNO597_01/12

“POCL Infrastructure/End-
to-End Demo — Meeting
Report - Escher Site Visit”

WITNO5970142

13

WITNO597_01/13

“Note re splitting Pathway
Risk re EPOSS”

WITN05970110

4

WITNO597_01/14

“Risk Register Analysis” —
Alan Fowler

POL00028150

15

WITNO0597_01/15

“Pathway Risk Response
for PWY064”

FUJ00078025

16

WITNO597_01/16

“Pathway Risk Response
for PWY066”

FUJ00078026

17

WITNO597_01/17

“Escher Dependency — An
Analysis”

WITNO5970117

18

WITN0597_01/18

“Pathway Risk

Processes/Top Ten Risks :

Status 8.9.95”

FUJ00078000

19

WITNO597_01/19

Fax from Bob King re
Strategic Compliance and
TIP interface

POL00031277

20

WITNO0597_01/20

“Terms of Reference —
Technical Assurance
Forum (DRAFT)”

WITN05970138

21

WITNOS97_01/21

“Technical Assurance
Forum — Meeting 2 —
Integrity (1)”

WITN05970129

22

WITNO597_01/22

“The Level of Information
Needed for Technical
Assurance”

WITN05970113

Page 72 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
23 WITNO0597_01/23 “Assuring Integrity, WITNO5970116
Accuracy and Robustness
of the Service”

24 ~~ WITNO597_01/24 “The Route to Acceptance | WITN05970115
Through Assurance and
Testing”

25 | WITNO597_01/25 “Product Assurance — A WITNO5970118
Re-Think”

26 | WITNO597_01/26 “PDA Quality Review FUJ00078984
Comment Sheet for POCL
Infrastructure Acceptance
Specifications” - Jeremy
Folkes comments 3/6/97.

27 | WITNO597_01/27 “Fortnightly Report — period | WITN05970143
to 19/01/98”

28 ~WITNO597_01/28 “Programme Review — WITNO5970114
Brainstorm on
Suggestions”

29 ~=WITNO0597_01/29 “Acceptance at Release WITN05970119
Authorisation”

Original copy of
POL00028503

30 = WITNO0597_01/30 “Acceptance Board POL00028367
Minutes”

31 WITNO597_01/31 “Briefing on the New WITN05970136
Horizon Contract”

32 =| WITNO597_01/32 “Independent Consultant POL00038828

Review of BA/POCL
Programme - Bird and
Bird/Project Mentors
Report”

Page 73 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
33 WITN0597_01/33 “Notes from reading the WITNO5970121
Bird & Bird/Project Mentors
Report”

34 = WITNO597_01/34 “Potential exposures from | WITN05970127
removal of DSS
requirements/new contract”

35 | WITN0597_01/35 “Project Emerald - Option C | WITN05970146
- Considerations Around
Future Use of Aspects of
ICL Pathway Solution”

36 | WITNO597_01/36 “Live Trial Stressing — A WITN05970147
Discussion Paper”

37 | WITNO597_01/37 Pack of Als from 1999 POL00028357

38 = WITNO597_01/38 “Al298 — System Stability” | WITN05970120

39 | WITNO597_01/39 Acceptance Incident POL00028478
Workshop Pack 25 and 26"
August 1999

40 WITNO597_01/40 “Incident 298 (System WITNO5970125
Stability)”

41 | WITNO597_01/41 “Comments on 2/9/99 WITN0O5970145
Rectification Plan for
Al298”

42 | WITN0597_01/42 “Acceptance Headlines - WITN05970130
input to HMT 20/10/99”

43 | WITNO597_01/43 “Al298 — Approaches to WITN05970133

restoring stability and
integrity”

Page 74 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
44

WITNO0597_01/44

“Acceptance Workshop —
ICL Pathway Action
Record”

FUJ00079174

45

WITNO597_01/45

Rollout Decision Demand
Position Paper

POL00028551

46

WITNO597_01/46

“Contingency Options for
Non-Availability of EPOSS
Feed to TIP”

WITN05970122

a7

WITNO597_01/47

“ICL Pathway Progress
Summary for Input to
Horizon/Pathway Delivery
Meeting 27" October 1999”

FUJ00079184

48

WITNO597_01/48

“A Reflection on the Past
Five Years: Lessons,
Issues and Key Points”

WITN05970123

49

WITNO0597_01/49

ICL Pathway Submission to
Trade and Industry Select
Committee, June 1999
(from parliament.uk
website)

WITNO5970144

50

WITNO0597_01/50

“Hostile Testing — A
Discussion Paper”

WITN05970124

Page 75 of 75

WITN05970100
WITNO05970100
