WITNO3720100

WITNESS: MILLIE CASTLETON
STATEMENT NUMBER: WITNO372

EXHIBITS: none

DATED: ....13/05/2022.

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF MILLIE-JO CASTLETON

|, MILLIEJOCASTLETONOf

will say as follows:

Introduction

1. 1am now 26 years’ old. In 2004 when the Post Office started all this in 2004, | was aged
8. | am the daughter of Mr Lee Castleton. The Post Office brought civil proceedings
against my father in the High Court of Justice in 2006. It did so on a false basis. | want to

describe the consequences for me, and for my family.

2. | wrote this statement at the suggestion of my mother and father. No other person has
had any part in its preparation or its content. | have not discussed it or its content with

anyone else.

Human Impact Statement

3. For over 17 years the post office has had a significant part of my life, a looming presence

that has clouded many of my late childhood memories.

4. Truthfully, | must have been 8 when | first took note the confusion, frustration and
anxiety that was leeching into my home. This was before talks of court, trials and
accusations of theft. This was the period that my father started noticing the IT faults that
wouldn't be taken seriously for so many years. In the years running up to my father's

trial in 2006 | vividly recall sitting on the staircase late at night, listening to conversations

Page 1 of 7
WITNO3720100

| barely understood or could really comprehend. To a child, the answer always seemed
obvious, my father hadn't done anything. Why didn't people believe him? Why is the
dining room table covered in papers as well as the back office of the post office and why
is he always down there late at night making phone calls and faxes? | didn't comprehend
the situation back then and, frankly, at 26 I'm now just horrified about how hard that
hundreds of sub-postmasters had to fight just to clear their names of a crime that not a
single one of them committed. So many court dates, so many lives and reputations, all of

which were dragged and beaten down over the course of two decades.

My family moved to run a small newsagents-post office in 2003, the start of a new life in
a place that would bring new opportunities and security for all of us. | was 8 and my
brother 6, all of us about to be thrown into something that would drastically shape the
rest of our lives. Sometimes I've asked myself about what would be different if we
started somewhere else. That's a question everyone asks, usually coming to little
conclusions, small changes that are just curious to imagine. But I can say with complete
confidence that our lives would have been unrecognisable in these situations. The
mental and physical toll that 17 years of fighting has left every one of us with scars that
we likely will always be healing from. This was an ordeal that not only cost my father
legal fees, this was an event that blackened our name and branded us all with something
that was unjustified. Court ruling, local gossip and unyielding arguments from the post
office would lead to my whole family being branded as thieves and liars. It's deeply
sickening to look back to my life in that small town. A place that would in time, fill me
with anxiety to walk through. How comfortable can anyone be when people spat at you
based on what you know is a lie? It was also a lonely time, the financial strain of legal
fees and supporting the family saw my dad working near 100-hour weeks, often
involving traveling and spending days on end away from us. He became a stranger to
me, someone | barely saw and lost close relationship with. My mother worked too
during the day, upholding the newsagents we still had, which was failing due to the label
attached to us and it after the legal case. This time in my life stands out as my never
seeing my dad and only having phone calls to speak to him rather than face to face,
because he was away so much working. As a coping mechanism | found myself insisting

that | clean the house or cook tea a few days out of the week. This increased as | got

Page 2 of 7
WITNO3720100

older. Unknowingly, this was the beginning and the start of me seeking comfort in some

kind of control in life.

. When I started a new school based within the local area | recall feeling nervous, typical

teen nerves of course, but deeply tainted with the knowledge that these strangers
would have the bias that I'd seen in others. | remember feeling cold and terrified when a
child on the bus in my first week asked, ‘didn't your dad steal loads of money or
something?' This set me on edge for a long time, causing me to become that ever so
anxious child who regularly was the subject of bullying. After a few incidents of
supposed friends treating me poorly, | completely disconnected. One year into my time
at this school | just removed myself from social interaction other than very passive
interactions with bullies and small talk with kinder folk. But the trigger was already
there, I'd lost faith in everybody around me over the years. Trust wasn't something I'd
afford in anyone, living in a constant cycle of fear and anxiety that lead me to not even
want to go to the canteen anymore. Lunch period became a time for me to hide
somewhere with a book and silence. A number of times | was asked if | was okay by
concerned staff. All of which | met with a nervous comment that | was fine. I didn't want
to involve anyone, nor did | see the point. To my mind the cycle was so deeply set in

place that it was impossible to escape.

. At home | was dealing with parents who were working their hardest to provide, utterly
pained by the stress that the post office trial caused them. Dad was working insane
hours as well as beginning to work with others to try and solve the many emerging cases
of other sub-postmasters and post-mistresses like him. My mother was also working as
much as she could but also dealing with a stress- induced epilepsy. She lost her driving
licence as a result and had to take medication. These seizures where unpredictable at
first when the medication was still new. | remember having to handle her seizures alone
as a child, sometimes in the middle of the night. When dad was away, I'd sleep beside
her just in case. | felt helpless, | couldn't do much to ease the financial issues of my
family, | couldn't offer any help beyond household tasks like cooking, cleaning, or giving
any birthday money and later money from my part time job to my mum to help. At this
time in my life my need for control in my own life took on a new form. | was always so

anxious, withdrawn and lost. | needed something to focus on, even if it was negative.

Page 3 of 7
WITNO3720100

8. [didn't tell my parents about the bullying or social withdrawal. They didn't know | spent
my breaks sitting alone or just walking around, they didn't know | could go a day or two
without really talking. They didn't know that | was assaulted on the school bus and had
to run off on the first stop, wet from water being thrown at me, being spat on and
having been hit by paper balls. In my mind this was an additional stressor they didn't
need. | could deal with it alone and not put more weight on their load. I just felt like such
a burden all the time. A waste of effort, concern, and attention. | made myself small, |
kept everything quiet and lied to them. To the point | even spent days out in town alone,
walking around for hours pretending | met with friends when | didn't. By then | also
developed an intense fear of spending money. My family was suffering, everything was
so desperately uncertain and spending anything on myself felt utterly selfish. Even to
this day | cringe and second-guess whenever | buy something that's not essential. It's a
strange feeling, screaming self-deprecation and "what-if" scenarios going off in my head.
Even buying a cup of basic coffee had my teenage self in knots. What if it was needed for
something else? Why was | even worth that shred of money? The childhood uncertainty

and fears just don't fade. I'm certain they never will.

9. These negative feelings grew. By the time | was 17 (that was in 2013) | was absolutely
wrecked by feelings of self-loathing, depression and feeling like nothing more than a
burden to my family- a feeling that they never did anything to validate but my mind
linked heavily to the emotional rollercoaster of their stress and pain. | couldn't be
another reason for it, | couldn't tolerate the idea of adding to it. They were busy, they
were pained from the post office fight. | was nothing, | felt like nothing. All because | was
so scared to hurt my family more than they had already. The post office just loomed too
large in our lives, controlling and warping every aspect of our beings. | had spent years in
self-imposed isolation, afraid of adults and peers. | often feel | had no teenage
experience as | insisted on staying home and doing chores, working with my family or
part-time work. | didn't have the fortitude to pursue anything with my peers. | just felt
so utterly worthless and empty, like | couldn't contribute anything meaningful to anyone
in my life. | just had to be useful, had to show some sort of worth or value. My sense of
identity lost as the years went by. By 2014, at the age of 18, | couldn't even tell you

about my favourite activities, shoes, or hobbies. | didn't put anytime into myself. At

Page 4 of 7
WITNO3720100

university this spare time required filling. Studying could only carry me so long, | just had
to do anything to feel productive or like | was achieving something. So, | walked. Some
days, for 8 or more hours without a break, this being on a diet that was ground back to
the absolute minimum, resulting in me having fainted a few times in the middle of the

town and sitting in lecture halls wearing my coat and gloves throughout.

10. My late teens and early twenties were governed by my eating disorder and mental
anxieties. | began to sink under the weight of it all and subsequent grabbed for some
sense of control. | was anxious about going to university and leaving my family. Mum
was still having seizures and Dad was still fighting a legal battle, | felt guilty. Leaving and
not being able to help more. | left, already dealing with an undiagnosed at the time
eating disorder. It began in my GCSE year, just eating less bit by bit and skipping out on
the canteen and pack lunches to avoid questions. By this point | was visibly skinny. Living
alone however gave way to me being vulnerable to all my demons. It was so easy to skip
out on food or restrict my intake. This also related to the fear of spending money on
anything other than something related to my family or essentials. | could finally feel a
sense of control, | could finally have some stability in my life. It was shamefully addictive
and disgustingly comforting. My parents became worried quickly of course, I'd moved
out and dropped weight at an alarming rate. But | couldn't stop, anorexia is a beastly
illness that has you ‘protected’ in a delusion. The truth was | just didn't care anymore, |
hated myself with every fibre of my being. | wanted control but | also wanted to feel
something, even if it was the pain of my aching body or the freezing chill that always felt
in my underweight frame. By the end of my first year of university | had been diagnosed
as anorexic and too sick to go to my second year. | spent a year out of university,
recovering at least partially in a physical sense before returning. But | still was pained,
still grappling with all my anxieties and self-hate. Burden, helpless, liar, useless and

worthless. | couldn't escape it.

11. My lowest weight saw me weighing little more than 5-stone and having to stay in
hospital for heart related issues for days on end. I'd be lying if | claimed that this wasn't a
cry for help. The surrender of a broken spirit, the pain and self-loathing if someone who
just couldn't escape a terrible situation. Every part of my late childhood and teens was

absolutely tainted by the post office case. My anorexia was a visual manifestation of all

Page 5 of 7
12.

13.

14.

WITNO3720100

of the feelings | was suppressing. Hate, fear, anxiety, and frustration. | was so broken, so

alone and frankly aching to just disappear forever.

This was the hardest part. | had to not only recognise my problems but also unpick years
of mental blocks. It took years, relapses, hospital stays, scares about my heart possibly
failing and a period of months in a day clinic post-graduation. | took my degree in 2017
weighing 5.5 stone. | would have graduated in 2016, but | had to take a gap year 2014-
2015 because of medical intervention because of my health problems and my eating
disorder. | recovered in due time, but therapy was still difficult. | remember feeling tiny
in those uncomfortable chairs, telling my care-co-ordinator over and over that | felt so
unworthy of help. That I'd come to hate my body, mind, and soul with all the venom |
could hold. It's hard to pick away years of destructive self-defence. Harder still when you

can still see ghosts of what influenced your decline all around you.

But | fought. | tried. I'm better for it. Not perfect but better, part of me will always feel a
little broken-up. | still feel a burning fear at spending larger sums of money or doing
something purely for myself. That nagging voice in my head still says ugly things
sometimes. It still tells me that my past and family’s struggle will define me, that it will
be a branding on my skin forever. Broken, thief or liar. Even now as I go into my career |
still find it so incredibly hard to trust anyone, even subconsciously | sabotage myself by
not asking for help with anything. Asking for equipment, advice or resources feels
terrifying. Like I'm unworthy or will be thought poorly of. I'm trying hard to break this
cycle but I'm 26 and am very conscious that | may never be able to fully commit to
natural trust. But my family is still fighting. I'm still fighting, as are many other hundreds

involved in the Post Office trial.

My story won't be the only one, the mental toll that so many years of fighting has taken

on so many of us is frightening.

Page 6 of 7
WITNO3720100

STATEMENT OF TRUTH

| believe the contents of this statement to be true.

13/05/2022
. Dated...... sone

Millie Castleton

Page 7 of 7
