                                                                                   WITNO0580100
                                                                                 WI TN00580100




                                                   Witness Name: Alwen Lyons


                                                   Statement No.: WITN00580100


                                                   Dated: 24 April 2024




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




                 FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF ALWEN LYONS




I, Alwen Lyons, will say as follows:


Introduction


1.   I am a former employee of the Post Office Limited ("POL"). I have set out my

     professional background at paragraphs 7 to 31 below.

2.   This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the

     "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 13 March 2024

     (the "Request"), and in response to the questions raised in that Request.

3.   As an overarching point, I retired from POL in 2017. I have addressed the

     questions put to me by the Inquiry honestly and to the best of my ability, based

     on my memory of events. However, I would like to highlight that I am being asked

     to comment on events which took place over ten years ago in some instances

     and it has been difficult to recall with precision certain meetings, dates and
                                       Page 1 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     information. Similarly, some of the matters I have been asked to comment on are

     outside my personal knowledge. Where that it is the case I have indicated this.

4.   There has also been a large amount of media coverage around the Horizon

     system ("Horizon"), the prosecutions of sub-postmasters, and the legal

     challenges brought over the past few years. As a result of this, it is inherently

     difficult to separate out what I knew at the time with what I have subsequently

     become aware of through such coverage.

5.   I have tried my best to provide accurate information to the best of my recollection

     and have answered the Inquiry's questions honestly, however the period of time

     since these events and since I retired from my role does make it difficult to answer

     many of the questions, some of which relate to events many years ago.

6.   I instructed a law firm, Kingsley Napley LLP, to assist in the preparation of my

     statement.

Professional Background

7_   In 1977 I went to the University of Birmingham to study maths_ After a year I

     decided that I wanted to change my degree and so, in 1979, I began a Drama

     and Theatre Studies course at Bretton Hall, which was part of Leeds University.

8.   Having graduated from Bretton Hall, I then joined the Royal Mail Group ("RMG")

     in 1984 as part of its Graduate Trainee Programme. I was initially based in the

     North East Region. The programme lasted for 18 months; during that time, I

     gained experience working within the various parts of RMG_ Through this

     programme, I had the opportunity to undertake projects_ At the end of the

     programme, each part of the business could bid for which graduate they wanted

     to join their team.

                                       Page 2 of 104
                                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                                       WI TN00580100




9.    On completion of the programme in 1985 having received bids from both Royal

      Mail Letters and Post Office Counters Limited ("POCL"). I ultimately decided to

      join POCL as Executive Assistant to the Counters Controller in the North East.

10. However, later that year, after a move to the South East of England, I started a

      role as Estates Manager for RMG in the South East Region, based in Brighton. I

      knew that a reorganisation was imminent and was hoping to re-join the POCL

      team in due course. I worked as Estates Manager for five months, and after the

      reorganisation towards the end of 1986, I became Assistant Management

      Accountant for POCL in the Brighton District.

11. After four years of study, I obtained an accreditation with the Chartered Institute

      of Management Accountants ("CIMA") in 1993.

12. In 1987 1 became the Management Accountant for the Brighton District of POCL,

      and in 1989 I was promoted to Head of Finance to lead the team.

13. In 1991, on the day I went on maternity leave with my second child, the Brighton

      District of POCL shut down and responsibility for the area split between the

      Aldershot and Hastings Districts. It was not possible for me to commute to those

      locations given my young family at the time, and so in 1991, I became Area

      Manager for POCL in the Worthing Area.

14_   It was in this role that I first held responsibility for managing sub post offices_ I

      directly oversaw and was responsible for approximately 180 offices at that time.

      I had three support staff (one trainer and two visiting officers) in my team.

15. In 1993, there was a further reorganisation of POL and the Area Manager role

      was changed to that of a Retail Network Manager. We were put into "clusters"

      but I was not required to relocate as I was covering the same area as in my

                                        Page 3 of 104
                                                                                    WITN00580100
                                                                                  WI TN00580100




     previous role. My "cluster" office was based in Portsmouth.

16. In 1995, I moved from POL to Royal Mail Letters ("RML") to become the Sales

     Channel Manager for RML in the South East Region.

17. In this role, I was responsible for the relationship between the South East Region

     of RML and POL, and provided training for sub-postmasters to sell Royal Mail

     products. I held this role for approximately one year.

18. In 1996, as I had been working closely with POL in the South East Region, I was

     offered the role of Regional Head of Finance for POL based in Tunbridge Wells.

19. In 2000 1 became the Head of the Retail Network for South London. I was

     responsible for post offices in South London (an area approximately south of the

     Thames, inside the M25). I had a team of approximately 18 retail line managers

     reporting directly into me.

20. In 2001 there was another reorganisation, and I became the Regional General

     Manager for POL in the South East region, based in St. Albans. I was responsible

     for Crown Post Offices and sub-postmasters; I had a senior leadership team

     which reported to me. The country was split into three regions (North, South East

     and South West), and I was responsible for the running of the post offices in my

     region (South East).

21. In 2002 there was further reorganisation, as part of which the country was split

     by office type, rather than by region, as it had been previously. I became the

     Head of Direct Manager Branches for POL, and was responsible for the

     Crown/Branch offices throughout the United Kingdom. Four regional managers

     reported to me at that time, and I stayed in this role for three years.



                                       Page 4 of 104
                                                                                    WITN00580100
                                                                                  WI TN00580100




22. In 2005 I was asked to become Programme Director Compliance and

      Conformance for POL for approximately six months, to focus on matters related

      to POL's contract with BT. I was also a Royal Mail Pension Trustee from 2005

      until 2012.

23_   In 2006 I became Head of Employee Engagement and Internal Communications

      for POL. I was not responsible for Post Office Branches, and held responsibility

      for internal communications, although not operational communications.

24. Later that year I became Head of Mail Services Marketing for POL. The role

      required me to ensure POL was meeting its contract obligations to RML and

      working with RML to market their products through the network.

25. In 2009 I became Head of Separation Programme for POL. I was the only

      representative of POL in that programme, and have set out more information

      about this role at paragraph 39.

The role of Company Secretary

26. In 2011 1 was asked by the new CEO of POL, Paula Vennells ("Paula") and the

      HR Director, Deborah Moore, if I would consider becoming the Company

      Secretary for POL, following the separation from RMG, the appointment of Alice

      Perkins ("Alice") as Chair on 21 July 2011, and the formation of its independent

      Board_ I had worked in POL for many years and had a good knowledge of the

      business. In addition, my CIMA accreditation was one of the professional

      qualifications which was considered appropriate for being a company secretary.

27. My role as Company Secretary involved ensuring that the Board was able to

      perform its governance functions, by making sure that it had access to the

      necessary information in order to do so. I discuss my key responsibilities below

                                         Page 5 of 104
                                                                                      WITN00580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




      at paragraph 29.

28.   There were 10 Board meetings a year, with additional ad hoc meetings as

      required. The Board meetings were organised in such a way that Board papers

      and an agenda were circulated to attendees a week before each meeting. The

      Board had several sub-committees for which I also acted as secretary.

29. A summary of my key responsibilities and reporting lines as Company Secretary

      are as follows:

        a. I was the conduit between the Board and the business. I made sure that

            information flowed between these functions and that actions were being

            followed up. I would make sure that the Board received the information

            and documentation it needed. In general, materials for the Board would

            be sent via the Company Secretary.

        b. Prior to each Board meeting I would speak with the Chair to agree the

            agenda. I would provide the draft agenda to the Chair in advance for

            approval of the meeting topics and agenda timings. Once approved, I

            would collate the necessary Board papers and circulate them to the Board.

            This would include the agenda, the previous Board meeting minutes (in

            draft), and the updated action log from the previous meeting. I would

            attend each Board meeting and take a detailed handwritten note of

            proceedings. Following the meeting I would prepare detailed minutes with

            action points which I would share, in draft, with the relevant attendees, as

            necessary, to check for accuracy of their input, and ultimately with the

            Chair to seek their view on the draft minutes before being presented to the

            Board for agreement and signing.


                                      Page 6 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




        c.   Generally, I would not have an active role in Board meetings unless I was

             called upon or if I had information that would enable the Board members

             to better understand the position. My role was to take the minutes. I did

             not have an advisory role to the Board, nor any decision making or voting

             power.

        d. I worked closely with the Chair to make sure that the Board received the

             information it needed in order to have an effective Board meeting.

        e. Where members of the Executive would bring issues to my attention for

             the attention of the Board, I would generally share these issues with the

             Chair before circulating more widely, if required.

        f.   I was also responsible for ensuring records were updated at Companies

             House. For example, if there were any resignations, I was responsible for

             making the necessary filings at Companies House.

30. When I first started as Company Secretary, I reported to the General Counsel,

     Susan Crichton ("Susan"). When Susan left POL, I reported to Paula for a short

     period as an Interim General Counsel was in place. When Jane MacLeod started

     as a permanent General Counsel, I then reported to her.

31. When I first started in this role, I had a PA in my team as support, who was shared

     with the Chair. As I took on more responsibility, another Company Secretary

     (trainee) joined to assist with the First-Rate Business, which was POL's foreign

     exchange joint venture with the Bank of Ireland. Thereafter another Company

     Secretary (qualified under the Chartered Institute of Governance) joined to assist

     with the Post Office Financial Services Business, another joint venture with the

     Bank of Ireland. We worked as a team, but they reported to me and I had overall

                                       Page 7 of 104
                                                                                       WITN00580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     responsibility for them.

Role in disciplinary actions against sub-postmasters

32. From 1991 until 1995, when I was an Area Manager, later called a Retail Network

     Manager, I was involved in the disciplining of sub-postmasters _ Specifically,

     when internal audit had identified and raised an issue, this would be raised with

     the relevant Area Manger to make the decision as to what was going to ha ppen

     at that office (including, for example, if it was to remain open and/or whether the

     sub-postmaster would be suspended or dismissed). In terms of investigating the

     issue, my recollection is that internal audit would, if appropriate, notify the Post

     Office Investigation Division if any further investigation was required. It is

     important to note that my role and this process pre-dated the introduction of

     Horizon.

33. From 2000 until 2001, after Horizon was introduced and when I was Head of

     Retail Network for South London, my team also held responsibility for disciplining

     sub-postmasters in that area. I was responsible for hearing any appeals following

     the initial disciplinary decision. I recall hearing two or three appeals during that

     time; my recollection is that on each occasion I would have taken advice, as

     appropriate. I do not recall that these appeals related to Horizon. I believe that

     these decisions could have been further escalated to a review of the appeal,

     although I do not recall that this ever happened.

34. From 2001 to 2002 when I was Regional General Manager, I could have also

     been asked to hear a review of an appeal, although I do not recall ever being

     asked to doing so.

35. I did not have any involvement in validating the accuracy of, or testing of, the

                                       Page 8 of 104
                                                                                      WITN00580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     Horizon system. This was not part of my role.

36. As set out below, from 2011 onwards, in my capacity as Company Secretary, I

     would have been party to discussions around Horizon and the concerns that had

     been raised, and would have had general visibility of issues relating to Horizon

     across the business. I explore this in further detail below.

Computer Weekly

37. I cannot specifically recall when I first became aware of the Computer Weekly

     investigation into Horizon, but I do not believe I was aware of this when the story

     was first published. At the time my main focus was the separation programme

     between POL and RMG. I have no recollection of the issues raised by Computer

     Weekly being discussed in the separation programme meetings, and I would not

     have expected these issues to be raised; that was not the purpose of those

     meetings and that would not have been the correct forum to do so. I was also, at

     that time, not on the Executive Committee at POL and I was very much working

     independently as part of the separation programme. Therefore, if it was

     discussed within RMG and/or POL executive meetings or Boards, I would not

     have been made aware of it.

38. As far as I can now recall, I believe I first became aware of this investigation

     shortly before attending the meeting with Alice and Lord James Arbuthnot MP

     ("Lord Arbuthnot") on 12 March 2012. I cannot specifically recall my reaction to

     it now, however this was something that was considered in the context of the

     meeting with Lord Arbuthnot. I go into more detail about this meeting at

     paragraph 65 below.

Separation from RMG

                                       Page 9 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




39. The process of separating POL from RMG began in 2009. I took up the post of

     Head of Separation Programme, and worked on this project for approximately

     one year and nine months. The Government had decided to privatise RMG, with

     POL being retained as a wholly owned business.

40. I attended formal separation meetings on behalf of POL. Also, in attendance were

     approximately 10 representatives for RMG, and the Shareholder Executives for

     the Government. I was the only representative from POL. These meetings took

     place regularly — weekly to start with, before moving to more regular meetings,

     and likely daily meetings as we moved towards the date of the separation.

41. My role was to represent POL at the meetings, put forward its position and

     explain the consequences for POL of any decisions that were being made. I took

     a note of the meetings I attended and fed back to POL as needed.

42. At a high level I fed back to Paula at POL. At a more granular level I liaised with

     those within POL who held responsibility for the separate business areas,

     coordinating and considering the various issues that arose in enabling the

     separation to take place. One example of this concerned shared buildings, and

     how the asset value would be split at separation, as well as the practicalities of

     two businesses sharing the same building post separation.

43. At the same time, POL was also negotiating a contract with RMG for the sales of

     their products post separation. This was a separate piece of work which I was

     part of at the time.

44. As far as I can recall, throughout the separation process there were no

     discussions about Horizon. I believe that if there had been any concerns about

     Horizon at the time they would have been raised within RMG or POL directly,

                                      Page 10 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     and not at the separation meetings. The formal meetings were necessarily high

     level, and were driven by the Government. Whilst there was discussion about the

     split of the IT systems between POL and RMG, I cannot recall any specific

     discussion about Horizon.

45. In terms of the less formal meetings, again the focus was on the processes

     around the separation and specifics relating to the two businesses. I cannot recall

     any issues concerning the validity of Horizon being discussed at those meetings.

46. Regarding the prosecution of sub-postmasters, during the separation process

     my assumption is that prosecutions continued as normal. I believe at the time the

     prosecutions were undertaken by RMG on behalf of POL. I was not involved in

     this specifically.

47. Although the separation programme was ongoing from 2009 to 2012, the

     separation itself did not take place until 1st April 2012. The POL Board and

     governance structures were set up prior to that in 2011, to enable the appropriate

     governance to be put in place and to ensure that the discussions and decisions

     were not all channelled through RMG.

Disciplinary actions against sub-postmasters

48. I have been asked to consider document POL00178577. I can see that my name

     is listed at page 3 of this document, along with Susan Huggins and Richard

     Barker, as being responsible for suspension / non-suspension decisions, and for

     debt collection. However, it is not the case that I was responsible for the

     management of the suspension of sub-postmasters and any associated debt

     recovery at that time.

49. At the date of this particular document (5 October 2004) 1 was Regional General

                                      Page 11 of 104
                                                                                          WITNO0580100
                                                                                        WI TN00580100




     Manager for Crown Offices (later re-named as Head of Directly Managed

     branches), and held no responsibility for sub-postmasters in that role. I held this

     role from 2002 to 2006. As explained above at paragraph 21, in 2002 a decision

     was taken that the post offices in England & Wales would no longer be divided

     by region but rather by the type of the branch. Under this model, Richard Barker

     was responsible for urban sub-postoffices, Susan Huggins was responsible for

     the rural sub-postoffices and I was responsible for Crown /Branch /Directly

     Managed offices. This meant that it was Richard Baker and Susan Huggins who

     would have been responsible for disciplining sub-postmasters at this time,

     depending on the size of the individual branch. Whilst, theoretically, I would have

     been      responsible     for   any        disciplinary   outcomes     for    Directly

     Managed/Crown/Branch offices, as those working within those offices were

     directly employed by POL, any disciplinary processes would be through their

     employment contract. The relevant branch manager and HR would be involved,

     and as a result, I had a different role.

50. I note that at section 1.1. of that document ("Can we see any other such danger

     branches from data today?") the top ten "shortage branches" are listed. Only one

     of those is a Branch Office, being Hertford Street BO, which I would have been

     responsible for at that time. I note the finding for that office was that, following an

     audit, no discrepancy had been identified and any shortfall "appeared to be an

     accounting error, because the ATM contents had not been verified at the first

     audit'.

51. I have also been asked to comment on the following statement: "The agent

     blamed the automated bureau system for the `accounting discrepancy' but we

     are not aware of any other offices reporting similar issues. Whether or not theft

                                        Page 12 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




      is proven, failures in supervision, reporting and escalation must be

      acknowledged. A challenge to systems integrity, valid or otherwise, should not

      have been allowed to fester in this way."

52.   Whilst I cannot recall my thought process in 2004, nor the automated bureau

      system, I did not have the same level of understanding that I do now. It is my

      view that any issues which suggest that there may have been a problem with the

      integrity of a particular system should be taken seriously and properly

      investigated.

53. I do not recall any similar issues being raised in relation to the systems at Branch

      or Crown offices at that particular time for which I was responsible. Had there

      been any such issues I would have expected these to be escalated to me by one

      of the four Heads of Retail Network who reported into me. I do not now have any

      recollection of this happening.

2011 consideration of integrity of Horizon at Board level

54. I have been asked to consider document POL00027270, namely the minutes of

      the Board Meeting on 13 December 2011. I do not now specifically recall this

      meeting, which took place 13 years ago, and as such any information provided

      is based on my current reading and interpretation of these minutes.

55. I do not believe that Project Sparrow was in existence at this point, which is why

      it would not have been referred to at this Board meeting. It appears this meeting

      took place when the Board was relatively new and was managing a number of

      very large strategic issues such as the network transformation, the telephony

      strategy and negotiations with the Bank of Ireland, which consumed a huge

      amount of attention and resource.

                                        Page 13 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




56. In terms of whether Horizon should have been covered at this meeting, at this

     point in time, I do not believe that the Board had any understanding of the extent

     of the issues with the system. With full hindsight, and had the Board understood

     the problems with the Horizon system at this point in time, then it should have

     treated it as a priority.

57. I can see from this document that Susan, the former General Counsel and my

     direct line manager at this time, was asked to provide a "Significant Litigation

     Report". I do not specifically recall this particular report but in general terms the

     purpose of this item was to bring any significant pieces of litigation or litigation

     risks to the Board's attention. A similar report would have been presented at

     RMG Boards pre-separation. There would not be a "Significant Litigation Report"

     at every single Board meeting, although it was done fairly regularly — perhaps

     quarterly.

58. If there had been any significant questions in relation to this report, I believe that

     these would have been minuted. From the absence of any such minute I have to

     conclude that no significant questions were asked of Susan by the Board

     following her report and that there was no substantive discussion of the report at

     this meeting.

59. lam also asked to consider document P0L00021503, namely the minutes of the

     Board Meeting on 12 January 2012, and the minute that "Les Owen asked for

     assurance that there was no substance to the claims brought by sub-postmasters

     which had featured in Private Eye".       Again, I do not specifically recall this

     meeting, but my belief is that the minutes would accurately reflect the Board's

     position at the time; i.e. there had been negative coverage of Horizon in Private



                                       Page 14 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




      Eye, and Les Owen was seeking assurance that the system was in fact working

      properly. I think the Board genuinely wanted to find out what was going on and

      was raising questions and challenges as a result.

60. I see at paragraph POLB12/07(a), that Susan was given an action in response

      to the minute: "Susan Crichton suggested that she clear the audit report with the

      external lawyers and if it is possible to give the report privileged status it would

      be circulate it to the Board". I do not recall the Board raising any concerns about

      this suggested course of action.

61. This RMG Internal Audit report was not Susan's report or work product, and I

      believe she wanted to check that with the external lawyers that it was not legally

      privileged and/or there were no issues with it being shared. I have no reason to

      think that there was anything improper or untoward in Susan seeking the lawyers'

      approval before she circulated the report in such circumstances.

62_   The Board action log (POL00096391) demonstrates the outcome of this action.

      Having reviewed that log, it appears that Susan updated the Chair, and that two

      reports were then to be circulated to the Board in advance of the next Board

      meeting.

63. I am also unable to recall whether the Board was provided with the actual number

      of criminal prosecutions made by POL. It may well have been included within the

      "Significant Litigation Report" (POLB(12)(13)). In terms of the reliance on the

      number of prosecutions resulting in convictions as a metric, and I appreciate that

      this is somewhat circular, but that would likely have given some comfort that the

      IT system was functioning as it should.

64. At that time, it was my understanding that POL had prosecuted individuals to the

                                         Page 15 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     criminal evidential standard in impartial courts. In addition, the findings of the

     RMG Internal Audit Report, which can be found at P0L00137239, (prepared with

     the assistance of a seconded IT expert from Deloitte) would have also given me

     a degree of comfort. My recollection more generally is the tenor of advice by the

     experts within POL was that there was no issue with Horizon, and I relied upon

     that.

Meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin

Meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on 12 March 2012 - Background

65. I first met Lord Arbuthnot on the 12 March 2012, when I attended a meeting with

     him and Alice. I believe that Alice had met Lord Arbuthnot at an event earlier that

     year. My understanding is that Lord Arbuthnot had raised some concerns with

     Alice about the operation of the Horizon system and Alice wished to meet with

     him to understand these concerns more fully. Alice asked that I attend the

     meeting with her as she was relatively new to POL, having taken up the Chair's

     role the previous year. I believe that she wished for me to attend both as support

     and because of my understanding of the network. She also asked that I take a

     note of the points arising at the meeting.

66. It was not the first time that Alice or I had been made aware of concerns that had

     been raised about the Horizon system. A question had been raised at the Board

     Meeting in January 2012, as referenced at paragraph 59 above, and, therefore,

     I believe the fact that Lord Arbuthnot had raised concerns afterwards would have

     also prompted Alice to meet him.

67. My overall impression was that Alice was taking the issues raised by Lord

     Arbuthnot very seriously. She understood Lord Arbuthnot to be a man of integrity

                                      Page 16 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     and was keen to meet with him and to understand more of the situation.

68. I had not met Lord Arbuthnot prior to this meeting, nor was I aware of his specific

     interest in Horizon. My understanding of the overarching purpose of this meeting

     was for Alice to listen to Lord Arbuthnot's thoughts and concerns about Horizon,

     to reassure him that those concerns would be taken seriously, and to take any

     follow up action points as necessary.

69. I believe that there was a pre-meet between Paula, Alice and myself prior to the

     meeting. I cannot remember any specific details from this pre-meeting, or what,

     if any, preparatory steps were taken. I recall that Alice was to update Paula with

     the outcome of the meeting and take any necessary steps thereafter.

Meeting — 12 March 2012

70. Whilst I do not have detailed recollections of this meeting, I do recall that it was

     generally positive, with Lord Arbuthnot and Alice being "on the same page". It

     was clear to me that they respected each other and they both wished to better

     understand the issues leading to concerns around Horizon. It was recognised by

     both Lord Arbuthnot and Alice that an investigation of the issues would be

     necessary. I recall Alice wanting to get to the bottom of the problem, to

     understand if indeed there was an issue, and if so, what needed to be done to

     address this.

71. For the most part of the meeting I was an observer and note-taker. I can see from

     the meeting note (POL00105481) that I explained the training that sub-

     postmasters received. I believe that I would have had this information from my

     previous roles at POL, rather than from any specific information gathered prior to

     the meeting. I cannot now specifically recall the details of the training. I do not

                                       Page 17 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     believe I had any further active role in the discussion.

72. I recall that Alice (and others within POL, following her report of the meeting),

     understood the need to take these concerns seriously. I do not recall being

     surprised by the issues that Lord Arbuthnot had raised as this was not the first

     time this had been raised, given the discussion in the Board meeting in January

     2012, and whilst at the time I believed that the Horizon system was technically

     sound, it was nonetheless clear that there were problems and concerns that

     needed to be addressed. Alice had been asked to meet with a Member of

     Parliament who had raised serious concerns, and it was absolutely appropriate

     and correct that POL took these matters seriously. Whilst I cannot speak for

     others, my recollection after that meeting is that these issues were indeed taken

     seriously. See my comments at paragraphs 90 to 92 below regarding my

     recollections of my personal view of the situation at that time.

73. I have specifically been asked about document POL00105481. I can confirm that

     these are my notes of the meeting on 12 March 2012. These notes were taken

     by hand and subsequently typed up. I believe that I would have shared these

     notes with Alice in draft before the notes were finalised. Whilst I cannot recall

     specifics, my practice was to ask her for any comments prior to them being

     finalised. I cannot recall if she had any comments on this occasion. Again, whilst

     I do not have any detailed recollection of the meeting, having re-read these notes

     now, they are as I remember them.

74. I do not remember the "Summary of Issues affecting Sub-postmasters"

     document, referred at page 3 of the notes; this may have been a document that

     was provided by Lord Arbuthnot during the meeting, which was then appended



                                       Page 18 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     to my meeting note.

75. I do not recall if I attended a post-meeting, following the meeting on 12 March

     2012. My main role was to prepare a note of the meeting, which I would have

     then sent to Alice. I believe that Alice would have met with Paula to discuss the

     meeting and any actions arising from this.

76. The document POLOO105481 also contains handwritten notes, and I have been

     asked whether these belong to me. I can confirm that these are not my

     handwritten notes. I believe that this may be Alice's handwriting, on the document

     that Lord Arbuthnot had provided (see paragraph 70 above). Whilst I cannot

     specifically recall, my assumption now is that Alice made those notes at the time

     of the meeting, handed the notes to me, and then I appended these to the

     meeting note that I produced.

77. I have been asked to comment on the note "Reputation key. Much cash around.

     There is a helpline available." As set out above, these are not my handwritten

     notes and therefore I do not know specifically what the notes relate to.

78. I have been asked about document P0L00021505, which contains the minutes

     from the Board Meeting on 15 March 2012, and in particular paragraphs

     POLB12/28 (b) and (c), and Les Owen's challenges to the business regarding

     the future IT infrastructure.

79. I have been asked about the comment: "Lesley Sewell emphasised that the

     business lacked the capability and maturity to manage the changes required to

     deliver the future IT Infrastructure." My interpretation now of this comment is that

     Lesley had informed the Board that, as the IT side of POL was in its infancy,

     having only formally separated from RMG earlier that year, it did not at that stage

                                       Page 19 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     have the capability and maturity to manages the changes required for the IT

     infrastructure moving forward.

80. I note at POLB12/28 (a) of the minutes is a reference to the proposed introduction

     of a Service Integrator (SI) to manage IT providers. Lesley Sewell ("Lesley"), at

     the start of that section, is noted to have "explained the IT Strategy for the next

     3 years which will support the wider business activity, procure circa 60 IT

     contracts and deliver the cost reduction challenge". It appears that the proposed

     introduction of an SI related to that strategy. My assumption is that Lesley was

     referring to the IT strategy and infrastructure as a whole, and was referencing

     the business' general lack of capability and maturity to manage the changes

     required to deliver the future IT infrastructure. I assume that in referencing the

     procurement of 60 IT contracts, Fujitsu would have been one of them. It therefore

     appears that Lesley's comments relate to the IT infrastructure as a whole rather

     than Horizon.

81. My assumption above is supported by the comments within the remainder of that

     paragraph a)- "This work was not a core competency and it made more sense to

     outsource. She stressed the importance of getting the SI contract terms correct

     and getting good governance in place to manage that contract", and at c) "Chris

     Day assured the Board that the SI and contracts would include efficiency targets

     which were already assumed in the budget". However, my thoughts on this are

     based on my interpretation now, rather than a specific recollection of the meeting

     at the time.

82. I have been asked whether I considered that this (Lesley's comment about the

     business lacking the capability and maturity to manage the changes required to



                                      Page 20 of 104
                                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




      deliver the future IT infrastructure) was the case from the start of the Horizon

      project. Horizon was introduced in 1999, over a decade before the POL and RMG

      separation. I was not involved in the introduction or set up of Horizon and

      therefore do not know whether Lesley's comment would have been applicable

      then. However, given that this comment related to the future of IT infrastructure

      for POL from 2012 to 2015, as opposed to the position with Horizon when

      operating under the previous model (and in an operational context), I do not

      believe that the comment is relevant to the set-up of Horizon in the late 1990s.


83_   With regards to Les Owen's challenges referred to in the minutes of the meeting,

      again, my understanding now is that these questions related to the business

      infrastructure, rather than operational IT. Having reviewed the minutes, I believe

      Les Owen was challenging whether the SI structure was right for the business

      and was looking for examples of where it had been deployed successfully. It

      appears that he also asked Lesley to ensure that POL retained control of

      procurement decisions. I do not believe that these challenges and the discussion

      about the business IT infrastructure related to Horizon


84. I have been asked about Les Owen's reason for resignation referred to at page

      5 of the meeting minutes. Les Owen had indicated his intention to resign prior to

      this Board meeting (as noted on the meeting agenda). As far as I am aware, his

      reasons for resigning were not related to the questions he had raised during the

      meeting or Horizon in general.


85_   When RMG and POL separated, Les Owen was asked to join the POL Board to

      provide a level of continuity through the changes that had occurred as a result of

      the separation. His passion and expertise were in Mail, rather than Counters, and



                                       Page 21 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




      I believe it was always his intention to resign from the POL Board after a certain

      period of time. As mentioned above, as far as I am aware this was unrelated to

      Horizon.

86. The meeting referred to at POLB12/41 (c) is the meeting between Lord

      Arbuthnot, Alice and myself on 12 March 2012.

87. As to the meeting notes at POL00021505, I had prepared these minutes as part

      of my role as Company Secretary. I would have made sure the action points were

      documented and would have circulated the actions and minutes to the relevant

      individuals. My ro►e was not to provide an opinion or input during the meeting,

      but to ensure that the Board received the relevant information, that previous

      action points were executed, notes of meetings and relevant papers had been

      circulated, and that accurate minutes of the meeting were taken.

88. As to my understanding of the Board's view of the concerns raised by MP's and

      sub-postmasters at this time, the Board members would have received a copy of

      the RMG audit that Susan had circulated prior to the meeting in April 2012. Whilst

      I cannot speak to the views of individual Board members, my general recollection

      is that they had taken comfort from the previous audit and the assurances that

      had been given about the functioning of the Horizon system. Alice had indicated

      at this Board meeting that she did not believe the system was at fault but she

      wanted evidence that could be shared with stakeholders to support POL's view

      on this.

89.   I believe that the Board considered that Horizon issues were being taken

      seriously within POL and that actions were being taken to address the concerns.

      I believe that the Board also recognised that the concerns raised were serious


                                       Page 22 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     and required further consideration and follow up. I believe that if any Board

     member had had concerns about the operation or integrity of Horizon at the time,

     this would have been raised at the Board meetings and minuted accordingly.

90. My own view was that there must have been another reason for the concerns

     that had been raised and that it was very important that POL understood, and

     addressed the root cause. I did at this time not believe that the issues were due

     to the fundamental technical functionality or integrity of the Horizon system, but

     that instead that there must have been other reasons — a lack of training or

     support, or misunderstanding of the system, perhaps. I had taken comfort from

     the audit that had taken place and assurances that were given, and genuinely

     believed that Horizon was operating as it should do. I did however recognise that

     this was a serious issue for POL that it needed to resolve, and that POL need to

     take steps to understand and address the root cause of the issues.

Post meeting

91. My recollection is that the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and the discussions

     thereafter led to a project examining the processes in place and the support

     available to sub-postmasters where it came to Horizon.

92. I cannot recall the name of this project nor when it started. It was led by Angela

     van-den Bogerd ("Angela"), and it examined the processes in place at the time

     to assess where improvements could be made to improve the support given to

     sub-postmasters _ I believe at that time, Angela was Head of Network Services.

93. In terms of the actions that were taken following this meeting, I believe that Alice

     and Paula explored the possibility of appointing an independent forensic

     accountant to review the cases of concern. I recall that I thought this was a good

                                       Page 23 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     proposal and positive step, and there were regular discussions about this, and

     other, possible options. It is likely that I would have spoken with Susan, Paula,

     and Alice about these issues on a regular basis. My overall recollection is that

     these concerns were being taken very seriously and both the Board and the

     business were keen to get to the bottom of the concerns that had been raised.

94. I have been asked about document POL00179511, namely an email from Rod

     Ismay ("Rod") to me, dated 26 March 2012. Rod led the accounting team at POL

     in Chesterfield. He was the accountant within POL whom I recall held the best

     understanding within POL of how the transactional accounting system worked.

     He reported into Chris Day, the Chief Financial Officer. I had worked with Rod

     during previous roles and so was familiar with him at that time. Rod had a wider

     accounting role within POL, but given his knowledge and understanding of the

     Horizon system, he was often best placed to give advice.

95. I do not specifically recall receiving this email from Rod. I also cannot recall any

     discussion I had with Rod at that time. Whilst I cannot speak for Rod, it appears

     that I had asked for this report and was now chasing him for a copy.

96. I cannot now recall reading Rod's report and as such cannot speak to the level

     of weight I placed on it at the time. However, having now read the report, I believe

     that I would have been comforted by this, alongside the internal audit report

     referred to above (POL00137239).

97. It was not part of my role to verify the accuracy of his report, and I would not have

     been qualified to do so. It appears that I forwarded the report onto Susan, who

     was General Counsel at the time, and others. I cannot now recall why this was,

     although anticipate that this is because I was asked to do so.


                                       Page 24 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




98. I have been asked about the document POL00105597. This contains an email

     dated 3 April 2012 between Paula, Susan and myself. With regard to the

     suggestion by Paula that it was "inappropriate" for a meeting to be set up with

     Moya Greene ("Moya"), and whilst I cannot speak for Paula or Alice, my

     understanding of this comment is as follows: At that time, Moya was the CEO of

     RMG. Paula was the CEO of POL. The issues raised by Oliver Letwin's office

     related to POL, and as such should have been addressed by POL. As Moya was

     CEO of RMG, she was not the correct CEO to be involved. My recollection is that

     post separation of RMG and POL (which happened on 1 April 2012, a few days

     before this email trail), Moya had at times received correspondence meant for

     Paula and vice versa. On this occasion it was appropriate for Paula, as CEO of

     POL, to meet with Oliver Letwin MP. My assumption is that Oliver Letwin MP's

     office sent the letter to Moya in error.

99. Paula had previously reported to Moya as CEO of RMG prior to separation, and

     although RMG and POL were by that time independent of each other, Moya may

     at times have become involved in matters relating to POL. Moya had suggested

     that perhaps she should meet with Oliver Letwin MP, and I believe that the point

     being made by Paula related to the fact that, as Moya was CEO of RMG and not

     POL, it was not appropriate for her to be involved in POL business.

100. I cannot recall being particularly surprised by the suggestion by Oliver Letwin MP

     of a "systemic issue." By that stage Alice and I had met with Lord Arbuthnot, and

     I was aware of the concerns that had been raised by him.

Letter to Oliver Letwin MP dated 4 April 2012

101 _ At document POL00115849 is a letter dated 4 April 2012 from Paula to Oliver


                                        Page 25 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     Letwin MP. I do not specifically recall this letter and do not believe that I was

     involved in its preparation. I do not now know who drafted this letter, and my

     assumption is that Paula would have had substantial input as the signatory of the

     letter, and given its importance.

102. I have been asked about the phrase "The Horizon system has been rigorously

     tested using independent assessors and robust procedures", and whether I

     believe this was accurate. Whilst I cannot specifically recall reading this letter at

     the time, as set out above, it was my understanding at the time that the system

     had been tested and was found to have been working correctly.

103. Today, I do not hold the same view as I did in April 2012. I have a far greater

     understanding of the failings of the Horizon system than I did at the time. At the

     time of the letter, I would have taken assurance and comfort from what I had

     been told. Given what I know now, I question how effective the testing was.

104_ I have been asked about document POL00105494, being an email dated 20 April

     2012. I can see from this correspondence that I was involved in the preparation

     of the brief for Paula and Alice ahead of their meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and

     Oliver Letwin MP. My role would have been to collate the relevant information

     before the meeting. I believe that in preparing for this meeting it would have been

     necessary to identify and consider the information about the case referred to

     Oliver Letwin MP, and also to look into further detail about the case raised by

     Lord Arbuthnot. I worked with others within POL in pulling together the briefing

     note. I believe this may have been Angela and Rod, but I am not certain. My

     recollection is that the briefing note was a summary of the pertinent issues.

105. I have been asked about document POL00107712. This appears to include an


                                         Page 26 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     email correspondence between myself and Rod on 11 and 12 April 2012, within

     which I sought information from Rod about the case of a sub-postmaster in Oliver

     Letwin MP's constituency, and Rod responded with the information requested.

106. Regarding the statement that "it would e [sic] great to be able to look at the

     keystrokes which caused this and explain why they happened", it was my

     understanding at that time that sub-postmasters could see all amendments or

     changes that had taken place within their accounts. It followed that, if we could

     review the keystrokes, we would be able to identify where the discrepancy had

     occurred. My understanding at that point was that any changes to the account

     on Horizon could be seen by the sub-postmaster.

107. I have been asked about document P0L00057647, being an email from Simon

     Baker on 30 April 2012, and whether I agree with Simon Baker as to the agenda

     and purpose of the meeting ahead of the 17 May 2012 meeting, and if so, why.

108. I do not specifically recall receiving this email; however I do remember that there

     had been a meeting prior to the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin

     MP. I believe that Simon Baker's role was to co-ordinate that meeting. Having

     reviewed the documents, it appears this was different to the pre-meet held with

     Paula and Alice, who were attending the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver

     Letwin MP.

109. It appears to me now that Simon Baker's description of the purpose of the

     meeting is correct, namely "The overall purpose of tomorrow's 1pm meeting is to

     help us prepare for the James Arbuthnot visit on 17 May." As to whether I agreed

     the agenda and purpose of the meeting at the time, it was not my role to do so.

Meeting — 3 May 2012

                                       Page 27 of 104
                                                                                          WITNO0580100
                                                                                        WI TN00580100




110. I have been asked about document POL00057656, namely a note of a meeting

     between myself, Susan, Paula and Alice on 3 May 2012. Having reviewed the

     note, I believe that its purpose was to document the discussions in preparation

     for the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP. I would have taken

     this note to ensure the discussions and any follow up points were documented

     and circulated as necessary. My assumption is that the meeting was an

     opportunity for us to discuss preparations for the meeting and the points to be

     covered.

111. I do not believe that this was a regular meeting, rather a one-off in preparation

     for a meeting with the MPs that was due to take place two weeks later.

112. Whilst I cannot now specifically recall this, I anticipate that I would have circulated

     the note to those who attended and likely also to those with action points arising.

113. I have been asked to explain the distinction between the "old and new Horizon

     systems." This was not my area of expertise. My assumption is that I noted this

     down, to ensure that this distinction was explained and so it was clear to those

     attending. I do not know whether the cases being discussed at that time related

     to the old or new system, but my recollection is that we wanted to ensure the

     MPs understood that the system had changed. I note that the comment also

     states that "any live system review would have to be on the new system, although

     we have an audit trail of every key stroke in the old system kept for 7 years." My

     understanding is that because the new system had been introduced by that

     stage, any review would need to take place on that system, as the old system no

     longer existed. My belief at that time was that we did have an audit trail of every

     keystroke, as indicated within that note.



                                        Page 28 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




114. I have been asked to explain the statement "The best outcome of this meeting

     would be a position where they believe our evidence in their individual

     constituent's cases and support how we are handling the current situation.

     Longer term once they are assured by the review of Horizon they could 'help' to

     win others round." Whilst I cannot specifically recall that meeting or the notes that

     I prepared, my interpretation of this statement now, and recollection of the

     approach at the time, is that we wanted to provide sufficient assurances to the

     MPs by going through the evidence in their individual constituents' case. If they

     were assured they would feel able to support our view that the Horizon system

     was sound, and that they too would support POL in its handling of the issues.

115. The reference to "win others round" I believe reflects the hope that, if the MPs

     were satisfied with these assurances and the evidence we were able to provide

     regarding the Horizon system, then they too may be able support POL as to the

     system's integrity moving forward. I believe that the aim was to demonstrate to

     the MPs that the system was indeed working correctly because there was a

     genuine belief at this time that Horizon was working as it should do, and it was

     important to POL that the MPs could review and understand this evidence too.

     At that time, I did not doubt the fundamental integrity of the Horizon system, but

     was aware that there were associated issues (such as training and support, for

     example) that needed to be addressed and improved.

116. I do not believe that the comment at paragraph 115 above suggests that there

     was no interest on my part, or indeed the part of those at that meeting, to

     investigate whether there were systemic issues with Horizon. On the contrary,

     had I understood there to be a systemic issue with Horizon at this time, I would

     have expected this to have been addressed by POL. I honestly believed that any

                                       Page 29 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     issues that sub-postmasters were experiencing did not arise from the technical

     functioning or integrity of Horizon.

117. Whilst I cannot comment on behalf of others who attended that meeting, it is my

     recollection that they too believed there was no systemic issues with Horizon.

     Alice had made it clear after the first meeting with Lord Arbuthnot that she wanted

     to get the bottom of the concerns, and that if there was a problem she wanted to

     know about it and for it to be resolved. She was robust about this. I recall Paula

     similarly wanted to understand if there was an issue. My recollection is that those

     attending the meeting on 3 May 2012 were all assured by the audit that had taken

     place.

118. I also do not believe the Board was in doubt about the safety of prosecutions at

     this point, and had similarly been reassured.

119. With hindsight and knowing what I know now, I do believe that more should have

     been done to investigate these issues. At the time, however, it was my honestly

     held view that appropriate steps were being taken and that it was not a systems

     issue that was causing the concern.

Meeting — 10 May 2012

120. Having reviewed the documents POL00179789 and POL00057711, it appears

     that, in addition to the meeting referred to above, there was also a pre-meeting

     that took place on 10 May 2012. Whilst I cannot specifically recall these

     documents, I believe I was sent the agenda to make sure I was aware of the

     issues to be discussed, and so that I could ensure that the Chair had access to

     the necessary material. I did not attend this pre-meeting on 10 May 2012.

121. I have been asked why this group of individuals were selected for the meeting.

                                       Page 30 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     My comments are based on assumptions now having reviewed the

     correspondence.

122. My assumption is that Angela, who was part of the operations/network team, was

     present as she had knowledge of the network and had prepared the briefing note

     for the meeting. Jarnail Singh was a criminal lawyer at POL who, as far as I can

     recall, was involved in prosecutions relating to Horizon and would have been

     there in that capacity. Susan would have attended as General Counsel. Lesley

     was Chief Information Officer, a role which was also central to any IT issues and

     she also `owned' the relationship with Fujitsu. Rod had a good understanding of

     the audit reports and the Horizon system given his accountancy background and

     my assumption is that he was there for that reason. I am not sure in what capacity

     Simon Baker attended, but I note his job description as "Programme Manager,

     Front Office of Government". I am not certain of Chris Darvill's role and why he

     was in attendance, but believe he was a lawyer at POL at that time. Paula as

     CEO, and Alice as Chair of the Board, no doubt attended as they were to meet

     with the MPs shortly.

Meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin, 17 May 2012

123. I did not attend this meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP. My

     recollection is that there were a number of people attending on behalf of POL,

     and therefore my attendance was not necessary.

124. Regarding document POL00105491 and the statement that "a forensic

     accountant with good people skills" was needed, my understanding is that it had

     been agreed that an independent forensic accountant would review the cases of

     concern, and the operation of the Horizon system relevant to those cases to


                                      Page 31 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     address the issues that had been raised. I recall that it was felt that sub-

     postmasters may be more comfortable being interviewed by an accountant with

     good people skills who would put them at ease, rather than a more corporate

     organisation who may be considered less personal and potentially viewed as

     threatening. It was felt that POL needed to send the right people to speak with

     the sub-postmasters about the issues encountered to get the best possible

     outcome.

125. I do not now recall sending this document and do not recall if I received a reply,

     or if there was any discussion about this. With regard to the handwritten notes,

     this is not my handwriting. It may be Paula's.

126. With regard to the statement that the forensic accountant would "...look at how

     the software is validated', my understanding is that this was Alice's comment that

     I had noted down. I cannot specifically recall this meeting and cannot speak for

     Alice, but my interpretation of this comment is that Alice wanted the forensic

     accountant to analyse the application of the software and to determine whether

     there were any issues with it Alice was clear from the outset that if there was a

     problem she wanted to know about it. My recollection is that POL wanted to be

     able to validate the system and provide evidence of its veracity, whilst also

     resolve any issues and problems that were occurring.

127. I did not believe at that time that the issue would be resolved by persuading Lord

     Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP that there was no problem with Horizon. It was

     my view that it was important to address the issues that Lord Arbuthnot and

     Oliver Letwin MP had raised, and that if we could demonstrate to them also that

     the system had integrity, this would assist in resolving wider problems. However,



                                      Page 32 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     I recognised that this was not the only answer and that work needed to be done

     to address the cause of the issues. My view at that time remained that the system

     worked properly, but I understood that there were some areas that could be

     improved to better support the sub-postmasters.

128. I have been asked about document P0L00021507, namely the Board Minutes

     of the meeting of 23 May 2012, and in particular POLB12/69(b). As a general

     observation, I note that this meeting took place six days after the meeting with

     Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP, described above. It is possible therefore

     (if not likely), that the agenda for the Board Meeting had been set prior to the

     meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP, and that papers had been

     circulated around the time of that meeting.

129. I was responsible for drafting the agenda for the Board Meetings, although the

     contents of that agenda were ultimately the Chair's decision. Whilst the process

     for preparing Board agendas differed over time, there was for the most part

     standing agenda items that would appear on most meeting agendas. This

     included, for example, a CEO and CFO Report. Certain agenda items were

     seasonal in that they appear at the appropriate point in the year, and others were

     ad hoc, depending on the business being considered at that time. It was also

     usual to have AOB items, which were usually items where specific papers had

     not been prepared, but they were nonetheless important issues to bring to the

     Board's attention for discussion. The AOB items would not always be specified

     on the agenda. The fact of items being discussed as an AOB does not diminish

     their importance to the Board or their importance at the time of consideration.

130. I note that the update regarding the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver



                                      Page 33 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     Letwin MP was considered by the Board as an AOB item. I do not know the

     reason for this. It may have been a timing issue. As set out above, the fact that it

     was reported back as an AOB rather than a specific agenda item does not

     diminish its importance.

131 _ My practice tended to be that I would prepare the agenda in draft and then send

     it to both Paula as CEO and also to the CFO at the relevant time for any input,

     and thereafter would send it to Alice. As Chair of the meeting, it was for Alice to

     determine its contents, and providing she was happy with the proposed agenda,

     this would then be circulated to the Executive for information, and to highlight

     that they would be required to produce a Board paper if appropriate_

132. With regards to the agenda for this meeting, whilst I cannot specifically recall

     preparing it or indeed the meeting itself, I am confident that Alice would have

     approved the agenda prior to it being finalised_

133_ I do not believe that at that time the Board requested regular updates on the

     issues considered at the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP. The

     reason for my belief is that, if the Board had requested this, I would have noted

     this as an Action Point. The fact that I did not indicates that no such request was

     forthcoming_

134. I cannot speak for Paula as to why she had indicated that the meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP had been a "success". I was not at the meeting

     and I did not provide the update_

135. As to whether Paula ever gave an account to the Board of an external meeting

     which did not go "welt' or "very well," I am not able to comment on this definitively

     without reviewing the meeting minutes where Paula provided an update on

                                         Page 34 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     external meetings. I do however recall that funding meetings with the

     Government were often particularly challenging and, given this, may fall into the

     category of meetings that Paula had described as not having gone well. This is

     an assumption on my part though, and without checking the minutes I cannot

     comment.

136. I cannot recall whether the Board was concerned about the prospect of further

     meetings with MPs about, their constituencies' cases. The Board minutes would

     provide the best record of challenges and concerns that were raised at those

     meetings. Board members were always free to raise any concerns they had with

     the Chair or the CEO outside formal meetings. I am confident that if any of the

     Board members had concerns about matters, they would have raised them

     appropriately either in the Board meeting or with the CEO and/or Chair.

137. With the benefit of hindsight, I believe that there are many things that could have

     been done differently. At the time, neither I, or I believe others, considered there

     to be an integrity issue with Horizon. Had we done so I believe that further steps

     would have been taken, including further scrutiny of the system_ I note that in

     May 2012, I was aware of the Computer Weekly investigation that had been

     undertaken, and also of the concerns raised by Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin

     MP. Whilst at the time I was satisfied that appropriate steps were being taken, in

     hindsight I accept that further work could and should have been done around this

     issue.

Instruction of Second Sight

138. Within this statement I set out my understanding and recollection of Second

     Sight's role and how it came to be instructed by POL to undertake a review.


                                       Page 35 of 104
                                                                                            WITNO0580100
                                                                                          WI TN00580100




139. As a general point I was not involved in the instruction of Second Sight, but I did

     attend several meetings, usually with Susan, and at times with Second Sight, to

     ensure that the investigations were moving ahead. At times those meetings also

     touched on Second Sight's reports or contact with MPs. If Second Sight raised

     queries, I would assist by identifying the relevant person to respond, and in

     facilitating a response. However I was not involved in their instruction or oversight

     of their role. I provide more details of this at paragraph 157 to 160 below.

140. I have been asked to consider POL00057991. Angela was Head of Network

     Services at this time. Whilst I do not recall specifically why I asked for the

     information contained within this document, my assumption now is that it was

     likely at the request of the Chair or a member of the Board.

141. Whilst I do not specifically recall receiving this email, it is likely that by that stage

     I would not necessarily have been surprised to read that sub-postmasters were

     saying that errors were generated by the Horizon system itself, as these cases

     appeared to be similar to those being advanced by Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver

     Letwin MP, from sub-postmasters within their constituencies.

142. I see within POL00057991 an email dated 31 May 2012, at 18h16 from Chris

     Darvill. It suggests that a number of affected sub-postmasters were alleging that

     there were integrity issues with Horizon. At the time it was sent, it was my belief,

     based on my understanding, that a sub-postmaster could see every keystroke

     made on their account, and therefore could identify specifically where any

     discrepancy arose. As such, I do not think that this email would have caused me

     particular concern at the time and I knew that POL was looking into these issues.

143. I have been asked to consider P0L00143192, P0L00143191, POL00107746,


                                         Page 36 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     P01-00107753, P01-00143385, P01-00143573, P0L00181578. As mentioned

     above, Rod was a senior accountant who worked for POL based in Chesterfield.

144. At that time Rod was the expert within POL on the accounting side of Horizon. If

     any queries arose relating to the Horizon system, Rod was usually the first point

     of contact for myself and other members of the business. His quality of work was

     considered to be thorough, and relied upon and trusted.

145. Within POL00143192, at Point 11 of the email from Rod dated 18 June 2012 at

     14h27, Rod noted "The Post Office is fully confident that the Horizon computer

     system ... enable sub-postmasters to account accurately for the transactions and

     balances they record". As the business' internal Horizon accounting expert, I

     would likely have given much weight to Rod's assessment. From my perspective,

     there was no reason to doubt the qua►ity or veracity of his work or the assurances

     that he provided. I cannot speak for the Board or its individual members as to

     what extent Rod's role informed their approach.

146. I had limited interactions with Rod, as he was based in Chesterfield. Aside from

     him, I would have approached Lesley with any questions I had regarding Horizon.

     Lesley, as CIO, was the IT specialist within POL, and served as the Executive

     conduit to Fujitsu.

147. Both Rod and Lesley provided me with comfort regarding the Horizon system.

     Both were very confident in their understanding of how the system worked, and

     both were robust as to its integrity. I did not have any reason to doubt their

     assessment or reassurances.

148. With regards to POL00143191, I do not specifically recall sending this email, but

     assume I must have forwarded it to Angela as she was directly involved in the

                                      Page 37 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     workstream which considered Horizon and its issues. I do not recall having any

     specific discussions with Angela in this regard.

149. I also note document POL00107746. Simon Baker worked in the team concerned

     with MPs, or I believe any work involving a parliamentary angle. I do not know

     what he meant by the fact that the review may be inconclusive and may lead to

     a "drain's up review". At this time, the Second Sight review was ongoing and my

     understanding was that this was the "drain's up review" of Horizon.

150_ I note within the document, at paragraph 4 on page 2, that there was 'some

     discussion on whether there could be bugs in the system...'. My understanding

     of this comment was that Second Sight was seeking to reassure both Lord

     Arbuthnot and POL that if there were bugs or similar technical defects within the

     system — as there could be with any computer system - Second Sight's review

     would identify them. As such, this did not change my opinion on whether there

     were defects in Horizon; rather, this email provided a degree of comfort that

     Second Sight's review would be effective.

151. I note within the same paragraph that 'the party line is that the system was bug-

     free and above suspicion'. I do not accept the characterisation of this belief as a

     "party line" — it was my truthful and honest understanding at the time that the

     Horizon system had integrity.

152. Within document POL00143385, I note the email from Rod dated 16 July 2012

     at 13h37 in which he states that `it offers more leads to invite more questions or

     challenges about matters which actually we feel do have controls in place to stop

     them'. Whilst I cannot recall this email specifically, upon my reading of it now, I

     consider that this was fairly typical response from Rod, whose approach was


                                      Page 38 of 104
                                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                                       WI TN00580100




     generally was to provide straightforward facts, without necessarily providing

     extensive background or engaging in any wider contextual discussion.

153. I note within the document POL00143573 that there is a reference to `external

     controls' to assist sub-postmasters who were experiencing losses. In general

     terms, if an office was experiencing losses, they were advised to undertake a

     series of measures to prevent further loss. These measures might include

     offering additional training to any staff, where possible introducing individual tills

     for staff, or installing CCTV over the safe. The sub-postmasters had complete

     discretion as to whether they followed these recommendations, and they did not

     require specific approval to introduce such measures. There was certainly

     nothing unusual about a branch implementing measures such as these.

154. Within the document POL00181578, I see in the email from Simon Baker dated

     7 September 2012 at 18h13 that Second Sight were apparently `becoming

     increased frustrated' by `documentation, or lack of it'. I was aware that at this time

     there were difficulties in producing some of the documents requested by Second

     Sight for their review. Some of the documents were very old, pre-dating the

     separation of POL from RMG, and in some cases RMG continued to hold the

     material. As such, it was at times logistically difficult to supply some of the

     documents requested by Second Sight.

155. In terms of liaison with Second Sight, my understanding was that Susan, as

     General Counsel, had ownership of POL's relationship with Second Sight.

     Angela was responsible for providing the operational inputs to Second Sight. My

     understanding of Rod's role (in relation to Second Sight) is that he would have

     been the person within POL to whom Second Sight would have spoken with



                                        Page 39 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     about the accounting within the Horizon system.

156. I have been asked to consider POL00339291, POL00339308, POL00107174,

     POL00091030, POL00091031, and POL00181348. Ron Warmington ("Ron")

     was one of two accountants at Second Sight (the other being Ian Henderson),

     who had responsibility for the review into the Horizon system.

157. I do not recall there being a formal tender or procurement process to instruct

     Second Sight; I believe the cost of the review fell under the amount that was

     required to initiate a formal public procurement process. I recall there was

     consideration as to what type of firm would be the best fit, and ultimately that

     Second Sight was preferred.

158. The Chair supported Lord Arbuthnot's' recommendation for a forensic review,

     and Second Sight was instructed following Susan Crichton's personal

     recommendation. I understood that Susan had worked with Ron of Second Sight

     previously, and I recall that she believed they could provide a valuable service.

     In terms of why Second Sight was the preferred supplier for this review, my

     understanding is that, although they were a small operation, it was considered

     they would have the best communication skills in terms of being able to liaise

     effectively with sub-postmasters. As discussed above paragraph 124, this was

     considered to be particularly important in terms of effectively liaising with sub-

     postmasters.

159. I did not speak to other accountancy firms prior to the instruction of Second Sight,

     and it would not have been my role to do so. I assume Susan, as General

     Counsel, would have been the main POL representative responsible for such

     communications.


                                       Page 40 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




160. I do not recall whether the decision to instruct Second Sight was approved by a

     Board decision. If it had been it would have been noted in the minutes.

161. As far as I can recall, Lord Arbuthnot's approval or endorsement of Second Sight

     was not specifically required. However, my recollection is that given the extent of

     Lord Arbuthnot's interest in this particular issue, the Chair considered it helpful

     for him to meet with Second Sight to discuss their approach. If Lord Arbuthnot

     was not satisfied, I assume we would have reconsidered the approach,

     particularly since he had specifically requested the forensic accounting review.

162. I note the email exchange at POL00091030. As is clear from this exchange, Lord

     Arbuthnot served as a conduit between Second Sight and the sub-postmasters.

     In addition, I believe that if an MP wanted one of their constituent's cases to be

     raised with Second Sight, they went through Lord Arbuthnot in the first instance.

163. As set out at paragraph 139 above, I was involved in supporting Second Sight

     with their review as a facilitator to ensure their queries were addressed by the

     most appropriate person. Given that I did not have the expertise in either the

     accountancy systems or on IT, I would have directed any queries to those who

     did. However, I did not hold responsibility for the relationship and I did not serve

     as the conduit between Second Sight and POL. I would support Susan and Paula

     in meetings with Second Sight, often taking a note of the actions to take forward.

164. I would not describe myself as having any particular role where it came to the

     instruction and supporting of Second Sight, but, as set out above, would help to

     facilitate the resolution of any issues. I would update the Chair, as necessary.

165_ I have been asked to provide an overview of a conversation I had with Ron on

     29 June 2012. 1 do not at this stage recall speaking to him on this date, although

                                       Page 41 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     note the email disclosed within POL00339308. The start of that email exchange

     begins with me requesting that Ron gives me a call to discuss arrangements for

     his initial meeting with Lord Arbuthnot. I cannot recall now whether or not he did

     call me that day, and/or whether or not I spoke with him about such arrangements

     another time.

166. I am asked whether I told Ron that remote access was not possible, either at that

     time or any other time. I believe at this point in mid-2012, I did not think remote

     access without sub-postmaster knowledge was possible. I do not specifically

     recall informing Ron of this, or having a conversation of that nature. I may have

     told Ron that was my belief but I cannot now recall whether or not I did. At a later

     date Fujitsu confirmed that remote access was possible in certain situations, but

     it remained my belief that this was always with the sub-postmaster having sight

     of any keystrokes on their account. I address this at paragraph 187 below.

167. I have been asked to consider POL00143269. George Thomson ("George") was

     General Secretary of the National Federation of Sub-postmasters (NFSP). I knew

     him on a personal level, as many years previously my father had held that same

     role. My understanding of this email chain having reviewed it now is that George

     was angry that he had not been kept updated regarding the review of Horizon by

     Second Sight, particularly as he had always been assured of the integrity of the

     system.

168. On page 5 of POL00143269, I see that I was given an action by Paula to contact

     George. It is evident from the email chain that it took me a while to get in touch

     with him over the phone.

169. Within the document POL00143269 and specifically within the email from


                                       Page 42 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     George dated 25 June 2012 at 09h16, he references 'a very strange decision'.

     Whilst I cannot speak for George, my belief is that he was referencing Second

     Sight's review of the Horizon system. At that stage, it was widely believed within

     POL that Horizon was functioning effectively and George had been informed of

     that, and so it may have appeared counter-intuitive to him for POL to instruct a

     review into its operation. Having reviewed the email exchange, I believe George

     was frustrated that nobody had updated him about this review, and the

     impression it gave about P0L's position on the concerns raised about Horizon.

170. With regards to whether it was appropriate for George to be informed of the

     appointment of Second Sight, I believe at the time I felt it was appropriate to do

     so as a matter of professional courtesy. George did not wield any decision-

     making power within POL, but he was an important stakeholder and likely felt

     that he should have been kept updated of any such issues.

171. As Head of the NFSP, I did not consider there to be any specific issue or difficulty

     with George sending sub-postmaster allegations to POL as this would enable

     them to be reviewed by Second Sight.

Further monitoring of Horizon issues by the Board


172. I am asked to consider POL00021510, namely the minutes of the Board meeting

     that took place on 23 January 2013.

173. In particular, I am asked to comment on the fact that the Second Sight review

     was included as an "AOB" rather than as a specific item on the agenda. I cannot

     now recall why it was referred to as an AOB in that meeting. It may have been a

     timing issue, i.e. that the Chair may only have received the Second Sight update

     shortly before the meeting, although that is speculation on my part and I cannot

                                       Page 43 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     specifically recall. However, as I set out above at paragraph 129, an item being

     considered as an AOB as opposed to a specific agenda item did not affect the

     importance being afforded to it; it was still duly considered by the Board and

     documented accordingly. I can see that no points were noted in relation to this

     update, which may have reflected the fact that there was little discussion around

     it at that time.

174. Generally, if there was a report or paper for the Board to consider, then this would

     be referred to in the meeting agenda and thus in the main body of the meeting

     and minutes. Conversely, if an update was being provided in the absence of a

     formal paper, this would typically be treated as an AOB or may have gone in the

     CEO's report.

175. My recollection is that the Board was generally updated on the Second Sight

     review as and when there was something in particular to update, or if there was

     something that the Board needed to be aware of. It would most likely have been

     the Chair or CEO who would have decided if there needed to be an update on

     Second Sight, and the minutes would reflect what was discussed and any follow

     up actions.

176. I am asked whether, in my opinion, the Second Sight updates to the Board should

     have been more regular. There was not, as far as I can recall, any expectation

     of a regular update of the Second Sight review at every Board meeting whilst the

     review was ongoing. At the time, I cannot recall being concerned that updates

     were not sufficiently frequent. Second Sight was progressing with its review, due

     to finish around the summer, and the Board would be updated as and when there

     was something to update on. I also note from the absence of any action points

     requesting more frequent updates that the Board must have been comfortable

                                       Page 44 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     with this frequency.

177. I have been asked about the statement "To date there was no evidence to

     suggest a fault'. Having reviewed the minutes of that meeting it appears that the

     Chair provided this update. My assumption is therefore that she would most likely

     have made that comment. I cannot recall this specifically however and I do not

     know the basis upon which this comment was made. I can only surmise at this

     stage that she must have had some basis for saying this, whether that was from

     Second Sight itself or some other source.

178. I am asked to consider POL00021513, namely the minutes of the Board meeting

     on 21 May 2013. Within these minutes, Susan is asked to provide an update to

     the Board in relation to Second Sight. I cannot now recall what update was

     provided, which would be noted in the Action Log following that meeting.

179. I do not recall at the time feeling that the Board was not receiving regular

     updates, and as can be seen from these minutes, my recollection is that when

     an update was required, it was asked for by the Board. My recollection is, at the

     time, Second Sight continued to undertake its work.

180. My recollection is that whilst the Board had received assurances in relation to the

     integrity of Horizon, it wanted to obtain clarity about this through the Second Sight

     Horizon review.

181. I have been asked about my understanding of the content of the Interim Second

     Sight report. I was involved in several meetings, including those with Second

     Sight, before the publication of the Interim Second Sight report. I do not now

     specifically remember my reaction to this document as at July 2013. I think it

     likely that at the time I would have been reassured by the conclusion at 8.2(a)


                                       Page 45 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     that "we have so far found no evidence of system wide (systemic) problems with

     the Horizon software". Equally, however, I think it likely that I would have been

     disappointed by the statement at POL 8.2(d) that, in terms of its dealings with

     sub-postmasters, "POL's response can appear to be unhelpful, unsympathetic

     or simply fail to solve the underlying problem". This raised issues about the

     support we had provided for sub-postmasters and I would have wanted this to be

     addressed.

182. I also note the Interim Second Sight report makes a number of general

     observations regarding Horizon including that "the vast majority of SPMRs and

     branches are at least reasonably happy with the Horizon system" (paragraph

     1.11) and "the Horizon system appears to achieve its intended purpose almost

     all of the time" (paragraph 7.1).

183. The report does identify a number of commonly reported user problems with the

     system (at paragraph 7.2) — such as gaps in training coverage and inadequate

     helpdesk support — and which required improvement. However, Second Sight

     did not conclude within the Interim Report whether remote access to terminals

     without sub-postmasters' knowledge was possible. At Spot Review 5, at

     Appendix 2 of the report, Second Sight did consider an allegation from a sub-

     postmaster that they witnessed remote manipulation of an account from the

     basement of the Fujitsu office in Bracknell in 2008. On this point, however,

     Second Sight concluded that, having considered both POL's evidence and the

     sub-postmaster's account, "we are left with a conflict of evidence on this issue".

     My recollection and belief are that, at that stage, I did not consider there to be a

     technical issue with Horizon.




                                         Page 46 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




184. With respect to this specific question of whether remote access to Horizon

     terminals without sub-postmasters' knowledge was possible, I do think that prior

     to the publication of the Interim Report, POL had tried to assist Second Sight in

     coming to a conclusion on this and I certainly do not consider that POL either

     ignored the issue or knowingly withheld anything from Second Sight.

185. In May 2013 I see that I confirmed to Paula that Lesley, then Chief Information

     Officer ("CIO") — as owner of the relationship with Fujitsu - would be taking this

     specific issue forward with Fujitsu directly in order to get "clear evidence about

     any central system which can adjust sub postmaster accounts" (POL00098382),

     i.e. it was my understanding at the time that the CIO had ownership of this

     workstream and it was not being ignored. In this regard, the CIO would have

     been the appropriate internal stakeholder to take ownership of this workstream.

186. It is also clear from POL00098439 that when Second Sight asked the clear

     question (among others) as to "what capabilities did the POL Bracknell team

     have" on 3 June 2013, Steve Allchorn forwarded this to Fujitsu stating "as a

     matter of urgency could you please provide a response to each of Ian's

     [Henderson] points", again reinforcing the point that POL was not ignoring the

     question and was asking Fujitsu directly to provide the requisite information and

     confirmation. On 4 June 2013, POL00029591 shows that Fujitsu replied to this

     confirming that the "live system is not accessible from the basement in Bracknell,

     i.e. that the member of staff in question could only have been talking about the

     test system". On 5 June 2013, within the same chain, I can see that POL did not

     necessarily take this general assurance at face value and further challenged

     Fujitsu to provide "some clear statement of facts" in response to the specific

     questions raised by Second Sight.


                                      Page 47 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




187. I am aware from POL00029598 and POL00029601 that between 6 — 11 June

     2013 Second Sight was still unsatisfied with POL's initial response to Spot

     Review 5. As a consequence, I understand that POL took further steps to try to

     bottom out this issue definitively. POL00029605 shows that on 13 June 2013,

     Fujitsu sent a detailed email confirming that whilst remote access was possible

     "this access is available only to Fujitsu's SSC team...they are based on the 6th

     floor which is the most secure floor in Bracknell.... there is no access to the SSC

     systems from the basement". The next day, 14 June 2013, Lesley— the CIO -

     provided further analysis on this specific point, confirming "I've tested Fujitsu on

     the infrastructure. This looks as if the test system infrastructure wasn't even in

     the data centre...if this is the case then SR5 has no foundation" (SR5 is an

     abbreviation of Spot Review 5). In relation to Fujitsu's email of 13 June 2013, it

     was my understanding at this time that even if remote access was possible under

     very controlled conditions, then this would be visible to any sub-postmasters

     through the keystrokes on their account. As such, it did not change my

     understanding and belief that remote access to accounts without sub-

     postmasters' knowledge was not possible.

188. Having been copied in to this chain, I do think that, at the time, I would have taken

     a significant degree of comfort from such reassurance being provided by both

     Fujitsu and from within POL's own 010 function. Moreover, I would have had no

     reason to doubt that either Fujitsu or the CIO were incorrect given that they

     possessed a level of technical expertise and understanding of the system that

     far exceeded mine.

189. I also understand that Second Sight provided further challenge to POL's analysis

     and position on 24 June 2013 (POL00188912). I can see from this email chain


                                       Page 48 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     that I — in my capacity as Company Secretary - escalated the issue to the CIO

     directly stating that "you are going to have to get involved in the Bracknell one",

     as the CIO ultimately owned the relationship with Fujitsu and was therefore the

     appropriate senior stakeholder to task with taking this forward. As stated above,

     I do believe that efforts were being made to try and get clarity on this issue and

     to provide Second Sight with the information they required.

190. From POL00190617, I can see that on 3 July 2013 Simon Baker emailed Second

     Sight, copying me in as well as the CIO, stating that "I took the action to answer

     the question: Did any Post Office employee have the ability to post transactions

     to the back-office accounting system. The answer is "no". Again, I do think that

     at the time I would have taken comfort from the fact that Second Sight's questions

     were being taken seriously and considered properly by the appropriate internal

     stakeholders (specifically those with the relevant technical knowledge including

     the CIO) and with Fujitsu and that both were consistent and definitive in their

     responses.

191. Although ultimately in their Interim Report, Second Sight concluded that there

     was a "conflict' between POL's evidence and the evidence of the sub-

     postmasters on this issue, I do think that efforts were made to try and work

     through the issue and the appropriate internal and external stakeholders were

     involved in this process.

192. 1 am asked to consider POL00021515, namely the minutes of the Board Meeting

     of 1 July 2013.

193. I note that Paula provided an update to the Board at the Board Meeting on 1 July

     2013 which included a summary of the Interim Second Sight Report. Having

     reviewed that update, it appears to me that it was accurate. I do not recall having


                                      Page 49 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     any concerns about this at the time, nor do I recall the Board raising any

     concerns. In particular, Paula confirmed to the Board at that meeting that "the

     investigation to date had found no systemic issues with the Horizon computer

     system but had highlighted areas for improvement in support areas such as

     training".

194. This update appears largely consistent with the conclusions set out in the Interim

     Report, which I have discussed above. Furthermore, I also note at POL13/52(c)

     that the minutes state that "the CEO was concerned that the report from the

     independent forensic accountants was not as factual as expected' — this reflects

     the points made elsewhere in the statement at paragraphs 202, 225 and 260,

     that Second Sight was not providing the granular forensic analysis that the

     business really needed and instead was focusing on higher level and more

     subjective issues.

195. Had I had any concerns with the update provided by Paula, I would no doubt

     have raised these with the Chair after the meeting. I do not have any recollection

     of doing so.

196. Whilst I cannot specifically recall whether any members of the Board raised

     concerns about the update provided, I believe that if any Board members had

     concerns about this update, these would have been minuted. That they were not

     leads me to believe that the Board did not raise any such concerns.

197. With reference to the document POL00192017, it also appears that Paula

     circulated the Interim Second Sight to the Board by email on 8 July 2013 at 16:12,

     although I cannot now specifically recall this.

198. As to my understanding at the time of the Board's view of the culpability of sub-


                                       Page 50 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     postmasters, I do not know what this was and cannot speak for individual Board

     members. I note however that no concerns were noted within the Board minutes.

     However, my general impression at the time was that the Board accepted what

     it was being told by the CEO, i.e. that there were no systemic issues with Horizon.

199. I am asked to consider P0L00027573, namely minutes of the Board Meeting of

     9 July 2013.

200. I am asked whether, save for the 2013/20 Strategic Plan, were any other topics

     discussed at the meeting. It is important to note that the 2013/20 Strategic Plan

     referenced here is entirely unrelated to Horizon. This was an ad hoc meeting, by

     conference call, held solely to discuss a request for funding from central

     Government. I also believe clearance from the EU was needed for this funding.

     There was pressure on the business to agree this funding and for the Board to

     sign off the strategy, as without the funding the business may not have been a

     going concern.

201. With respect to the meeting with the Secretary of State and Minister scheduled

     for 11 July 2013 (i.e. two days after this meeting) that is referenced within the

     minutes, my understanding having reviewed the minutes is that the Board was

     discussing the various ways that Sue Barton — the Strategic Director — could

     present the various financing options to Government. I do not have any

     recollection beyond that.

Involvement of Second Sight and termination


202. My recollection is that Second Sight's contract was terminated because its review

     was taking longer than expected and it had not been sufficiently forensic and

     granular. I believe that the Board wanted a detailed forensic review that looked


                                      Page 51 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     at the individual post office accounts and came to a definitive view as to whether

     or not any discrepancies were due to issues with Horizon.

203. Instead, Second Sight's findings were more subjective, focusing on issues such

     as the fairness of the sub-postmaster contract, the quality and availability of

     training, and the level of support provided by the helpline. These were all

     important issues but not the forensic review of the IT system the Board was

     expecting. The CEO explained progress with Sparrow, the mediation scheme

     and the termination of SS in her CEO report to the Board POL27304_ I do not

     recall who in particular made the decision to terminate the contract.

204. I am now unable to recall what my overall opinion of Second Sight's report was

     at the time. I do recall that, as stated at paragraph 183 above, whilst it identified

     various general issues with the Horizon system it did not address the specific

     forensic issues that the Board was seeking clarity on and for which the report

     had originally been commissioned.

205. I am asked to consider POL00021516, namely Board Meeting minutes of 16 July

     2013. Please note that paragraphs POLB13/60 (c) (g) (j) relate to an independent

     Board effectiveness review and are entirely unrelated to Horizon.

206_ The minutes of the meeting at POLB 13/63(a) note the CEO's comments

     concerning the Second Sight report. It is important to note that although the CEO

     highlighted the lack of any systemic issues with Horizon and some "positive

     things", she also highlighted areas for improvement. Indeed, at POL 13/63(a) she

     recognised that "there were cultural issues which had to be addressed" and that

     she "stressed that this was now a catalyst to make changes in the Business". It

     appears that this was an accurate summary of the conclusions of the interim



                                       Page 52 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




    report, and I cannot recall any concerns at the time of the accuracy of this update.

207. I also note at POL13/63(c) that the "Board expressed strong views that the

    Business had not managed the Second Sight review well'. My recollection having

    reviewed these minutes was that the Board believed that Second Sight had gone

    beyond its terms of reference, and instead of conducting a forensic analysis of

    figures and considering individual accounts in detail, had instead looked at wider

    and more subjective issues. I believe the Board wanted the business to manage

    Second Sight better to ensure a more timely and effective conclusion to the

    review.

208. I am unable to say whether the Board considered the impact of potentially

    wrongful prosecutions on the sub-postmasters, although of course I would hope

    that it did. In relation to the statement at POLB 13/63(b) that "the Board were

     concerned that the review opened the business up to claims of wrongful

    prosecution", I note that the minutes also state "The Board ask if Susan Crichton,

    as General Counsel, was in anyway implicated in the prosecutions. The CEO

    reported that, up until eighteen months ago, Royal Mail Group Limited (RMG)

    had run the criminal law team and many of the cases in the review had arisen

    before separation".

209. I do not recall whether any members of the Board raised concerns about POL

    using a third party in the context of prosecutions. To the extent that such

    concerns were raised, these would have been minuted. At POLE 13/63(b) it is

    noted that since separation (from RMG) "the General Counsel had proposed

    moving to the more normal position of using the CPS for prosecutions; this was

    being explored".



                                      Page 53 of 104
                                                                                          WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




210. Similarly, I do not specifically remember what information was provided to the

     Board in terms of the statistics for prosecutions.

211. I have been asked whether the Board raised concerns about the high levels of

     prosecution following the installation of Horizon. It is important to recognise that

     Horizon was installed in 1999, and that this particular Board had only been in

     existence since 2011. 1 do not recall, and think it unlikely, that this Board would

     have considered any statistical changes before and after 1999, and if any Board

     had done so it would most likely have been the Royal Mail Group Board prior to

     separation. I do not recall seeing any papers, or other information, tracking any

     increase in prosecutions after the installation of Horizon in 1999. It is also

     important to note that POL had been prosecuting sub-postmasters before the

     Horizon system was introduced_ I do not know whether, and to what degree, this

     may have increased following the installation of Horizon.

212. I note that POL 13/63(c) states that the "Board expressed strong views that the

     Business had not managed the Second Sight review well'. I do not recall which

     individual Board member stated this.

213. At paragraphs 206 and 207 above, I set out my understanding at the time of the

     Board's view of the Second Sight Review.

214. With respect to Alice's request, minuted at POL 13/63(g) that there be a

     "postmortem" report to the Audit and Risk Committee ("ARC"), without having

     sight of the subsequent ARC papers, minutes and action log, I have no

     recollection of whether this was actioned by Susan, and what the ARC's findings

     were. I cannot now recall what steps were taken in relation to this but as it was a

     request from the Chair it is my belief that this action would have been fulfilled.



                                       Page 54 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




215. I note at POL 13/65(d) that "the Board asked for visibility of the decisions being

     taken by the ExCo". I believe that this refers specifically to the financial

     performance at the time, and my understanding is that this was not directed to

     Horizon specifically. There was financial pressure on the business to operate

     within budget, and the CFO had (at POL 13/65(c)) confirmed the need to reduce

     costs, and that there was a reforecasting exercise being conducted in relation to

     this reduction.

216_ In response, my understanding is that the Board recognised that difficult

     decisions would need to be taken, and consequently wanted to know what the

     pros and cons of the various options were in order to be assured that the right

     financial decisions were being taken, and for the right reasons. This was entirely

     unrelated to Horizon, and as far as I recall, I do not believe it was the case that

     the Board was either saying, or even implying, that it was not receiving adequate

     information. I cannot recall the Board raising concerns about the level of

     information being reported to it.

217_ Having reviewed the minutes and from the CEO's update, at POL 13/63(a), I

     think it was clear that the issues with Horizon had been identified and that this

     was a "catalyst to make changes in the Business," even if Second Sight had not

     necessarily identified any "systemic issues" with the system. My recollection is

     that the Board did want to address these issues and to make changes, and that

     there was a general sense that this would be done. I certainly do not recall any

     dissenting voices in that regard.

218. 1 am asked to consider POL00021518, namely the Board Meeting minutes of 27

     September 2013.



                                         Page 55 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




219. I note that this document is the minutes of a Board meeting held on 25 September

     2013 and that POLB 13/88(a) refers to a Horizon update paper being sent to the

     Board on 27 July 2013_ I understand that this update paper is POL00006590_ I

     do not specifically recall this update, but it states that "further to the Board

     discussion on 16 July, this note provides an update on how we're taking forward

     the programme of work in response to the publication of the Second Sight report'.

     POL00021516 confirms that a Board meeting was indeed held on 16 July 2013.

220_ I can see from POL00298022 that I sent a version of it to the Board on 26 July

     2013 and Martin Edwards then circulated a revised version on 27 July 2013. I

     note that in my email of 26 July 2013 I describe this as a "detailed note from

     Paula". I discuss this further at paragraph 241 below and in response to

     questions 86/86a_

221 _ As to whether these papers were requested by the Board following the meeting

     on 16 July 2013, as stated above, it appears to me from reading these documents

     in 2024 that this update may have been requested by the Board after the July

     2013 meeting. However, I do not recall if that was the case, and this is purely

     speculation on my part.

222. I have been asked why, if these papers had been requested, they were not noted

     within the Board Meeting minutes. Had the papers been requested during the

     meeting this would have been noted as a formal action point and documented

     accordingly. On occasion however, members of the Board may request

     documents outside of the meeting or through the ARC.

223. I do not recall whether the Board raised any concerns about the papers not being

     sent to the Board earlier. Indeed, if such concerns had been raised in the meeting



                                      Page 56 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     then these would have been minuted. From re-reading these documents

     recently, it appears to me that the Board received these papers as soon as they

     were ready, and I cannot think of any reason why the Board would have been

     concerned with the timing of this.

224. As a general observation, I did not have any concerns about items not being

     accurately recorded in Board meetings. As set out at paragraph 29 above, as

     Company Secretary, my practice was to take verbatim notes of discussions at

     meetings and then to write up the minutes from these verbatim notes as soon as

     practicable after the meeting. It was my practice to have the draft minutes to the

     Chair by no later than the third day after the meeting. The draft minutes were

     then approved by the Chair and recommended to the Board at the next meeting

     as being an accurate record of discussions. These draft minutes were then

     agreed by the Board and signed by the Chair. Where appropriate I would also

     share the minutes in draft to those attending the meeting both for accuracy and

     so that they could pick up their action points.

225. With regard to Susan's departure from the business, whilst I cannot speak for

     Susan, I believe that by that stage she felt that, as General Counsel, she had lost

     the confidence of the Board. I believe that this was, as a result of the Second

     Sight review. As discussed above at paragraphs 202, it was felt that the Second

     Sight review was taking too long, and had failed to deliver the granular forensic

     analysis that the Board required Susan had been the person responsible for

     recommending them to the business. My experience of working with Susan was

     that she was not someone who would countenance staying in an organisation

     where either her integrity or capability had in some way been questioned.

226. As to whether I had any concerns as to the reasons why Susan left the business,

                                       Page 57 of 104
                                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                                       WI TN00580100




     as a general point I had concerns that POL was losing a good and experienced

     General Counsel at short notice, which inevitably left a gap that needed to be

     filled.

227. I am asked to consider POL00021520, namely the minutes of a Board Meeting

     on 27 November 2013.

228. I do not believe as at the date of this meeting, being 27 November 2013, I had

     concerns about the various decisions made at this meeting in reference to

     prosecutions, and referenced at POL13/126. It is important to note that I am not

     a lawyer and have no legal qualifications, and I did not have either the knowledge

     or expertise to be able to challenge what was being proposed. However, I think

     it is very likely that at the time I was comforted by the fact that the CEO confirmed

     that "prosecutions were not brought lightly' and that "the Business was reviewing

     its approach" (POL 13/126(d)). Similarly, I note at POL 13/126(c) that Sir Anthony

     Hooper had changed his position and was "inclined to look at each case

     individually'. Again, I believe that this is something that would have given me

     comfort that the appropriate scrutiny was being given to past prosecutions and

     that the business was taking this issue sufficiently seriously. Whilst I cannot recall

     this particular Board Meeting, this reflects my general recollections from that

     time.

229. I also note at POL13/126(e), the then General Counsel, Chris Aujard, and Angela

     were given a specific action to "consider the future approach of prosecutions at

     a future Board alongside the improved support process for sub-postmasters".

     This is also something that would likely have provided me with comfort that, not

     only were past cases being looked at, but looking ahead, the business was taking

     steps to make improvements.

                                        Page 58 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




230. As to whether the decisions made at that time were the correct ones, at the point

     of the meeting and given the Board's level of knowledge at the time, it appears

     to me that the Board was trying to do the right thing, both in terms of backward

     and forward-looking actions. However, with my level of knowledge as at 2024, I

     think the whole approach and scrutiny of past convictions is called into question.

231. As Company Secretary I was aware of the general legal obligations upon me to

     ensure compliance with the Companies Act 2006, including the obligation to

     ensure that the Board considered the interests of all stakeholders, including sub-

     postmasters. I do believe that during my time as Company Secretary the Board

     was mindful of this obligation and, even if hindsight shows that the correct

     decisions were not necessarily taken at the time, I can see from my review of

     these minutes that the Board was trying to get to the bottom of what had

     happened and was trying to improve its approach to such cases in the future.

     This is reflected by the various updates at POLB 13/126, including that Sir

     Anthony Hooper was inclined to look at past cases individually (POLB 13/126(c),

     and that the business was actively reviewing its approach to future prosecutions

     (POLB 13/126(d)). If I considered that the Board was not compliant with its

     obligations this would have been raised with the Chair.

232. I have no recollection of being concerned about the timing of these discussions.

     I note that matters relating to Horizon developed throughout 2013.

233. Indeed, it was my belief at the time that POL was working through the issues,

     trying to understand the root cause and putting in place processes to improve

     the support offered to sub-postmasters, based upon the information that it had at

     the time. The Board may have had concerns about the pace, quality and cost of

     Second Sight's work, and I do believe that it wanted things to be resolved as

                                      Page 59 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     quickly as possible.

234. I do not recall what was contained in the General Counsel's note regarding

     professional indemnity and Director and Officer insurance coverage.

Advice by Simon Clarke

235. I am asked to consider POL00006357, namely the advice provided by Simon

     Clarke (referred to as the "Clarke advice").

236. It is important to recognise that I do not recall ever having had sight of the Clarke

     advice during my time at POL.

237. Upon reading this document at this stage, it is clear to me that it was legal advice

     concerning the evidence provided by Dr Gareth Jenkins ("Dr Jenkins"), an

     employee of Fujitsu Services Ltd, who acted as an expert witness for the POL in

     a number of criminal prosecutions of sub-postmasters, and who consistently

     gave evidence as to the integrity of Horizon.

238. It appears from reviewing this advice that it is focused on whether the evidence

     provided by Dr Jenkins satisfied the legal test for "expert evidence". I can see

     from the conclusions section to this document — in particular paragraphs 37 - 39

     - that Simon Clarke states that Dr Jenkins failed to disclose material known to

     him relating to the integrity of Horizon which "fatally' undermines his credibility

     as an expert witness and which, by extension, means that POL had breached its

     legal duties as a prosecuting authority. I do not know who commissioned this

     advice or why they did so.

239. I am not aware if this document was ever circulated to the Board, although I do

     not recall this being the case. There is no mention of this document in either

     POL00021516 or POL00021518, being the 16 July 2013 and 25 September

     2013 Board minutes. Had the Clarke advice been circulated to the Board I would

                                        Page 60 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     have expected it to be discussed and referenced in one of these sets of minutes.

     As such, I have no basis to believe that the Board ever saw this document or,

     therefore, factored it into any discussions or decisions. If the Board did see it, I

     do not know when this happened.

240. In addition, I can see from POL00192783 that on 22 July 2013 (i.e. one week

     after the Clarke advice is dated) an update to the board was prepared. This

     update may have been written by someone within the legal function — although I

     do not know who - and was sent by Susan Crichton to Martin Edwards and me

     on 24 July 2013 (POL00192782).

241. This update makes no reference to the Clarke advice; instead it states that, with

     reference to the legal duty of prosecutors, "through its criminal law solicitors

     Cartwright King (CK), POL is complying with that duty by reviewing past and

     present prosecutions". As discussed above at paragraphs 219 and 220,

     P0L00006590, shows that on 26 July 2013 I circulated a summary to the Board

     which appears to quote directly from the 22 July 2013 update and again makes

     no reference to the underlying Clarke advice. This reinforces my belief that

     neither I nor the Board was sighted on the Clarke advice at this time.


Board Meetings —2014


242. I am asked to consider POL00021521, namely minutes of a Board Meeting that

     took place on 21 January 2014.

243. I note at POL 14/7(f) that the CEO updated the Board that "Sparrow was taking

     longer than we had originally expected' and that at 14/7(g) "the Board agreed

     that the February ARC would consider an update on Sparrow'. At that stage the

     Sparrow subcommittee had not yet been set up, and so the appropriate sub-


                                       Page 61 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     committee to address this was the ARC.

244. My interpretation of this minute is that, in light of the CEO's update, the Board

     wanted more time to consider the Sparrow issues in more detail and to review

     the mediation scheme progress_ As such, and with an ARC meeting — which was

     specifically for the purpose of considering issues of risk — scheduled to take place

     shortly after this Board meeting, the Board felt it was appropriate to use that

     forum to have a detailed discussion on Sparrow before bringing it back to the "full

     Board in February' (POL 14/7(g)), i.e. at the next monthly Board meeting. As

     such, I believe this was a case of the Board using the Board subcommittee

     structure to give itself more time and space to consider Sparrow in detail.

245. I do not consider that it was inappropriate for the Board to move the update on

     Sparrow to ARC at this stage, and to use the ARC in this way. As set out above,

     the purpose of moving Sparrow onto ARC was to give the Board more rigorous

     oversight of the issue and more time to consider it in depth. ARC was a dedicated

     audit and risk committee; the Board was asking that committee to consider the

     issue from that perspective before reconsidering it at the full Board at the next

     meeting. I do not recall having any concerns with this approach.

246. I am asked by the Inquiry whether there were any discussions between the Board

     raising concerns that the move of the update on Sparrow to ARC may fail to

     provide Sparrow the level of attention and scrutiny it deserved. I do not recall that

     there were any discussions between the Board raising concerns about this. As

     explained above at paragraph 244, on the contrary, it seems that the whole

     purpose of moving the Sparrow update to ARC was to increase the level of

     scrutiny over it. It is clear from POL 14/7(g) that the Sparrow update was always

     intended to return to the main Board at the next regular meeting after ARC had

                                       Page 62 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     considered it from a risk perspective.

247. It is my understanding that the Sparrow papers for ARC would be circulated to

     the full Board so that full Board members could review before the meeting and

     attend ARC if they wanted or provide input if they wished to. This was done in

     order to maximise transparency. There was an open invitation for any Board

     member to attend any Board subcommittee if they wished.

248. I am asked to consider POL00100193, Post Office Audit Risk and Compliance

     Committee Prosecution Policy, and POL00021522, the minutes of the Board

     Meeting on 26 February 2014.

249. As stated above, it is my understanding that the Board was not aware of the

     Clarke advice at this point in time. At paragraph 4.5 of POL00100193, being a

     paper from Chris Aujard to the ARC from February 2014, there is a passing

     reference to the fact that "we have been advised that in these cases, there is a

     strong likelihood that such a defence would be successful'. It is a possibility that

     the `advice' Chris Aujard is referring to here may potentially be the Clarke advice,

     however I do not believe that the underlying paper from Simon Clarke

     (POL00006357) had itself been circulated to the Board (if that is indeed what is

     being referred by Chris Aujard here).

250. I do not recall being aware of the Clarke advice at this stage. If I had seen this

     advice, I believe I would have asked for it to go to the Board. I have no

     recollection of this document ever being circulated to the Board.

251. It is my understanding and belief that the Board did not receive the Clarke advice,

     and as such it could not suppress it. It is my assumption that the Clarke advice

     was likely commissioned and received by the legal team. I have no recollection

     of the legal team transmitting it on to the Board, either through me as would be

                                       Page 63 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     the usual way, or through any other means, and it is not referenced in any of the

     Board minutes I have seen (beyond the potential passing reference discussed

     above at paragraph 249).

252. With respect to the minute at 14118(a) that "the Board received a report on the

     challenges facing the Initial Complaint and Review Mediation Scheme ("the

     Scheme')" I do not specifically recall the report in question but do recall that this

     was the working group being chaired by Sir Anthony Hooper that was trying to

     mediate between sub-postmaster who had been pursued on a civil basis and the

     business. The Scheme was using Second Sight to look into certain cases; this

     was a separate workstream to Second Sight's substantive review of Horizon.

253. I believe that the challenges being referred to here relate to the difficulties that

     the Scheme was experiencing in terms of being able to locate the relevant

     information and documentation, particularly for historic cases. In addition, I

     believe that there may have been an expectation gap between what the affected

     sub-postmaster thought they should receive and what the business was able or

     willing to pay by way of compensation.

254. I am asked to consider POL00105529, Post Office Ltd Board Initial Complaint

     Review and Mediation Scheme, and POL00021523, the minutes of a Board

     Meeting on 26 March 2014.

255. I note at paragraph 14/32(h) of POL00021523 that Paula "noted that the quality

     of the work undertaken by Second Sight had been challenged by Sir Antony

     Hooper, Chairman of the Working Group, who was now insisting on more

     evidenced based reports". As this minute references Sir Anthony Hooper, I

     believe this refers to the work carried out by Second Sight as part of producing

     evidence for that Scheme.

                                       Page 64 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




256. Second Sight was, at this time, supporting Sir Anthony Hooper's working group

     for the Initial Complaints Review. I believe that this particular Board minute was

     referring to the some of the difficulties that Sir Anthony Hooper was experiencing

     with the Second Sight work in that specific context. It is my recollection now that

     Sir Anthony Hooper required specific granular information on individual accounts,

     and Second Sight was struggling to provide him with that. Often the cases went

     back many years and that type of information may have been extremely hard to

     find or simply not available.

257. From my review of the document I understand that the work undertaken by

     Linklaters LLP was a legal analysis of the sub-postmaster contracts, and it

     advised on whether or not the contracts permitted POL to pursue the sub-

     postmasters for losses at their offices.

258. It appears from this advice that Linklaters LLP concluded that POL was legally

     entitled to recover losses from sub-postmasters. However, I can also see from

     paragraph 1.4 of this advice, that this conclusion was predicated on an

     assumption that Horizon was working as it should.

259. I do not know who in particular commissioned this advice but assume it must

     have been the legal team at that time, as they held the budget for external legal

     support. It would typically be the General Counsel and legal team who engaged

     external lawyers.

260. I note the minute at POLB 14/32(k) in POL00021523 that "the Board agreed that

     they needed to commission a piece of work, to complement that undertaken by

     Linklaters, to give them and those concerned outside the Business, comfort

     about the Horizon system". As stated above, I note that the Linklaters advice


                                       Page 65 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     was predicated on the fact that Horizon was functioning correctly; this minute

     suggests to me that the Board was still not comfortable that it had received the

     evidence necessary to support its understanding that Horizon was functioning

     correctly. Second Sight had been instructed for this very purpose, but as

     explained elsewhere in this statement, their report had not provided the granular

     forensic account analysis that the Board had expected, instead focusing on more

     subjective "cultural" issues with the system. Consequently, my understanding is

     that at this point, the Board was still not entirely comfortable that they had

     received the necessary evidence so as to address any concerns as to the

     integrity of Horizon. Whilst I cannot speak for members of the Board, that was

     my understanding at the time.

261. I see at POLB 14/32(l) that the General Counsel was given an action to "test" the

     terms of reference with Linklaters. I do not know if this action was undertaken but

     my interpretation of this minute is that the Board was essentially saying that this

     additional work needed to demonstrate that "Horizon is reliable" in order to

     address the assumption made by Linklaters at paragraph 1.4 of their advice. By

     testing the Terms of Reference with Linklaters, effectively the Board were looking

     to ensure that the work commissioned would prove that Horizon was reliable, as

     opposed to another review that did not meet the Board's needs.

262. I am asked to consider POL00021525, namely the minutes of the Board Meeting

     of 21 May 2014.

263. I do not recall the specific discussion referenced at POLB 14/70 or why the

     decision was taken to exclude Sparrow from the annual report and accounts.

     Having read the minutes I can only surmise that Mark Davies would have gone

     through the pros and cons of including it as against excluding it, and that the

                                      Page 66 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     decision was taken on that basis. I cannot now recall any specific discussion on

     this.

264. I believe that the Initial Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme was also

     excluded as it was all part of Sparrow; I do not think it was the case that this was

     excluded on its own terms. but rather because it fell within the wider Sparrow

     `umbrella'.

265. I do not recall the Board raising any concerns about this. Had this been the case,

     I believe that such concerns would have been minuted.

266_ As to whether or not the Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme should have

     been included, it was not my decision as to what should be included in the annual

     report. I am also aware POL's external auditors would not have signed off the

     annual report and accounts if they had been concerned, I would have expected

     them to raise this with the CFO. With full hindsight, and knowing what I know

     now, I do think there should have been some disclosure of the ongoing Initial

     Complaint Review and Mediation scheme in the annual report.

267. I am reminded by the reference at 14/32(g) of POL00021523 that the Sparrow

     Board subcommittee was established after 26 March 2014, although I cannot

     recall the precise date that it was formally set up_ The Non-Executive members

     of the Sparrow Board subcommittee were, the Chair, Alisdair Marnoch (Chair of

     the ARC) and Richard Callard (Shareholder Executive), the CEO was also a

     member.

268. My understanding is that the Sparrow subcommittee was established to give

     more time, space and rigour to the Horizon issue. At this time, the Board was

     dealing with a number of large strategic issues which inevitably limited time


                                       Page 67 of 104
                                                                                    WITNO0580100
                                                                                  WI TN00580100




     available at Board meetings. By creating a dedicated subcommittee, I believe

     that the Board was seeking to ensure that it was dedicating sufficient resource

     and oversight to Horizon.

269. I am asked to consider POL00148420, namely an email from me to Chris Aujard

     and Belinda Crowe on 23 May 2014.

270. I can see from this document that I shared draft minutes with Chris Aujard and

     Belinda Crowe, along with some other individuals (names redacted), on 23 May

     2014. It was my custom and practice with any draft minutes to share the draft

     with the relevant presenter to ensure I had accurately captured their input into

     the areas presented. Although I would take input from individuals to explain or

     clarify specifics about their presentations, my sharing of the draft minutes with

     them would not in anyway change the substantive minutes of the Board meeting.

     For paragraph (f), for example, it appears that I was checking with the General

     Counsel that the action assigned to him was correct. There was nothing unusual

     about me checking parts of the minutes with relevant individuals who attended

     the meeting for accuracy regarding their specialisms, before they were then

     presented to the Chair for signing.

271. With respect to the statement "it's a bit smoke and mirrors but here are the

     minutes, comments asap please," this was unprofessional and should not have

     been included in the email. This did not in any way relate to any attempt to

     mislead or conceal information, and was in no way related to the accuracy of the

     minutes.

272. My recollection is that this comment within the email related to a passing

     comment between myself and Belinda Crowe following the meeting that had



                                      Page 68 of 104
                                                                                        WITNO0580100
                                                                                      WI TN00580100




     taken place, as the discussions in that meeting had been circular at times, and

     therefore it was particularly challenging to minute. It was an off the cuff', poor

     use of words that did not reflect the way I approached the meeting or the way

     that I prepared the minutes. As set out at paragraph 224 above, it was my role to

     ensure that an accurate minute was taken, and I always did my best to ensure

     that this was done.

273. I reiterate that this in no way reflects on the quality, accuracy or completeness of

     the minutes — which absolutely did record the discussion accurately - or how

     seriously I took my role as Company Secretary.

274. 1 am asked to consider POL00021526, namely the minutes of the Board Meeting

     that took place on 10 June 2014.

275. I note from the minutes that this meeting was held at Warren House. My

     recollection is that this was during a Board away day; an annual event used for

     strategic discussion. During this event I recall that a meeting was held specifically

     to discuss Sparrow.

276. I note from POL 14/85(a) that "the Board received an update on the discussions

     of the Sparrow Sub-Committee on 6 June 2014". 1 do not specifically recall the

     content of this update but I am reminded of the Sparrow sub-committee meeting

     of 6 June 2014 by POL00022128. From this document I can see that on 6 June

     2014 Chris Aujard and Mark Davies presented a paper discussing in detail the

     three options for the future of the Initial Complaints Review and Mediation

     Scheme together with cost projections for each of them, communications

     implications, stakeholder handling and potential timelines. Whilst I have no

     specific recollection of this meeting, I can only assume that the update given to



                                       Page 69 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




      the Board reflected this.

277. I believe that Chris Aujard joined this meeting by conference call. Whilst I am

      unable to recall the risks that he articulated, I can see from POL00022128 that

      the risks of the three options were discussed in the paper provided to the Sparrow

      sub-committee entitled "Initial Complaints Review and Mediation Scheme: the

      way forward'. In summary, the risks identified in this paper were:

  •    "Option I — the Scheme may last for an additional 18 months which is

       considered "substantial" and may result in applicants and stakeholders being

       unhappy at the final outcome.

  •    Option 2— potential strain on the working group and the possible withdrawal of

       some parties. The risk of negative PR was also identified.

  •    Option 3 - The risk of negative PR and impact on stakeholders was considered."

278. I understand that references to the "Scheme" in POL 14/85(c) are to the Initial

      Complaint and Review Mediation Scheme being chaired by Sir Anthony Hooper.

      My understanding, based on my reading of this document now, is that there had

      been discussion that the Scheme was not working as it should at the Sparrow

      subcommittee on 6 June 2014, and that the matter was being brought to the full

      Board to take a decision on what changes were necessary to improve it going

      forwards.

279. My recollection is that there were a number of issues with the Scheme that

      required amendment. As previously discussed, I believe that Sir Anthony Hooper

      was unhappy with the level of granularity of Second Sight's analysis and that he

      was not receiving the information he had requested, which may have been

      unavailable and/or difficult to locate given the passage of time. There was also

      an" expectation gap" between what many sub-postmasters thought they should

                                       Page 70 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     receive after mediation and what was being proposed.

280. I do not know if the options presented at this meeting had been discussed with

     Sir Anthony Hooper prior to the meeting taking place.

281. As to whether any other matters were discussed at that meeting, whilst I cannot

     specifically recall this, it is my belief that the meeting was convened to discuss

     this one issue and had any other matters been discussed at this meeting, they

     would have been minuted.

Ongoing Monitoring

282. With regard to document POL00021528, being Board Meeting minutes of 25

     September 2014, and in particular paragraphs POLB14/109 (d) and (e), I do not

     recall what update was provided by Chris Aujard and Belinda Crowe on the

     progress of the Initial Complaints Review and Medication Scheme.

283. I cannot recall how the Board responded when they were informed that the

     business was about to refuse to put cases involving criminal convictions into

     mediation. The board minute notes that "the board members understood that

     the next few weeks could be controversial as the Business was about to refuse

     to put cases involving criminal convictions into mediation."

284. With regard to section POLB14/109 (e), Richard Callard was a member of ShEx,

     and I note from the minutes that the Board had asked the General Counsel, Chris

     Aujard, to work with him to update the minister. I do not know specifically what

     the Board was responding to in that part of the discussion, and in particular I

     cannot recall whether this had originated as a result of a request from the Minister

     or any other stakeholder.



                                       Page 71 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




285. As to who was responsible for updating the Minister on these matters, Belinda

     Crowe, Chris Aujard and Richard Callard held the responsibility for updating both

     ShEx and the Minister. Whilst I was not party to the update and do not therefore

     know exactly what was covered, I assume that the update was in relation to the

     fact that cases involving criminal convictions were not being put into the

     mediation scheme.

286. I am asked to consider POL00021529, namely Board Meeting minutes of 29

     October 2014, and in particular paragraph POLB14/128 (b). Within the minutes

     it is noted that the Chair offered to reconvene the Sparrow Board Sub Committee.

     I am asked what the Board's response was to this, and why any response is not

     noted in the minutes. Whilst I cannot recall this specific meeting, I believe that

     had the Board agreed to reconvene the Sparrow Board subcommittee, this would

     have been reflected as an action point. I therefore believe that, at this point, no

     decision was taken regarding reconvening the Sparrow subcommittee.

287. I am asked for my understanding of the reason why POL did not progress all

     case into mediation. I cannot specifically recall this, and I believe the mediation

     scheme was being run by an external law firm, and so it may be that this was

     based on legal advice, but that is an assumption on my part.

288. It was my understanding that if it was felt that criminal cases needed to be

     reviewed, the correct legal process was to refer them to the Criminal Cases

     Review Commission.

289. I am asked to consider POL00006575, being the meeting minutes of the Sparrow

     Sub-Committee Meeting of 12 January 2015.

290. I do not know who within the legal team at that time knew about the Clarke advice.

                                      Page 72 of 104
                                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                                       WI TN00580100




     As set out at paragraph 236 above, I do not recall ever seeing that advice at the

     time.

291. At that time, in 2014, the legal team was made up of approximately 20 individuals.

     My assumption is that Chris Aujard would likely have seen this advice and

     possibly others within his team too, but I do not know this for sure, as I was not

     aware of this advice having been received.

292. As to the knowledge of the members of the Sparrow Board subcommittee, it is

     my view that had the Clarke advice been discussed within the subcommittee

     meetings (or at the Board meetings themselves) then this would have been

     reflected in the minutes. My practice in taking minutes would be to include any

     substantive discussions and/or decisions, and I believe a discussion about the

     Clarke advice would have fallen into that category. I have no recollection of the

     Clarke advice, and do not know who within the Sparrow Subcommittee may or

     may not have known about it.

 Sparrow subcommittee meeting — 18 February 2015

293. I am asked to consider POL00006574, namely the minutes of the Sparrow

     subcommittee meeting of 18 February 2015, and in particular paragraph PS15/0

     (d) and (f).

294. By that stage in 2015, Jane MacCleod had joined POL and replaced Chris Aujard

     as General Counsel. Whilst I cannot specifically recall, it is likely that there would

     have been an overlap between Chris Aujard leaving and Jane MacCleod joining,

     to allow for a handover.

295. I am asked whether, on reflection and on what I know now, given all the

     information that POL had at that time, it is fair to say that there was a refusal on

                                       Page 73 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     behalf of POL to change its views. For the purposes of this question, I assume

     that reference to POLs views is its view not to include the criminal conviction

     cases in the mediation programme. My interpretation of the discussion reflected

     in these minutes is that the subcommittee was discussing the effectiveness of

     the mediation scheme and the next steps in relation to this. I would not class this

     discussion as a refusal on behalf of POL to change its views, rather a decision

     on behalf of POL to continue to support the proposition that the criminal cases

     should not be put forward for mediation, as the right path for review would have

     been to the CCRC. I do believe, with full hindsight, given the Clarke advice, those

     impacted cases should have been passed to the CCRC. Whilst, based on what

     I know now in 2024, I do think this should have happened, at the time the

     decisions were taken based on information known and understood then. As set

     out above, I did not believe at the time that the criminal convictions were unsafe.

296. Based on my reading of these minutes, my understanding is that POL was to

     continue to pay c. £3,000 per case to support applicants of the scheme, by

     offering them the services of Second Sight to review their case.

297. At that time, I believe that Second Sight's role was to review the evidence in

     relation to each specific case in the scheme, identify the facts in a standard

     format, and to present them to the scheme's review team, POL, and the sub-

     postmaster.

298. I am asked whether, in my view, the overview of the role of Second Sight provided

     by Tom Wechsler in the meeting is a correct summary. I can see at PS15/05 (f)

     Tom Wechsler explained that the commitment made by the Minister in Parliament

     18 months prior was that "SS would be involved in the scheme," and that "their



                                      Page 74 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     role as set out in the proposal was thought to fulfil that commitment."I would not

     describe that reference as a summary of Second Sight's role — rather I think Tom

     Wechsler was indicating that, in his view, Second Sight's involvement in the

     scheme had fulfilled the commitment given by the Minister. In terms of Second

     Sight's role at that time, my understanding and recollection was that they were

     to review the individual cases, identify the evidence and ensure this was

     presented to the review team, POL and the sub-postmaster.

299. I have been asked to consider POL00027279, namely Board Meeting minutes of

     25 March 2015, and in particular paragraph POL15/32.

300. I am asked for my understanding as to why no written report on Project Sparrow

     was provided by Mark Davies, Director of Communications and Corporate

     Affairs, to the Board. As far as I can recall, the verbal update on Project Sparrow

     (as reflected in the meeting minutes) was provided by Mark Davies as the

     Director of Communications and Corporate Affairs. My assumption is that the

     reason his verbal update was not accompanied by a written report could have

     been a timing issue. It appears that the CEO report POL00027304 which

     included an update on Sparrow was presented to the board and Mark then

     supplemented that report with his update later in the meeting.

301. I am asked who suggested that the update be verbal. I do not know who

     suggested this. As a general point, the agenda and any additional items would

     have been agreed with the Chair prior to the meeting, although in this case I am

     not certain who suggested this it would have been cleared with the Chair.

302. I am asked why the verbal update was not noted in the minutes. I do not know

     why this is. It may well be that the contents of the update were contained in the


                                      Page 75 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




     CEO's report, in which case it would not have been repeated in the minutes, but

     I do not know if this is the case. My practice in taking minutes was to include any

     substantive discussions.

303. I do not recall whether any members of the Board raised issues with the minutes,

     as recorded. If any issue had been raised about the accuracy of the minutes,

     they would have been amended accordingly and this would have been noted at

     the next Board meeting before the minutes were signed by the Chair. The next

     Board minutes (POL00021532) show no such amendment.

304. It was my responsibility, as Company Secretary, to take detailed minutes of

     Board meetings. I set out at paragraph 29 above my practice when taking and

     preparing minutes of meetings.

305. I have been asked to consider POL00021535, namely minutes of the Board

     Meeting on 15 July 2015.

306. My understanding of the reasons for Alice leaving POL in 2015 is that, having

     served a four-year term as Chair (since 2011), had she decided to stay, she

     would want to commit to a second full term. I believe that this was not something

     that she wanted to do, and whilst she had the option to stay, it was her decision

     not to.

307_ Whilst I cannot speak for Alice, as far as I am aware the issues related to Horizon

     were not an active part of why she left.

Board Meeting — 22 September 2015

308. At document POL00021538 are the Board Meeting minutes of the Board Meeting

     that took place on 22 September 2015.


                                       Page 76 of 104
                                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                                    WI TN00580100




309. I cannot now recall whether, prior to this meeting, the Board had been provided

     with a comprehensive report on the cases that had been withdrawn from the

     mediation scheme and the Criminal Case Review Commission case. My minute

     suggests that this was covered in the CEO's written report the meeting. However,

     I note that the CEO's report at POL00027245 does provide some information.

310. I am asked why the minutes do not reference the Significant Litigation Report,

     whereas earlier minutes do. As a general point — and as set out above at

     paragraph 57 — it was not the case that the Significant Litigation Report was

     considered and discussed in every Board Meeting; on the contrary, it was only

     considered in certain meetings, I believe this may have been quarterly. The

     agenda for this meeting would have been agreed with the (interim) Chair. I do

     not now know why it was not included on this Board Meeting Agenda.

311. As to who would have made the decision not to include this, again I cannot now

     recall this. Neil McCausland, as Interim Chair of the Board at that time, would

     have ultimately decided the agenda for the Board Meetings and what should or

     should not be included. I would have likely spoken with Neil at this time to agree

     the Agenda prior to it being circulated. Whilst I cannot recall the details, it may

     well be that the Significant Litigation Report was not due to come to this meeting,

     and therefore it was not excluded from the agenda.

312. I note document POL00027636, namely the minutes of the Board Meeting on 28

     October 2015.

313. As to why Neil McCausland left POL, my recollection was that he was always

     planning on leaving POL at this time. Whilst I cannot speak for Neil McCausland,

     my recollection is that he had taken on a new, significant executive role with a


                                      Page 77 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     large retail organisation and had decided that he could not commit to both roles.

314. I am asked why Neil McCausland's departure was not announced at that time.

     My recollection is that the departure or retirement of Non-Executive Directors

     would not usually be announced unless specifically requested by the individual

     concerned. In my view there was nothing unusual or untoward about the fact that

     Neil's departure was not announced. It would have been filed at Companies

     House as required.

315. Whilst I cannot recall the specifics of Tim Parker's appointment as Chair, my

     understanding is that, as this was a Government appointment, it was not

     necessary to have Board resolution noting his appointment. The necessary filing

     was made at Companies House.

316. I note that these minutes do not include a specific update in connection with

     Horizon and Project Sparrow. As before, the meeting agenda would have been

     agreed with the Chair prior to it being circulated. I note in the minutes of the

     previous Board Meeting on 22 September 2015 (POL00021538), Tim Parker, as

     the new Chair, had been asked to undertake an independent review of Project

     Sparrow on his appointment. Whilst I cannot recall this specifically, it may well

     have been that he had started this review and had decided not to include it as an

     agenda item until such time that the review had completed. I do not consider that

     there was anything untoward as a result of an update not being included.

317. I cannot now recall the Board Meeting on 28 October 2015 but, given that it is

     not contained in the minutes, I do not believe that any Board member raised any

     concerns about the lack of an update on Project Sparrow or Horizon. Had such

     concerns been raised I believe that I would have included this within the minutes.


                                      Page 78 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




     Given the passage of time I cannot now recall specifically what was discussed.

318. Whilst the Board generally came together once a month (save in August and

     December), my recollection is that outside of those meetings the CEO would

     have had regular one-to-ones with the Chair. As the business had ongoing

     discussions about Project Sparrow, Second Sight and the issues with Horizon,

     these topics may have been discussed at these one-to-ones. As to whether

     members of the Board had such conversations outside of the Board Meetings, I

     do not know.

319. As set out at paragraph 57 above, as far as I can recall, the Significant Litigation

     Report was not discussed as a topic every Board Meeting. Whilst it was

     considered regularly by the Board, this was not on a monthly basis. I do not know

     why on this occasion it was not included as a topic on the agenda.


Board Meeting — 22 January 2016

320. I note document POL00021540, namely the Board Meeting minutes of 22

     January 2016.

321. POLB16/10 (b) contains the reference: "The Board noted the Prosecutions Policy

     but challenged whether the policy should be available on the Post Office website,

     asking what benefit this brought to the Business". From reading these minutes it

     appears that the Board was informed of the Prosecutions Policy and noted the

     changes. I believe this was the outcome of the Prosecutions paper which was

     presented and discussed at the ARC by Chris Aujard (POL00100193). I recall

     that the Board challenged whether the policy should be made available on the

     website.

322. The CEO addressed this, and an action was noted to consider whether

                                       Page 79 of 104
                                                                                    WITNO0580100
                                                                                  WI TN00580100




     publication was indeed appropriate. The new General Counsel, Jane MacCleod,

     was then tasked to consider this further. I cannot ultimately recall what was

     decided and whether this issue was again considered by the Board. As an

     executive policy, any ratification would have been done by the executive and

     noted by the Board.

323. The rationale for changing the Prosecution Policy and the changes being

     proposed was presented by Chris Aujard and discussed at the ARC

     (POL00100193).

324. As set out at paragraph 236 above, I cannot recall receiving a copy of the Clarke

     advice (POL00006357), and whilst I cannot speak for all members of the Board,

     as far as I can recall I do not believe that the Board similarly received a copy.

     Whilst I do not know if the Board were aware of this advice when discussing the

     new Prosecution Policy, I do not believe that I was aware of it at that stage. I

     cannot recall whether the Board considered ceasing prosecutions at that stage,

     but had they done so, this would have been reflected in the minutes.

325. The minutes of the Board Meeting on 22 January 2016 do not reference Project

     Sparrow, Horizon or the Significant Litigation Report. These items were not on

     the meeting agenda. I do not know why this was but I do not believe that this was

     for any untoward reason. As I mentioned at paragraph 57 above, whilst these

     topics were regularly considered at discussed by the Board they did not all make

     up a part of every Board Meeting.

326. I note POL00021542. This document contains the Board Meeting minutes of 24

     May 2016.

327. I can see from the minutes that Jane M acCleod presented a paper to the Board

                                      Page 80 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




     covering the Postmaster Litigation and gave a verbal update on the High Court

     claim.

328. I am informed by the Inquiry that the next noted update to the Board on this

     litigation was five months later on 24 November 2016. As to how the Board was

     kept informed and made decisions during this period, I do not now recall this. I

     do not specifically recall what discussions took place during that five-month

     period and when, but it may be that these matters were addressed in the CEO

     report, rather than as a specific agenda item, although I would expect the minutes

     to show if this had taken place. It may well also be that during that time

     discussions took place outside of the Board Meeting and that members of the

     Board were made aware of matters in that way, for example through the regular

     one to ones between the Chair and the CEO. However, I do not have any specific

     recollection of this or recall being party to these discussions. My assumption is

     that, during this period, there were not any decisions for the Board to make in

     relation to the litigation, hence why no such decisions were recorded. This is an

     assumption on my part however as I do not specifically recall this.

329. I cannot recall whether the Board was informed when proceedings had been

     served but I would have expected this to be the case.

330. As to whether the Board had any input in the way proceedings were conducted,

     I believe that any substantive discussion around this within the Board Meetings

     would have been minuted. Whilst I do not know if the Board did input into the

     proceedings, I believe that any such input would have been noted in the minutes

     accordingly.

331. I have been asked to consider POL00103264 and POL00027185. I note from


                                      Page 81 of 104
                                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                                       WI TN00580100




     those minutes at POLB16/84 AOB (a) that the update provided to the Board in

     respect of Project Sparrow was that the Group Litigation Order was expected in

     January. Given the minutes, and whilst I cannot recall this, I believe that it was

     the only substantive update provided — had anything more extensive been

     discussed, I believe that this would have been noted in the minutes.

332. From reviewing the minutes, I cannot see any decision made by the Board in

     relation to the Group Litigation Order. Whilst I have no specific recollection of

     this, my assumption therefore is that no decision was made by the Board on that

     day. The minutes note that the only information received was the date of the

     Group Litigation Order.

333. I cannot specifically recall whether the Board sought further information on the

     sub-postmaster litigation, but the fact that this is not minuted nor is there any

     action noted as a result of this indicates to me that they did not.

334. Again, and whilst I have no specific recollection of this, I do not believe that there

     was any paper provided in the Board Pack addressing the sub-postmaster

     litigation, as the reference to this in the minutes is within AOB. As set out at

     paragraph 129 above, the fact of it being an AOB does not diminish its

     importance from the perspective of the Board. It does suggest to me however

     that there was no specific paper accompanying this update, as if there had been

     this would more likely have been noted as an agenda item, with underlying

     papers. As before it may well have been a timing issue in that the Board. Noting

     Paula's comment that the Group Litigation Order was expected in January, my

     assumption is that there was nothing further to update on at this time. I cannot

     specifically recall this however and this is an assumption on my part.



                                        Page 82 of 104
                                                                                               WITNO0580100
                                                                                            WI TN00580100




335. As to the adequacy of these minutes, I do not have any concerns about this. The

     process I adopted in taking verbatim notes, as set out at paragraph 224 above,

     indicates to me that the minutes that I prepared were an accurate reflection of

     the meeting. If there had been any issue with the minutes that I had drafted, there

     was opportunity for the Board to raise this prior to their being finalised.

336. At POL00021546 are the minutes of the Board Meeting on 31 January 2017.

     Within that meeting, Rob Houghton ("Rob"), Group Chief Information Officer,

     outlined three current issues concerning Fujitsu. The second of those was "The

     operational risk is outside our risk appetite" and I have been asked for my

     understanding of this comment. Whilst I cannot recall the detail of this, it may

     have been related to the fact of the ongoing outages that were causing

     operational difficulties for Post Offices. I recall that issue was considered as high

     risk as the Post Offices were not able to trade in those circumstances. However,

     I cannot recall this in any detail and Rob's commentary would be contained within

     his report, which I would not have repeated within the minutes. I do note at

     POL00241688, there is reference to "significant incident with Horizon on 9t" May"

     where "approximately 65% of transactions on Horizon failed to complete as the

     system began to degrade owing to memory issues", which supports my

     recollection of this issue.

337. I note P0L00021547, namely the Board Meeting minutes of 28 March 2017. I

     was not present at this meeting due to personal issues                _GRo_._,_.._,_._.__._.
                                                                      --




                              , and as a result, Victoria Moss, the Deputy Company

     Secretary, attended in my absence. In my time as Company Secretary at POL,

     this was the only Board Meeting that I was not able to attend. Victoria Moss, a

     qualified Company Secretary, would have prepared the minutes of the meeting.

                                       Page 83 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




338. I do not recall specifically being provided with an update following this meeting,

     although no doubt I would likely have spoken with Victoria Moss about it. I am

     asked in particular about the Project Sparrow update at POLB17/24 (b — e),

     where the General Counsel is noted as providing a verbal update. I was not

     present at the meeting and therefore do not know whether the Board asked any

     questions or asked about the likelihood of success or advice on settlement. I

     would anticipate that any substantive questions or discussions would have been

     minuted.

339. POL00021548 are the minutes of the Board Meeting of 25 May 2017. The

     minutes do not include an update on Sparrow, Horizon or the Significant

     Litigation Report.

340. I cannot now recall why it was that these matters were not referred to within the

     minutes. Had they been listed on the agenda and/or discussed as an AOB, I

     believe that this would have been minuted. As stated at paragraph 129 above,

     the decision of what to include on the Agenda rests with the Chair. Where there

     was an update to be provided, I believe it would have been included_

341. It is also worth noting, as set out at paragraph 136 above, that whilst the Board

     tended to receive updates through the Board Meetings, occasionally updates

     were given outside of those meetings. In addition, the CEO and Chair had one

     to one meetings where inevitably, updates would be provided.

342_ I cannot at this stage specifically recall what, if anything, was discussed about

     Sparrow, Horizon or the litigation at this Board meeting. However, if discussions

     had taken place they would have been appropriately minuted.

Retirement

                                      Page 84 of 104
                                                                                                                                                                            WITNO0580100
                                                                                                                                                                       WI TN00580100




343. 1 am asked to consider POL00021549, namely the Board Meeting minutes of 25

     July 2017. The minutes reflect at POLB 17/62 my resignation as Company

     Secretary, effective from 30 August 2017, and the appointment of Jane MacLeod

     (the then General Counsel) as Company Secretary from that date.

344. 1 took early retirement for personal reasons. `                                                                                  GRO

     1._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._..._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._,_._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._._..._._._._.__._._._._._._._._..
                                                                                    GRO

     These personal matters did not impact my work in the run up to my retirement,

     but I recognised at the time that it was the right time for me to leave. I performed

     my role as Company Secretary up to the end of August 2017. My resignation had

     nothing to do with Horizon.

345. I have maintained contact with some of my former colleagues who I worked with

     in the 1980s, my former PA, and also Susan. Since my retirement I have had

     various contact with former colleagues, for example with Paula in relation to

     references for voluntary work. That was some time ago now and save for those

     referenced above, I have not had any recent contact. Since it became clear I

     would be giving evidence, I have not spoken with any former colleagues.

346. I am asked about my understanding of the nature of the relationship between

     Alice and Paula. My recollection of their relationship was that it was very

     professional. They were very supportive of one another, but would also challenge

     and scrutinise decisions as necessary. I believe that both would raise issues with

     one another if they felt necessary.

Role within the company


347. I have been asked to consider INQ00001085, namely the transcript of Paul

     Inwood's evidence to the Inquiry, at pages 113 to 114.

                                                                          Page 85 of 104
                                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                                   WI TN00580100




348. Within this document, at lines 1-16 on Page 114, Paul Inwood has provided

     evidence that 'it was rumoured internally that I had `rebuked' Post Office

     employees for suggesting that it was possible for Fujitsu engineers to access the

     system remotely in the first quarter of 2018. This is simply not possible, as I

     retired from the business in August 2017.

349. Prior to my retirement my genuine belief was that sub-postmasters could see any

     changes to their accounts. I may have shared that observation with appropriate

     people at various times, but certainly would not have been `rebuking' people as

     is being suggested.

350. My genuine and honest belief at the time was that Fujitsu engineers could not

     remotely access the Horizon system without the sub-postmasters' knowledge.

     This was based on the assurances I was being provided with as well as my

     general and ongoing exposure to issues associated with Horizon which I would

     have had sight of in my capacity as Company Secretary.

351. With the full benefit of hindsight, and in particular the knowledge of the issues

     with Horizon which I have only become aware of since my departure from the

     business in 2017, I do regret believing the assurances that I had been given.


Training


352. My CIMA qualification was one that was recognised as being appropriate for the

     Company Secretary role. I did however consider it appropriate to undertake some

     specific training before I became Company Secretary.

353. In order to prepare myself I completed two or three online courses specific for a

     Company Secretary role. I recall this focused on minute taking, the Companies

     Act 2006, and other issues that a Company Secretary would need to be familiar

     with.

                                      Page 86 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




354. I also took advice from John Millidge, the experienced Royal Mail Company

     Secretary, and explored with him what would make an effective Company

     Secretary. Furthermore, I had discussions with Alice, who had knowledge of

     Boards, where we discussed best practice.

355. During my time as Company Secretary I completed three or four courses with

     other company secretaries to ensure that my knowledge was up to date. I recall

     that at least two of these courses were run by Slaughter and May. My recollection

     is that some were twilight meetings whilst the others were full day courses.

356. As to whether I was ever asked not to minute certain things Board Minutes, this

     was only on very rare occasions. When this did occur, it was — as far as I can

     recall - usually in relation to personal issues being discussed, and it would be the

     Chair who would ask me not to minute it. As I said, however, this was a very rare

     occurrence.

357. I do not recall ever being asked not to minute any discussion related to Horizon,

     Project Sparrow or the Group Litigation.

358. I was acutely aware of the fact that minutes of meetings should be recorded

     accurately to reflect the discussions and decisions of the Board and any related

     action points. As set out at paragraphs 29 and 224 above, my practice was to

     take verbatim notes of discussions, which I then typed up and circulated in draft,

     prior to them being finalised.

359. If at any point the minutes that I recorded were not accurate and reflective of the

     meetings, they would not have been approved by the Board and signed by the

     Chair.


Reflections




                                       Page 87 of 104
                                                                                       WITNO0580100
                                                                                     WI TN00580100




360. At the time of my retirement I was very proud to have worked for POL for 34

     years, and latterly as part of Paula's management team. At that point I had a

     genuine belief in the integrity of the organisation and the work it did. However,

     my pride at working for POL has been significantly tainted by the issues which

     have emerged since my retirement, and which are the subject matter of this

     Inquiry. I have no pride regarding the issues with Horizon and the treatment of

     sub-postmasters and hold deep regret for the impact that this had on sub-

     postmasters and their families.

361. With the benefit of hindsight, there are many steps POL should have taken to

     address Horizon and the issues being raised by sub-postmasters.

362. I believe that if the Board had been aware at the time of the serious systemic

     problems relating to the integrity of Horizon then there are things that it would

     have done differently also. Horizon was discussed at length at numerous

     meetings, with third-party support being put in place to try and identify issues. I

     do not believe the Board tried to conceal or ignore the issues.

363. Given what I know now, there are many things which, had I known at the time, I

     would have done differently. I now wish, with the benefit of hindsight, that greater

     scrutiny had been applied to the assurances that were given and I deeply regret

     this. I genuinely believed in Horizon's integrity, however mistaken this belief has

     subsequently been shown to be.

364. As to who might be responsible, I do not know who holds responsibility for the

     Post Office scandal and therefore whether this can be attributed to any particular

     individual or individuals.

365. The final point I wish to convey is my sincere sorrow that this scandal has

     happened, and in particular my deep regret for those wrongfully convicted or


                                       Page 88 of 104
                                                                             WITNO0580100
                                                                           WI TN00580100




accused. These words cannot even begin to put right what has happened but

they are sincere. I cannot imagine how it must be for the sub-postmasters whose

voices went unheard throughout these years_ I want to express my deep and

genuine remorse for what has happened.




                                Page 89 of 104
                                                          WITNO0580100
                                                        W ITN00580100




Statement of Truth


I believe the content of this statement to be true.




Signed:
             GRO


Dated: 24th April 2024




                                       Page 90 of 104
                                                                         WITNO0580100
                                                                       WI TN00580100




Index to First Witness Statement of Alwen Lyons


 No.     URN           Document Description         Control Number


    1.   POL00178577 Blackwood SPSO — Post

                       Incident Review and          POL-BSFF-0016640

                       Recommendations

                       (05.10.2004)


    2.   POL00027270 Post Office Limited Board      POL-0023911

                       Meeting Minutes

                       (13.12.2011)


    3.   POL00021503 Post Office Limited Board      POL0000036

                       Meeting Minutes

                       (12.01.2012)


    4.   POL00096391 Post Office Limited Board      POL-BSFF-0164716

                       Status Report (17.04.2012)


    5.   POL00137239 Horizon On-Line Design         POL-BSFF-0000026

                       Review — Gartner Findings

                       (03.10.2008)


    6.   POL00105481 Notes of Meeting with

                       James Arbuthnot, Alice       POL-0104661

                       Perkins and Alwen Lyons,

                       March 13th (14.03.2012)




                                 Page 91 of 104
                                                                      WITNO0580100
                                                                    WI TN00580100




7.   POL00021505 Post Office Limited Board

                   Meeting Minutes               POL0000038

                   (15.03.2012)


8.   POL00179511 Email from Rod Ismay to         POL-BSFF-0017574

                   Alwen Lyons re Horizon

                   Integrity — Final Report

                   (26.03.2012)


9.   POL00105597 Email from Paula Vennells       POL-0104597

                   to Susan Crichton and

                   Alwen Lyons re Oliver

                   Letwin MP (03.04.2012)


10. POL00115849 Letter from Paula Vennells

                   to Oliver Letwin MP           POL-0114586

                   (04.04.2012)


11. POL00105494 Email chain re briefing note

                   for POL's meeting with Lord   POL-0104674

                   Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin

                   MP (18.04.2012 -

                   20.04.2012)


12. POL00107712 Email correspondence

                   between Rod Ismay and         POL-0110810

                   Alwen Lyons re case in



                              Page 92 of 104
                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                   WI TN00580100




                  Oliver Letwin MP's

                  constituency (10.04.2012 —

                  13.04.2012)


13. POL00057647 Email from Simon Baker to       POL-0054126

                  Alwen Lyons re Objective

                  and Agenda for meeting

                  with James Arbuthnot

                  (30.04.2012)


14. POL00057656 Notes and Actions from 3rd

                  May 2012 discussion on        POL-0054135

                  James Arbuthnot and Oliver

                  Letwin MP


15. POL00179789 Email from Simon Baker to       POL-BSFF-0017852

                  Alwen Lyons and other POL

                  personnel containing

                  agenda for preparation

                  meeting for Arbuthnot visit

                  (09.05.2012)


16. POL00057711 Arbuthnot / Letwin

                  preparation meeting agenda    POL-0054190

                  (10.05.20122)


17. POL00105491 Email from Alwen Lyons to




                              Page 93 of 104
                                                                    WITN00580100
                                                                   WITN00580100




                  Paula Vennells re James       POL-0104671

                  Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin

                  MP (21.05.2012)


18. POL00021507 Post Office Limited Board       POL0000040

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (23.05.2012)


19. POL00057991 Email correspondence            POL-0054470

                  between Angela van-den-

                  Bogerd and Alwen Lyons re

                  MPs visit (31.05.2012 —

                  0706.2012)


20. POL00143192 Email correspondence            POL-BSFF-0002357

                  between Rod Ismay, Simon

                  Baker, Alwen Lyons and

                  Angela van-den-Bogerd re

                  Shoosmiths call

                  (18.06.2012)


21. POL00143191 Email correspondence            POL-BSFF-0002356

                  between Rod Ismay, Simon

                  Baker, Alwen Lyons and

                  Angela van-den-Bogerd re

                  Shoosmiths call

                  (18.06.2012)


                            Page 94 of 104
                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                   W ITN00580100




22. POL00107746 Email correspondence re

                  MPs meeting with Second       POL-0106006

                  Sight (04.07.2012-

                  05.07.2012)


23. POL00107753 Email chain regarding POL's POL-0106009

                  response to Alan Bates' FOl

                  request (06.07.2012 —

                  20.07.2012)


24. POL00143385 Email chain regarding POL's

                  response to Alan Bates' FOI   POL-BSFF-0002550

                  request (06.07.2012 —

                  16.07.2012)


25. POL00143573 Email chain regarding Paul

                  Popov's case (04.09.2012)     POL-BSFF-0002738


26. POL00181578 Email chain re meeting with

                  Second Sight (07.09.2012 —    POL-BSFF-0019641

                  10.09.2012)


27. POL00339291 Email correspondence

                  between Alwen Lyons and       POL-BSFF-0165012

                  Second Sight re Forensic

                  Review of the Post Office

                  cases (25.06.2012 —



                            Page 95 of 104
                                                                   WITNO0580100
                                                                 WI TN00580100




                  26.06.2012)


28. POL00339308 Email correspondence          POL-BSFF-0165029

                  between Alwen Lyons and

                  Second Sight re Forensic

                  Review of the Post Office

                  cases (25.06.2012 —

                  2906.2012)


29. POL00107174 Email chain re Second Sight

                  meeting (05.07.2012)        POL-0105482


30. POL00091030 Email chain re Second Sight

                  audit (26.07.2012 -         POL-0090674

                  27.07.2012)


31. POL00091031 Email chain re Second Sight

                  audit (26.07.2012 -         POL-0090675

                  27.07.2012)


32. POL00181348 Email from Simon Baker re

                  update on MPs cases         POL-BSFF-0019411

                  (03.09.2012)


33. POLOO143269 Email correspondence with

                  George Thomson (NFSP) re    POL-BSFF-0002434

                  SS review (21.06.2012 -




                            Page 96 of 104
                                                              WITNO0580100
                                                            WI TN00580100




34. POL00021510 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000043

                  (23.01.2013)


35. POL00021513 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000046

                  (21.05.2013)


36. POL00098382 Email correspondence re       POL-0097965

                  meeting with James

                  Arbuthnot (24.05.2013)


37. POL00098439 Email correspondence re       POL-0098022

                  Bracknell Enquiry

                  (24.05.2013 - 06.04.2013)


38. POL00029591 Email correspondence re       POL-0026073

                  SS info (04.06.2013 -

                  05.06.2013)


39. POL00029598 Email correspondence re       POL-0026080

                  Spot Review 5 Response

                  (24.05.2013 - 11.06.2013)


40. POL00029601 Email correspondence re       POL-0026083

                  Spot Review 5 Response

                  (24.05.2013 - 11.06.2013)




                            Page 97 of 104
                                                                  WITNO0580100
                                                                WI TN00580100




41. POL00029605 Email correspondence re      POL-0026087

                  Second Sight Line of

                  Enquiry (13.06.2013 -

                  16.06.2013)


42. POL00188912 Email correspondence         POL-BSFF-0026975

                  between Simon Baker and

                  Alwen Lyons re SS call

                  (24.06.2013)


43. POL00190617 Email from Simon Baker to    POL-BSFF-0028680

                  SS and POL re access to

                  back office accounting

                  systems (07.03.2013)




44. POL00021515 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes            POL0000048

                  (01.07.2013)


45. POL00192017 Email chain re SS 5 July     POL BSFF-0030080

                  update (06.07.2013)


46. POL00027573 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes            POL-0024214

                  (09.07.2013)


47. POL00021516 Post Office Limited Board


                            Page 98 of 104
                                                                     WITNO0580100
                                                                   WI TN00580100




                  Meeting Minutes               POL0000049

                  (16.07.2013)


48. POL00021518 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes               POL0000051

                  (25.09.2013)


49. POL00006590 Update on the work              POL-0017671

                  programme arising from the

                  Horizon report (26.07.2013)


50. POL00298022 Email correspondence re         POL-BSFF-0136072

                  Board note on Horizon

                  (26.07.2013 — 27.07.2013)


51. POL00021520 Post Office Limited Board       POL0000053

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (27.11.2013)


52. POL00006357 Advice note, prepared by

                  Simon Clarke (15.07.2013)     POL-0017625


53. POL00192783 Update to POL Board re:         POL-BSFF-0030846

                  Horizon Legal Issues

                  (23.07.2013)


54. POL00192782 Email from Susan Crichton       POL-BSFF-0030845

                  to Marin Edwards, Simon




                            Page 99 of 104
                                                                WITN00580100
                                                              WI TN00580100




                   Baker and Alwen Lyons with

                   POL Board update

                   (24.07.2013)


55. POL00021521 Post Office Limited Board       POL0000054

                   Meeting Minutes

                   (21.01.2014)


56. POL00100193 Post Office Audit Risk and

                   Compliance Committee         POL-0099776

                   Prosecution Policy (Feb

                   2014)


57. POL00021522 Post Office Limited Board       POL0000055

                   Meeting Minutes

                   (26.02.2014)


58. POL00105529 Post Office Ltd Board Initial

                   Complaint Review and         POL-0105096

                   Mediation Scheme


59. POL00021523 Post Office Limited Board       POL0000056

                   Meeting Minutes

                   (26.03.2014)


60. POL00021525 Post Office Limited Board       POL0000058

                   Meeting Minutes

                   (21.05.2014)



                             Page 100 of 104
                                                                   WITNO0580100
                                                                 WI TN00580100




61. POL00148420 Email from Alwen Lyons to     POL-BSFF-0007543

                  Chris Aujard and Belinda

                  Crowe re draft minutes

                  (23.05.2014)


62. POL00021526 Post Office Limited Board     POL0000059

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (10.06.2014)


63. POL00022128 Meeting of the Sparrow        POL-0018607

                  Sub-committee — agenda

                  and minutes (06.06.2014)


64. POL00021528 Post Office Limited Board     POL0000061

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (25.09.2014)


65. POL00021529 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000062

                  (29.10.2014)


66. POL00006575 Sparrow Sub-Committee         POL-0017849

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (12.01.2015)


67. POL00006574 Sparrow Sub-Committee

                  Meeting Minutes             POL-0017848




                            Page 101 of 104
                                                              WITNO0580100
                                                            WI TN00580100




                  (18.02.2015)


68. POL00027279 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL-0023920

                  (25.03.2015)


69. POL00027304 CEO Report v6 (March

                  2015)                       POL-0023945


70. POL00021532 Post Office Limited Board     POL0000065

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (21.05.2015)


71. POL00021535 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000068

                  (15.07.2015)


72. POL00021538 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000071

                  (22.09.2015)


73. POL00027245 CEO's Report - September POL-0023886

                  2015


74. POL00027636 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL-0024277

                  (28.10.2015)


75. POL00021540 Post Office Limited Board



                            Page 102 of 104
                                                                   WITNO0580100
                                                                 WI TN00580100




                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000073

                  (22.01.2016)


76. POL00021542 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000075

                  (24.05.2016)


77. POL00103264 Post Office Board Agenda

                  (2411 2016)                 POL-0102847


78. POL00027185 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL-0023826

                  (24.11.2016)


79. POL00021546 Post Office Limited Board     POL0000079

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (31.01.2017)


80. POL00241688 Post Office Board Agenda

                  (24.05.2016)                POL-BSFF-0079751


81. POL00021547 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000080

                  (28.03.2017)


82. POL00021548 Post Office Limited Board

                  Meeting Minutes             POL0000081

                  (25.05.2017)




                            Page 103 of 104
                                                               WITN00580100
                                                             WI TN00580100




83. POL00021549 Post Office Limited Board      POL0000082

                  Meeting Minutes

                  (25.07.2017)


84. INQ00001085   Transcript of Evidence       INQ00001085

                  provided by Paul Inwood to

                  the Inquiry (13.10.2013)




                            Page 104 of 104
