                                                                                        WITNO0430100
                                                                                      WITNO0430100




                              Witness Name: The Right Honourable Sir Anthony Hooper


                                                          Statement No: WITNO0430100


                                                                   Dated: 8 March 2024




                          POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




                            FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF


                  THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ANTHONY HOOPER




   I, The Right Honourable Sir Anthony Hooper, will say as follows:




   INTRODUCTION


1. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the

   "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 26 September 2023

   (the "Request").



   BACKGROUND


2. Prior to my appointment as Chairman of the Working Group for the Initial Complaint

   Review and Mediation Scheme ("the Mediation Scheme"), I taught law at various

   universities in England and Canada, practiced at the Bar of England and Wales



                                     Page 1 of 6
                                                                                             WITN00430100
                                                                                         WITNO0430100




   primarily in crime, became a High Court judge in 1995 and a Court of Appeal judge

   in 2004, retiring in 2012.


3. I understand that my appointment as Chairman was initiated by the JFSA and MPs

   and approved by POL. The Terms of Reference [POL00022307] set out the

   objectives of the Working Group and its rules of procedure. I believed, as apparently

   did the representatives of POL and the JFSA, that the objectives were achievable.


4. In the event of a disagreement between POL and JFSA, the two members of the

   Group, I had a casting vote. The principal disagreement between POL and JFSA

   related to the issue of mediation. The position of JFSA was that all or substantially all

   applicants accepted to the scheme should be entitled to have their cases sent for

   mediation so that the SPMs could explain their claims to and discuss their claims

   with POL. POL's view was that a case should not be sent to mediation unless there

   was a realistic prospect that mediation would lead to a claim being settled. At first I

   agreed with POL but after representations from JFSA about the history of the

   scheme, I believe that I largely cast my vote in favour of mediation.


5. It became clear to me before POL in March 2015 terminated the Working Group that

   the objectives of the Working Group were unlikely to be achieved, a view shared by

   JFSA and various MPs.


6. As I made clear to Paula Vennells and I believe Alice Perkins, it was in my view

   unlikely that the cause of the losses suffered by was, as POL alleged, theft by SPMs

   from POL. Most if not all the SPMs were of excellent character. The fact of a loss

   would be known to POL within days or weeks. No sensible person would steal from

   POL, knowing that POL would identify the loss so quickly leading to the SPM being

   prosecuted/dismissed. Whilst I was probably unaware of the true magnitude of the


                                      Page 2 of 6
                                                                                            WITN00430100
                                                                                           WITNO0430100




   complaints by SPMs about Horizon causing the losses, it seemed unlikely that all or

   most of the complaints were unfounded. Whilst, as POL alleged, some losses could

   be due to errors made in entering transactions, the many high value losses made

   that unlikely. Some losses could be due to employee theft, but again that was an

   unlikely cause of so many high value losses. As the work of the Group proceeded, it

   became clear to me that POL had not properly investigated losses, preferring instead

   prosecution/civil action/dismissal. Whilst in my first meeting with Paula Vennells, I

   had suggested that convicted SPMs not be included in the scheme, I changed my

   mind afterwards. The Minutes show that convicted applicants were accepted and

   see also [POL00109982]. My concerns about POL were heightened by the seeming

   unwillingness of POL (as the Minutes show) to provide the Working Group and

   particularly SS with explanations about surpluses, other than an acceptance that

   after 3 years, surpluses were taken into the general accounts. Given the value of the

   losses sustained by SPMs and on the assumption that the losses were not caused

   by theft, where had the money gone? My concerns increased when I learnt that

   SPMs did not have to disclose explained gains.


7. The achievement of the objectives of the Working Group became effectively

   impossible when POL refused to accept that losses could be caused by Horizon and

   the apparent unwillingness of POL to accept any responsibility for the losses. One

   case stands out in my memory. An SPM had been invited, if not persuaded, to take

   over a branch which had been suspended. He was not told that the reason for the

   suspension was a big loss (some £60,000, I recollect). Within a very short time the

   branch suffered a further large loss and was, as I remember, suspended again and

   the SPO lost a large sum of money. To me it was clear that whatever the contract

   between the SPO and the PO said, the SPO deserved to be compensated not


                                      Page 3 of 6
                                                                                              WITNO0430100
                                                                                            WITNO0430100




   having been told of the reasons why the branch had earlier been suspended. I learnt,

   probably from Alan Bates or Second Sight, that the mediation had failed. Towards

   the end of the life of the Working Group some mediations took place. It was decided,

   probably by POL, that the Working Group was not to be told about the results of the

   mediations until about 25 mediations had concluded and then the Working Group

   would only be told about the results in general terms. At about that time I

   understood, informally, that none of the mediations had been successful.

8. The subsequent refusal by POL to accept that Horizon could be the cause of losses

   continued for many years. By the time POL found itself as a respondent before the

   Court of Appeal Criminal Division, it had changed its position. As the Court said

   ([2021] EWCA Crim 577):

          70.   In its Respondent's Notice, POL accepted Fraser J's findings that there
                were about 30 bugs, errors and defects in the Horizon system, which did
                not operate simultaneously and which affected both Legacy Horizon and
                Horizon Online, and that there was a significant and material risk on
                occasions of branch accounts being affected in the way alleged by the
                claimants by bugs, errors and defects. It also accepted that POL failed
                to disclose to SPMs and to the courts the full and accurate position in
                relation to the reliability of Horizon. In relation to its duties as a private
                prosecutor, POL accepted that in cases where the reliability of the ARQ
                data was essential to the prosecution case, it had a duty to assess that
                data; and that in view of the limitations on the extent to which SPMs could
                investigate discrepancies in Horizon, POL had a duty to investigate to
                ensure that the evidence was accurate and to pursue reasonable lines
                of enquiry raised by the SPM. It was further accepted that Fujitsu had
                the ability to insert, inject, edit or delete transaction data or data in branch
                accounts; had the ability to implement fixes in Horizon that had the
                potential to affect transaction data or data in branch accounts; and had
                the ability to rebuild branch data. All of this could be done by Fujitsu
                without the knowledge or consent of the SPM.




                                      Page 4 of 6
                                                                                           WITNO0430100
                                                                                         WITNO0430100




9. The Court earlier explained what ARQ data was:


          15.    Fujitsu held audit data ("ARQ data"), which contained a complete and
                 accurate record of all keystrokes made by an SPM or an assistant when
                 using Horizon. It was therefore possible to refer to the audit data to track
                 every transaction recorded on Horizon.

10. The failure of the Working Group was not due to any structural weakness in its

   organisation or work. Its failure to achieve its objectives was solely due to the failure

   of POL to accept what it was later to accept before the CACD. I am not in a position

   to say whether the management of POL knew or suspected at the time that the

   Horizon system was unreliable. The evidence from the subsequent litigation, civil

   and criminal, would suggest to me that the management over many years

   deliberately failed fully and properly to investigate the cause of the losses

   notwithstanding the obvious unlikelihood that SPMs were stealing from POL. That

   failure ruined the lives of countless SPMs and must never be forgotten or forgiven.




Statement of Truth


I believe the content of this statement to be true.


SignedH         GRO
Dated:     8/03/24




                                       Page 5 of 6
                                                                         WITN00430100
                                                                      WITNO0430100




Index to First Witness Statement of THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ANTHONY

HOOPER




No.    URN            Document Description              Control Number

1.     POL00022307    Initial Complaint Review and      POL-0018786

                      Mediation Scheme - Terms of

                      Reference for the Working Group

2.     POL00109982    Letter from Paula Vennells to     POL-0111131

                      Anthony Hooper regarding Post

                      Office's approach to mediation




                            Page 6 of 6
