                                                                                     WITN10550100
                                                                                   WI TN10550100




                                                         Witness Name: David Sutherland

                                                      Teale Statement No. WITN10550100

                                                                  Dated 3 January 2024




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




         FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF DAVID SUTHERLAND TEALE




I, David Sutherland Teale, will say as follows:-

Introduction

   1. I am a former employee of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and

       held the position of Procurator Fiscal at Lochmaddy.

   2. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry with

       the matters set out in Rule 9 Request dated 8 December 2023, which relates

       to matters falling within Phase 4 of the Inquiry.

   3. I have been asked to set out my involvement as Procurator Fiscal in the

       prosecution of William Quarm.

Background




                                       Page 1 of 13
                                                                                      WITN10550100
                                                                                    WI TN10550100




   4. I have been asked to summarise my educational and professional

      qualifications. My full name is David Sutherland Teale. I am aged 74 years. I

      am a practicing solicitor in Scotland. I hold the qualifications Bachelor of Arts,

      Bachelor of Laws, Diploma in Forensic Medicine, Notary Public.

   5. I have been asked to summarise my career. I qualified as a Scottish solicitor in

      1980 and, following a short spell in private practice, joined the Crown Office and

      Procurator Fiscal Service (COPFS) as a Procurator Fiscal Depute in 1982. In

      March 2000, I was appointed Procurator Fiscal for the jurisdiction of the

      Western Isles which included the Sheriff Court District of Lochmaddy. I retired

      from COPFS in June 2015 and have since been a Director in the MaciverTeale

      Law Practice, Stornoway.

   6. I have been asked to provide details of my experience working with the Post

      Office and prior to this prosecution of William Quarm whether I was involved in

      any prosecutions reliant on data from the Horizon IT system. Over the years as

      a Procurator Fiscal Depute working in busy offices such as Glasgow and

      Greenock, I would have received and considered many reports from the Post

      Office regarding criminality by their workforce. I found as a Reporting Agency

      that their reports were straightforward and I cannot recall any instances at all

      where there was any suggestion that the information provided was misleading.

      I cannot recall any other Post Office case considered by me which relied on

      data from the Horizon IT system.




Involvement in criminal prosecution case studies being examined by the Inquiry


                                     Page 2 of 13
                                                                                         WITN10550100
                                                                                       WI TN10550100




Prosecution of William Quarm

  7. I have been asked to provide a full account of my involvement in and

      recollection of the prosecution of this case, including but not limited to

      answering the questions as follows.

   8. The circumstances in which I first became involved in this case are as follows.

      In Scotland, COPFS is the sole prosecuting authority and accordingly, the

      police and certain other agencies such as the DWP or the Scottish Society for

      Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SSPCA) or, as in this case, the Post Office

      would, where they have identified, in their view, sufficient evidence of criminality,

      submit reports for the consideration of prosecution to the Procurator Fiscal in

      whose jurisdiction the crime is alleged to have been committed. It is entirely

      within the discretion of the Procurator Fiscal in his or her jurisdiction (which is

      based on geographical location), to decide whether to take no proceedings, or,

      if proceedings are considered appropriate, the level at which to prosecute.

      Options range from warning, limited fine to prosecution at the appropriate level

      of court, ie District Court, Sheriff Court (whether before a Sheriff sitting alone or

      with a jury) or High Court.

   9. I have been asked to describe my role in relation to this case. The Report from

      the Post Office was received at the Procurator Fiscal's office in Lochmaddy in

      early 2009. As Procurator Fiscal there, I read and considered it. The reports

      submitted to the Procurator Fiscal follow a standard form. They provide details

      of the accused and his or her previous convictions. There follows a summary of

      the evidence against the accused prepared by the reporting officer (who, in this
                                      Page 3 of 13
                                                                                     WITN10550100
                                                                                   WI TN10550100




   case, I would expect to have been Raymond Grant given the contents of the

   document,    (Post   Office   Ltd   Confidential:    Investigation   Legal:   Theft,

   embezzlement      and    Money      Laundering      for   William    John     Quarm

   [POL00166596]), a list of witnesses, a list of productions and a draft charge.

   The draft charge submitted with the report is what the reporting officer considers

   to be appropriate to the circumstances. However, it is for the Procurator Fiscal

   to decide for himself what charge is appropriate and the precise wording of it.

   The summary of evidence submitted at this stage would not usually include full

   witness statements. These would only be submitted at the request of the

   Procurator Fiscal following a plea of Not Guilty.

10.The Procurator Fiscal will consider carefully the report, always with a view to

   ascertaining whether it discloses that a crime has been committed and then, if

   he is satisfied on that aspect, whether there is corroborated evidence (ie from

   two sources) that the accused committed the crime. If the report fails to disclose

   a crime or if there is no corroborated evidence of the accused's guilt, then the

   Procurator Fiscal will mark the case "No Proceedings" and provide his reasons

   for doing so for future audit purposes. This process is called, "case marking".

11. It goes almost without saying that the Procurator Fiscal will inevitably rely on

   the accuracy of any such report on which to base his decision and it is well

   accepted that he is entitled to rely entirely and absolutely on its accuracy for

   justification of any consequent actions taken by him. If there were ever any

   concern by a reporting officer in any agency whether Police, DWP, SSPCA or

   Post Office that any part of their report was open to doubt then that should be

   brought to the attention of the Procurator Fiscal in the body of the report. If, in


                                   Page 4 of 13
                                                                                  WITN10550100
                                                                                WI TN10550100




   this case, had there been any doubt as to the accuracy of the data produced

   by Horizon known to the reporting officer, then, of course, that should have been

   made very clear indeed since it would have seriously affected the decision

   made by the Procurator Fiscal.

12. If a case is to be prosecuted, the Procurator Fiscal will draft the appropriate

   charge, consider what witnesses he intends to lead to prove his case and list

   any previous convictions. These will be typed and put together to form what is

   called the Complaint (since it is the Complaint of the Procurator Fiscal) and

   served by post on the accused with a date for it to call in court at a Pleading

   Diet.

13. Because I do not have access to the original case papers, I can only surmise

   that the evidence provided to me would have been a summary such as that

   contained in (Post Office Confidential: Investigation [POL00166596]). From this

   it is clear enough that there is a sufficiency of evidence to proceed. This was

   evidence that the crime of embezzlement had been committed.

14. The interviews appear fair and not oppressive. I note that Mr Quarm was given

   an appropriate caution at the beginning of the first interview.

15. Being satisfied that there was indeed a sufficiency allowing me to proceed, my

   next decision would have been to decide the nature of proceedings. Given the

   large sum involved, I would have been in no doubt that the public interest

   required that I prosecute. As to forum, the sum involved suggested that

   prosecution in the Sheriff Court would have been appropriate. Mr Quarm had

   no previous convictions, was elderly and in poor health. Against that, he had

   not repaid any of the embezzled funds. I would have thought it unlikely that, at


                                  Page 5 of 13
                                                                                      WITN10550100
                                                                                    WI TN10550100




   most, he would have received a sentence of imprisonment not in excess of 12

   months and, accordingly, I opted for prosecution at Sheriff Summary level

   (before a Sheriff sitting alone). Because I do not have access to the original

   case papers, I cannot say what the Reporting Officer provided as a draft charge

   or charges but I see that the charge on the complaint, for which, as I have said,

   I would have drafted, is one of embezzlement.

16. Having made these decisions, I marked it for prosecution and arranged for the

   Complaint to be served on Mr Quarm for a first calling in court on 2 June 2009.

   As Procurator Fiscal, I had the authority to proceed without reference to others

   in COPFS.

17.The case proceeded through various callings in court. I see from the court

   minutes (Court Papers from Lochmaddy Sheriff court re William John Quarm

   [COPF0000001]) that the accused's solicitor tendered a plea of Not Guilty to

   the charge and challenged the fairness of the interviews on the basis that the

   accused had been denied legal representation at them. That argument was

   rejected by the Sheriff and the case was continued for a trial to take place.

   Before the date set for trial, the accused's solicitor offered me a plea of guilty to

   a reduced sum, namely £24,000. Although I did not have to, I did contact Robert

   Daily, Post Office Investigator, and discussed it with him (Email from Zoe

   Topham to Robert Daily and cc Mandy Talbot, re: Paible — Branch code 147869

   -William John Quarm [POL00166833]). Following that, I returned to the

   accused's solicitor and suggested that a plea of guilty to embezzlement of

   £27,000 (reduced from £40,277) would be acceptable. This was accepted by

   the accused's solicitor and was duly tendered at court. Mr Quarm was


                                   Page 6 of 13
                                                                                       WITN10550100
                                                                                     WI TN10550100




   sentenced to 150 hours Community Service (reduced from 2000 hours for a

   plea of guilty). I do think that it was reasonable to accept the offer to plead guilty

   to that reduced sum. It would have been difficult, if not impossible, to prove the

   actual amount embezzled given that the Horizon audit depended largely on the

   bogus figures input by the accused. If the case had gone to trial, I would have

   had to rely on evidence from the accused's admissions as to how much he

   considered he had embezzled and the period over which he considered he had

   been operating falsely and other evidence such as average takings over

   previous years. The figure offered was significant and would have allowed the

   court to treat the crime seriously and, of course, would have meant a certain

   conviction. I expect that in my discussions with Robert Daily, Investigation

   Officer, (referred to later) this would have been my argument for accepting the

   offer.

18. 1 have been asked whether I was aware of any allegations made by William

   Quarm relating to the reliability of the Horizon IT system and, if so, what I

   thought the significance of this was. I see from the transcript of his interviews

   (Record of Tape Recorded Interview of William John Quarm [POL00166599])

   that he considered that there was an error of around £600 or £700 in January

   or February 2008 in the data relating to the ATM in his branch. He thought that

   the total shortfall (of £40,277) should be reduced by that. In another section of

   his interview (Record of Tape Recorded Interview [POL00166599]), he was

   adamant that a remittance sent to his branch of £32,000 was wrong and that

   other remittances to his branch of £9,000 were also wrong because, he

   maintained, the largest remittance ever paid to his branch was £7,000. The


                                    Page 7 of 13
                                                                                    WITN10550100
                                                                                  WI TN10550100




   interviewer, Raymond Grant, Investigation Manager, responded to the latter

   suggestion, "It's automatic. It's a Horizon produced figure. People don't make

   decisions I'm going to send you 5. It's an automatic cash management system."

   When Mr Quarm protested, "But why if they were wanting £7,000 did they send

   me £7,000?" Raymond Grant replied, "It's the system. I don't know, I can't

   explain".

19. While these do seem to have been alerts as to the accuracy of Horizon

   produced data, it is difficult to treat them as serious challenges given that Mr

   Quarm admitted taking cash coming into his Post Office branch, equivalent of

   around £4,200 every week for an unknown period but conservatively estimated

   to be 10 or 11 months, and without putting it through his till. He further admitted

   inputting fictitious figures to Horizon to disguise the shortfall.

20. At the time of taking my decision to prosecute, I think that I can safely say that

   I would not have had any doubts as to the reliability of the evidence provided in

   the Post Office report. Certainly there was no suggestion at all that the Horizon

   IT system had produced or was producing unreliable data. If there had been

   any such suggestion, then I would have seriously considered proceeding further

   against the accused.

21. 1 have been asked who made the charging decision. As I have explained, as

   Procurator Fiscal it was my decision alone to prosecute him. In Scotland, the

   police will "charge" an accused. In this case, the police were not involved and

   the Post Office Investigators did not have authority to charge. In Scotland, an

   accused person receiving a Complaint amounts to having been "charged"




                                    Page 8 of 13
                                                                                    WITN10550100
                                                                                  WI TN10550100




22.I have been asked who authorized the prosecution in this case. As I have

   explained, as Procurator Fiscal I alone took the decision to prosecute.

23. I have been asked to provide details of any advice I provided in respect of the

   evidence and the merits of prosecution. I do not recall providing advice about

   this case to anyone.

24. I have been asked whether any Horizon data (and in particular ARQ logs) was

   requested from Fujitsu in this case. No Horizon data was requested from

   Fujitsu.

25. 1 have been asked who the disclosure officerwas in this case. The Investigating

   officer who supplied the documentary productions to the Procurator Fiscal's

   office at Lochmaddy was Robert Daily.

26.I have been asked to explain my role in relation to disclosure in these

   proceedings. After receiving the documentary productions from Robert Daily, it

   was my responsibility to ensure that they were sent to the defence solicitor.

27. I have been asked to provide an account of the disclosure requests made by

   the Defence in this case, what advice I provided in relation to any such requests

   and how the Post Office responded to them. In respect of disclosure, the

   documentary evidence detailed in (List of Productions submitted to Procurator

   Fiscal Office by Robert Daily, re: William John Quarm [POL00166753]), would

   have been provided as a matter of course to the defence solicitor following the

   accused's plea of Not Guilty. In summary cases (such as this one) the

   procedure for disclosure to the defence is that, following a plea of Not Guilty (or

   earlier, if particularly requested by the defence) the defence solicitor will write

   to the Procurator Fiscal's office stating that they act for the accused and


                                   Page 9 of 13
                                                                                   WITN10550100
                                                                                 WI TN10550100




   requesting disclosure of the productions. This is done electronically via a secure

   link. I see from (Letter from David Teale to Raymond Grant re Case against

   William John Quarm [POL00166755]) that on 1 July 2009 my office requested

   that the Investigating officer provide all the documentary productions. I have no

   doubt that these would have been produced to the defence although I do not

   see the usual covering letter to the solicitor in the bundle of documents

   supplied.

28. I have been asked to describe the nature of any discussions I had with counsel

   and the Post Office's legal representatives during the course of these

   proceedings. I had no discussions with counsel or any legal representatives of

   the Post Office.

29. I have been asked to reflect on the way that the investigation and prosecution

   was conducted by the Post Office and the outcome of the case. As I have made

   clear, in Scotland the Post Office investigators will carry out the investigation

   (and may be directed in their enquiries by the Procurator Fiscal at any stage)

   but the prosecution is entirely in the hands of the Procurator Fiscal. I have

   nothing adverse to say about the Post Office's handling of the investigation in

   this case. It seems to me to have been investigated thoroughly and fairly and

   any requirements from the Procurator Fiscal's office for, say, delivery of

   productions or discussion of the reduced plea offered were met promptly and

   properly. I have assumed that none of the Post Office witnesses in this case

   were aware of challenges to the integrity of Horizon data. The outcome of a

   plea of guilty was appropriate given the accused's admissions.




                                  Page 10 of 13
                                                                                     WITN10550100
                                                                                   WI TN10550100




30. I confirm that I have reviewed all the documents listed in the Rule 9 request and

   there are none on which I wish to make specific comment.

31. In my paragraph 13 above, I have stated that I do not have access to the original

   case papers. Missing from the bundle provided by the Inquiry is a copy of the

   original case report which would have been submitted by the Post Office

   Investigator to the Procurator Fiscal at Lochmaddy. This document is important

   because it contains the summary of evidence and without it, I do not know the

   precise information I had on which I based my prosecution. At this stage, I can

   only surmise that the summary of evidence would have been roughly similar to

   [POL00166596]. [POL00166596] is clearly a Post Office Internal document

   since its final sentence reads, "It is recommended that a report should be

   prepared and submitted to the Procurator Fiscal's Department for its

   consideration as to what further action should be taken". It is that report referred

   to in that sentence which is missing from the bundle supplied to me by the

   Inquiry.

32. I am not sure when I was first made aware of issues relating to the Horizon IT

   system. Since I received the Rule 9 request, I have read the Scottish Criminal

   Case Review Commissions report on these Post Office cases and see that

   COPFS paused prosecutions on them, following on information which they had

   received. I do not now recall whether COPFS issued any directions or guidance

   to Procurator Fiscals on this matter or whether I learned about the issues

   through the media.

33. In relation to my paragraphs 29 and 30 above, I confirm that, at the time of

   being involved in the prosecution of William Quarm, I was not told by anyone at


                                   Page 11 of 13
                                                                                       WITN10550100
                                                                                     WI TN10550100




       the Post Office or within COPES about other cases in which the integrity of the

       Horizon system was being challenged.


General


   34. 1 have been asked to what extent (if any) I considered a challenge to the

       integrity of Horizon in one case to be relevant to other ongoing or future cases.

       As I have said, I have not dealt with any other Horizon case and so did not have

       to consider the challenges to the integrity of Horizon.

   35. I have been asked if there are any other matters which I consider of relevance

       to phase 4 of the Inquiry. I have no other matters to draw to the attention of the

       Inquiry.




Statement of Truth


I believe the content of this statement to be true.




Signed:     GRO
Dated: 3 January 2024




                                      Page 12 of 13
                                                                               WITN10550100
                                                                             WI TN10550100




Index to First Witness Statement of DAVID SUTHERLAND TEALE
No    URN            Document Description                      Control
                                                               Number
1     POL00166596    Post Office Ltd Confidential:             POL-0162041
                     Investigation Legal: Theft,
                     Embezzlement and Money Laundering
                     for William John Quarm
 2    COPF0000001    Court papers from Lochmaddy Sheriff       N/A
                     Court re William John Quarm
 3    POL00166833    Email from Zoe Topham to Robert           POL-0162278
                     Daily and cc Mandy Talbot, re: Paible -
                     Branch code 147869 - William John
                     Quarm
4     POL00166599    Record of Tape Recorded Interview of      POL-0162044
                     William John Quarm
 5    POL00166753    List of Productions submitted to          POL-0162198
                     Procurator Fiscal Office by Robert
                     Daily, re: William John Quarm
6     POL00166755    Letter from David Teale to Raymond        POL-0162200
                     Grant re: Case against William John
                     Quarm




                               Page 13 of 13
