                                                                                           WITNO8410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




                                            Witness Name: Alexander Simon Talbot

                                                     Statement No.: WITNO8410100

                                                                 Dated: 22 May 2023




             First Witness Statement of Alexander Simon Talbot




1.   My name is Alexander Simon Talbot, although I am generally known as Simon

     Talbot, I have been employed by Post Office Limited ("POL") (or its

     predecessors) since August 1987.

2.   Except where I indicate to the contrary, the facts and matters contained in this

     witness statement are within my own knowledge. Where any information is not

     within my personal knowledge, I have identified the source of my information or

     the basis for my belief. The facts in this witness statement are true to the best

     of my knowledge and belief.

3.   In this statement I use the term "Postmaster" broadly to refer to those people

     or entities that are responsible for operating post offices (but excluding those

     individuals employed by POL), rather than with any formal definition in mind. I

     use the terms "Postmaster" and "Sub-postmaster" interchangeably given their

     common usage. Nothing in this statement is intended to detract or differ from

     any definition adopted by POL.
                                                                                    11
                                                                                           WITNO8410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




4.    This witness statement has been prepared in response to the request made by

      the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the "Inquiry") pursuant to Rule 9 of the

      Inquiry Rules 2006, dated 3 April 2023 (the "Rule 9 Request"). In this witness

      statement, I address each of the questions set out in the Annex to the Rule 9

      Request regarding my career background at POL and my knowledge of and

      involvement with the following areas within POL:

     a. Audit; and

     b. Knowledge of bugs, errors or issues with the Horizon IT System ("Horizon").

5.    Although I also have some knowledge of and involvement with training of

      Postmasters, as the Rule 9 Request has only asked two specific questions in

      relation to training of auditors, I have not set out my general experience with,

      and knowledge of, training of Postmasters within POL which I would be happy

      to do if it would be helpful to the Inquiry.

6.    Where I refer to specific documents in this statement, copies of those

      documents are identified by the Inquiry's unique reference number for that

      document.


DEFINED TERMS

7.    In this statement, I have used a number of acronyms and defined terms. I have

      set out a definition of each as I have introduced them. However, for

      convenience, I also set out the definitions of these acronyms and definitions

      below:



       AR®                   Audit Rationale Document
       ART                   Audit Reporting Tool


                                                                                    IN
                                                                                     WITNO8410100
                                                                                   WITNO8410100




Audit Team          POL team responsible for carrying out audits of Post
                    Office branch accounts
Contract Team       POL team responsible for the contractual liability of
                    Postmasters, including managing the contractual
                    relationship between POL and Postmasters such as
                    managing performance and making decisions on the
                    suspension and termination of Postmaster contracts
Debt Recovery       POL team responsible for recovering debts from
Team                Postmasters


                     .~Ti"ts.1"L3. 11.3TiL+~7   • i f - Tf.7€tIE~
FSA                 Field Support Advisor
FSC                 Finance Service Centre
FTL                 Field Team Leader
GLO                 Group Litigation Order
Horizon             The Horizon IT System

IIA Standard 2300 Institute of Internal Auditors standards

Inquiry             The Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry
NOA                 Network Operations Advisor
NOM                 Network Operations Manager
POL                 Post Office Limited
P&BA                Product and Branch Accounting
OAR                 Quality Assurance Review
Rule 9 Request      The Inquiry's request pursuant to Rule 9 of the Inquiry
                    Rules 2006, dated 3 April 2023
Security Team       POL team responsible for managing the physical
                    security of POL assets and branches and dealing with
                    security incidents such as robbery and burglary
Training and Audit POL employees who conducted training                  for
Advisors           Postmasters and auditing of branch accounts
121 meetings        Regular meetings between an individual auditor 1
                    trainer and their team leader
2019 / 2020         Full scale revision of audit practices and procedures
changes             precipitated by the settlement of the GLO
                                                                               3
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




CAREER BACKGROUND

8.    1 have been asked to briefly set out my professional background and identify

      and explain my roles within Post Office to date.


August 1987 -- 2004: Postal Officer at Stockport Crown Office

9.    1 first joined Post Office in August 1987 as a Postal Officer at Stockport Crown

      Office, a branch directly managed by Post Office. I did not have any significant

      work experience prior to this. I had partially completed my A Levels when I

      joined Post Office and have not obtained any further qualifications since. When

      I first joined, I received four weeks of training at a POL training school in

      Bradford, and two weeks of supervised working at a "satellite' branch located

      in Leeds. During this time, I used Horizon (since its roll-out) on a day-to-day

      basis including inputting transactions.




10.   In 2004, I was promoted to Assistant Branch Manager at Ashton-Under-Lyne

      Crown Office, another branch directly managed by Post Office. This role was

      the first time I had managerial responsibility. During this time, I used Horizon on

      a day-to-day basis.


2006 — 2007: Financial Services Assistant at Stockport Crown Office

11.   In 2006, 1 returned to the Stockport Crown Office, where I was a Financial

      Services Assistant. During this time, I had less involvement with Horizon than I

      had in my previous roles, but I continued to use Horizon to enter transactions

      in relation to financial products, such as life insurance.



                                                                                        4
                                                                                           WITN08410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




2007 — 2008: Assistant Branch Manager at Stockport Crown Office

12.   In 2007, 1 was promoted to Assistant Branch Manager of the Stockport Crown

      Office. During this time. I had managerial responsibility, as Stockport Crown

      Office was a large branch with a number of staff who I assisted in managing in

      my role as Assistant Branch Manager. In this role I was more removed from

      day-to-day activities including entering transactions, but I would still have

      regularly used Horizon, including for weekly/monthly balancing and printing off

      reports.




13.   In 2008, I was promoted to Branch Manager of the Stockport Crown Office. In

      this role I was responsible for approximately 16 employees who worked at the

      branch. Like when I was the Assistant Branch Manager at Stockport, during this

      time I was more removed from day-to-day activities including entering

      transactions, but I would still have regularly used Horizon, including for

      weekly/monthly balancing and printing off reports.




14.   In April 2012, I took up a new position as a Field Team Leader ("FTL") Network

      Services. The grade for this role was 2A. My line manager was Lesley McNally

      (nee Frankland), Audit & Training Team Leader, who I believe reported to Adrian

      Wales, Regional Network Manager, who I believe then reported to Angela Van

      Den Bogerd, Head of Network Services. The reason I moved from a Crown

      Office to a Network position is because I wanted to further my career within the

      Post Office. This role was not based at a particular POL site, and I largely


                                                                                     5
                                                                                               WITN08410100
                                                                                             WITNO8410100




      worked from my home near Manchester unless I was required at a specific

      location. The team I was responsible for was based in the North West of

      England, however our activities were not limited to the North West geographic

      area.


15.   When I first became an FTL, I was trained in the skills required to perform my

      role. I attended a training course for a week in Chesterfield with approximately

      six newly recruited FTLs. The course was given by Chris Gilding, who was a

      fellow FTL. I otherwise learnt about the procedures and teams for which I was

      responsible through observation of my fellow FTLs once I was in my role. I do

      not have any formal qualification or training in audit.


16.   This was the first time that I was involved with audit functions within Post Office,

      and part of the team which was responsible for carrying out audits of Post Office

      branch accounts ("'Audit Team"). In broad terms, an audit of a branch's

      accounts involved attending a branch, gathering Horizon data as to the levels

      of cash and stock which ought to be present within a branch (by printing off

      various Horizon reports) and reconciling that Horizon data with the physical

      cash and stock actually present by counting the amount of cash and stock in

      the branch. Section 2.2. on page 5 of "Audit Charter" (version 4.0)

      (POL00083966) states that:


              "The primary purpose of branch and cash centre audit activity is to

              provide an independent assurance to Post Office Ltd that:
                                                                           -




              • Its assets exist at Post Office® branches and cash centres

              • There is compliance to relevant policies, processes, regulations and
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




17.   My understanding is that this type of audit is more akin to a stock-taking

      exercise, rather than a forensic exercise of verifying the accuracy of the

      accounts such as those conducted by professional auditors such as the "Big

      Four". Accordingly, when I refer to "audits" and "auditors" in this witness

      statement, I am referring to audits and auditors in this context.


18.   My key responsibility in this role was the management of a team of auditors and

      trainers ("Field Support Advisors" or "FSAs"). Each FSA had responsibilities

      of giving training to Postmasters and carrying out audits of branch accounts.

      My role involved, for example, managing the IT equipment and cars that the

      auditors used; looking after the wellbeing and health and safety of auditors; and

      liaising with the scheduling team based in Bolton. My role in relation to the

      scheduling of audits would be to make sure that the Audit Team could staff the

      audits which had been planned by the scheduling team, for example by

      organising travel arrangements and making sure there was sufficient time for

      the auditor to get to the audit location.


19.   Part of my role was liaising with auditors in relation to issues that arose and

      fielding calls from auditors who were carrying out audits on location. My contact

      with auditors was primarily to ensure that they got to and from the audit

      locations safely. I would also be contacted in relation to specific issues that

      arose, such as Audit Team hardware or equipment failures (not equipment

      failures in branches), or for advice. If something unexpected came up, such as

      a large discrepancy arising at audit, an auditor may have contacted me to let

      me know, but as I was not the relevant decision maker, this contact would be in
                                                                                           WITN08410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




      addition to the auditor contacting the Contract Manager of that branch who was

      the proper decision maker.


20.   In the period of time that I was an FTL, I was responsible for approximately 13

      FSAs at any given time. I recall that there were approximately 14 FTLs in total,

      and approximately 160 FSAs during this period.


21.   I also had responsibilities as part of the quality assurance process of audits,

      which I discuss in more detail at paragraph 129 to 131 below.


22.   I also had responsibilities for maintaining documents and information sources

      which contained the key procedures and policies to be followed by auditors and

      trainers. The key document which contained the policies and procedures to be

      followed by auditors was the Audit Process Manual. This was a document which

      was broken up into several chapters, such as "Performing a Branch Audit,

      Chapter 3 of the Audit Process Manual" (version 5.1, 2010 is POL00084801).

      The FTLs were each assigned different chapters of the Audit Process Manual,

      which we were responsible for reviewing on approximately a yearly basis and

      updating as necessary. The chapter for which each FTL was responsible would

      change depending on the personnel movements into and out of the FTL team

      over time. Although I do not recall all the details as to when I was responsible

      for various chapters of the Audit Process Manual, I do recall that at some point

      I was responsible for Chapter 5 -- Closures and Chapter 11 -- Quality Assurance

      from approximately August 2012, along with other FTLs.


23.   In addition, each FTL was responsible for keeping up-to-date assigned sections

      of `EASE'. EASE was the name of the system run on the Lotus Notes platform


                                                                                     M
                                                                                               WITN08410100
                                                                                             WITNO8410100




      which contained knowledge articles and guidance for FSAs. Like in relation to

      chapters of the Audit Process Manual, FTLs would be assigned responsibility

      for the maintenance of various sections of EASE. The EASE system was later

      replaced by a SharePoint used by the Audit Team, although I do not recall when

      this occurred. Upon review of the version control section of Chapter 9 of the

      Audit Process Manual (page 1 of POL00088750) which records the

      replacement of Lotus Notes with SharePoint, I believe it may have been around

      October 2013.


24.   I also had responsibilities in relation to training, which I discuss briefly in more

      detail at paragraphs 82 to 87 below.


25.   Broadly speaking, in this role I had a high-level overview of the specific audit

      practices which occurred within branches. Although I did not routinely perform

      audits myself, I had a good understanding of the audit process. I recall assisting

      with audits and had conducted regular observational quality assurance reviews

      of audits, during which I would be present at the branch being audited.


26.   I do not recall that there were any significant changes in the policies or practices

      within the Audit Team during the period I was an FTL. Likewise, I do not recall

      being involved in any specific projects or initiatives relating to changes to the

      policies or practices within the Audit Team during this time.


September 2016 — April 2018: Network Operations Manager

27.   In September 2016, I moved to the role of Networks Operations Manager

      ("NOM"). The grade for this role was 2A. My line manager was Lesley McNally,

      Network Operations Area Manager, who I believe reported to a Regional
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




      Network Manager, although I do not recall who that was, and who I believe then

      reported to Andrew McBride, and then later Pam Heap, Head of Network

      Operations. The NOM role was created following a restructure within POL which

      brought responsibilities which had previously been undertaken by FTLs, Field

      Change Advisors and Property Project Managers, under the NOM role. Under

      this structure, each NOM had responsibility for fewer Network Operations

      Advisors ("NOAs"), but had expanded responsibilities in other areas. NOMs

      were responsible for particular geographic areas. I recall that I was responsible

      for approximately 344 branches during this time, which were primarily in the

      North West of England.


28.   Prior to the creation of the NOM role, Field Change Advisors had been

      responsible for things such as: scoping for potential new branches; delivering

      new branches; finding alternative sites for branches; arranging consultations

      with the public for the potential opening or closing of branches; reviewing

      business plans submitted by prospective Sub-postmasters; and assisting with

      interviewing prospective Sub- postmasters. These responsibilities all carne

      under the new NOM role in respect of my assigned branches.


29.   Also prior to the creation of the NOM role, Property Project Managers had been

      responsible for the arrangements necessary to get a new branch up and

      running, such as: considering the size of the branch and how much equipment

      would be required; appraising the specification of this equipment; ordering said

      equipment; and creating a financial estimate of the cost required to establish

      new branches. Like in respect of the Field Change Advisor responsibilities,



                                                                                    10
                                                                                               WITNO8410100
                                                                                             WITNO8410100




      these responsibilities all came under the new NOM role in respect of my

      assigned branches.


30.   As a NOM, I retained largely the same responsibilities in relation to training and

      audit as I did as an FTL, and as described at paragraphs 16 to 24 above.

      However, I recall that my role did not include responsibilities for quality

      assurance (as described at paragraphs 129 to 131 below). My understanding

      is that quality assurance of audits did not occur during the time the NOM role

      existed.


31.   I recall that there were approximately 36 NOMs in total, and approximately 78

      NOAs during this period. Accordingly, I had responsibility for fewer NOAs than

      I did when I was an FTL, but I had many other responsibilities as described at

      paragraphs 28 to 29 above.


32.   I do not recall that there were any significant changes in the policies or practices

      within the Audit Team during the period I was a NOM. Likewise, I do not recall

      being involved in any specific projects or initiatives relating to changes to the

      policies or practices within the Audit Team during this time.


April 2018       April 2019: Area Training and Audit Manager
             a




33.   In April 2018, I moved to the role of Area Training and Audit Manager. The grade

      for this role was 2A. My line manager was Lesley McNally, National Training &

      Audit Manager, and I believe she reported to Judith Aubrey, National Network

      Operations Manager, who I believe then reported to Pam Heap, Head of

      Network. The Area Training and Audit Manager role was created following a

      restructure that removed the NOM role. Broadly speaking, I understand that

                                                                                       11
                                                                                               WITN08410100
                                                                                             WITNO8410100




      POL reverted to a model more similar to that employed while I was an FTL. That

      is, the audit and training responsibilities were separated back out from what had

      been the responsibilities previously associated with Field Change Advisors and

      Project Property Managers.


34.   As an Area Training and Audit Manager, my responsibilities were almost the

      same as my responsibilities as an FTL, as described at paragraphs 16 to 24

      above, looking after a team of POL employees who conducted training for

      Postmasters and auditing of branch accounts ("Training and Audit Advisors").

      However, as when I was a NOM, I recall that my role did not include

      responsibilities for quality assurance (as described at paragraphs 129 to 131

      below). My understanding is that quality assurance of audits did not occur

      during the time the Area Training and Audit Manager role existed.


35.   I recall that there were approximately 10 Area Training and Audit Managers in

      total and approximately 84 Training and Audit Advisors during this period. While

      the number of Training and Audit Advisors each Area Training and Audit

      Manager was responsible for were not necessarily equal, I believe that I had

      responsibility for approximately 9 Training and Audit Advisors.


36.   I do not recall that there were any significant changes in the policies or practices

      within the Audit Team during the period I was an Area Training and Audit

      Manager. Likewise, I do not recall being involved in any specific projects or

      initiatives relating to changes to the policies or practices within the Audit Team

      during this time. However, I recall that there was a general emphasis on training

      during this period as there was a desire to get new branches open and to

      maintain the network. As all auditors had a dual role as both auditor and trainer,
                                                                                       M
                                                                                            WITN08410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




      the consequence of a greater emphasis on training was that there were fewer

      resources devoted to audit functions.


April 2019 — April 2020: Area Audit Manager

37.   In April 2019, 1 moved to the role of Area Audit Manager. The grade for this role

      was 2A. My line manager was Alison Clark and I believe she reported to Julie

      Thomas, Network Operations Director for at least some of the period I was an

      Area Audit Manager. As an Area Audit Manager, my responsibilities were very

      similar to those when I was an Area Training and Audit Manager, which in turn

      was very similar to when I was an FTL, as described at paragraphs 16 to 24

      above. The main difference in the role was that the training and audit functions

      were split at this time, and as an Area Audit Manager I only managed auditors

      who no longer had a role in training Postmasters.


38.   Although I cannot recall exactly when this change occurred, I recall that the

      quality assurance exercise returned approximately upon the creation of the

      Area Audit Manager role, and so I believe I did have responsibilities for

      conducting and managing the quality assurance exercise during this period (as

      described at paragraphs 129 to 131 below).


39.   I recall that there were three Area Audit Managers in total, and approximately

      30 auditors during this period. While the number of auditors each Area Audit

      Manager were responsible for were not necessarily equal, I believe that I had

      responsibility for approximately 10 auditors.


40.   During the time I was an Area Audit Manager, there were large changes to our

      practices and procedures in terms of how we engaged with Postmasters, and

                                                                                    13
                                                                                            WITN08410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




      a full-scale revision to our audit practices and procedures over this time ("2019

      12020 changes"), which I describe in general terms below at paragraphs 40 to

      45. My understanding is that changes were precipitated by the new ways of

      working developed following the settlement of the Horizon Group Litigation

      ("GLO").


41.   I recall that all chapters of the Audit Process Manual were reviewed and

      amended where appropriate to reflect the new engagement practices.


42.   One major change I recall is the procedure for speaking to a Postmaster when

      the auditor arrived to carry out an audit. Previously, an audit could have been

      scheduled for a number of reasons, which I have described at paragraph 90

      below. When an auditor arrived at a branch to conduct an audit, they would not

      necessarily inform the Postmaster why the branch was being audited.


43.   Following the changes in the audit practices, the Network Monitoring Team (also

      known as the Branch Analysis Team during certain time periods) were

      responsible for selecting which branches were to be audited. The selection of

      a branch to audit was based purely on the data which the Network Monitoring

      Team had access to, such as the amount of cash on hand at the branch. The

      Network Monitoring Team would provide the reasons for an audit to be carried

      out in the form of an Audit Rationale Document ("ARD"). The ARD would be

      provided to the Postmaster when the auditor arrived at the branch to commence

      the audit. The engagement with the Postmaster was designed to be more

      Postmaster-centric and was designed to step through the process that would

      be carried out by the auditor. My impression is that these changes were well

      received by Postmasters.
                                                                                    14
                                                                                             WITNO8410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




44.   A second major change I recall in the time I was an Area Audit Manager was

      ceasing the practice where only one auditor may have conducted an audit

      (other than in Scotland, where there needed to be two auditors both before and

      after the 2019 / 2020 changes). Previously, some audits may have been

      performed by only one auditor, particularly if the branch was small. Following

      the 2019 / 2020 changes, it became a requirement for there to be a minimum

      of two auditors at any audit. My understanding was that this change was

      introduced to ensure a higher level of consistency in audit practices and results,

      and to allow for audit results to be verified by two auditors.


45.   A third major change that I recall in the time I was an Area Audit Manager was

      the introduction of an opportunity for the Postmaster to check the results of the

      audit themselves and record on the audit papers whether they agreed with the

      results reached by the auditors. A section on the papers which were completed

      at every audit was introduced for the Postmaster to acknowledge that they had

      checked the results reached by the auditors and whether they agreed or

      disagreed with the audit results. Alternatively, the Postmaster could

      acknowledge that they had been given an opportunity to confirm the audit

      results but had declined to take up this opportunity. The Postmaster would be

      asked to sign this section of the audit papers. My understanding was that this

      change was introduced to help reduce the number of disputes which later arose

      about the results of an audit and to further support the Postmaster through the

      audit process.




                                                                                     15
                                                                                           WITNO8410100
                                                                                         WITN08410100




46.   In April 2020, I moved to the role of Contract Advisor. At that time, there were



      for a large number of branches. The branches for which I was responsible were

      divided by reference to a list of all branches maintained by POL which was

      based on the postal code of each branch.


47.   During this time, I was not part of the Audit Team and had no responsibility in

      respect of the audit of branch accounts.




48.   In my current role as Security Support Team Manager, my responsibility is to

      ensure the provision of a comprehensive security service. This is achieved by

      reducing the business exposure to risk of crime, and by safeguarding

      Postmasters, their teams and customers. This involves the following core

      responsibilities:

            a. taking ownership of all security responses in branch and supply chain,

                and ensuring a security response when incidents occur;

            b. leading the team of security managers to protect Postmasters and

                assets from internal and external threats;

            c. ensuring that the Security Team consistently supplies a quality output

                and offers appropriate support to both internal and external partners;

            d. ensuring that the team adheres to a supportive, compliant and audited

                approach to Postmasters and the business; and


                                                                                    16
                                                                                             WITNO8410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




             e. driving supportive crime prevention activity focused on keeping

                 Postmasters, their teams and customers safe.

49.     1 manage all eight Security Managers within the POL network, who are

        geographically dispersed and located in Northern Ireland, Scotland, and

        England and Wales.

50.     During the time that I was a member of the Audit Team, I understand that the

      functions of the Security Team           involved investigations following the

        identification of discrepancies. However, before April 2021 when I joined the

        Security Team, the functions of this team were significantly altered such that

        the Security Team no longer conducts any investigations. The primary role of

        the Security Team now is to support Sub-postmasters and the business,

        including responding to robberies, burglaries, antisocial behaviour and

        otherwise providing physical security support to branches. The Security Team

        also supports the supply chain through a programme known as Cross

        Pavement Observations. The Security Team also performs support visits to new

        Sub-postmasters, provides post-incident support, and performs 'health checks'

        at branches to help ensure compliance with physical security measures.

51.     In my current role I am not part of the Audit Team and have no responsibility in

        respect of the audit of branch accounts.


AUDIT

Organisational Structure

52.     1 have been asked to consider POL00085682, POL00085769, POL00086765,

        P0L00086831, P0L00088445, P0L00088445, and P0L00033398, and to


                                                                                     17
                                                                                           WITN08410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




      provide a summary of the changes to the organisational structure of the Audit

      Team during the time I was a member of that team, together with my

      understanding of the reasons behind those changes.

53.   1 have reviewed the documents listed at paragraph 52 above. I note that

      POL00033398 is described in the Rule 9 Request as being "Post Office

      Training Presentation on Assurance Review: Quality of Auditing" (Draft)

      (version 0.5, undated)". Upon my review of this document, it appears from the

      face of the document that it may more accurately be described as a

      Presentation titled "Assurance Review: Quality of Auditing" dated February

      2011.

54.   1 have described the various roles I held within the Audit Team between April

      2012 and April 2020, and how those roles changed over time at paragraphs 14

      to 44 above. When my role changed from FTL, to NOM in September 2016,

      then to Area Training and Audit Manager in April 2018, and finally to Area Audit

      Manager in April 2019, it was because the Audit Team had undergone a

      restructure. My grade did not change during the course of these moves. At no

      point was I ever involved in the design of the restructure, nor do I have any

      actual knowledge of the reasons behind these changes. However, I have set

      out below my understanding as to the perception within the Audit Team as to

      why these restructures may have occurred, as follows:

         a. In respect of the creation of the NOM role, my understanding is that it

              was perceived by POL that there would be a benefit to both Sub-

              postmasters and the business for there to be a single point of contact

              between a branch and POL in respect of all aspects relating to the

                                                                                   18
                                                                                      WITNO8410100
                                                                                    WITN08410100




   design, establishment and running of a branch, rather than three

   different teams with responsibilities for different facets of the interactions

   between POL and a branch.

b. In respect of the change from NOMs to Area Training and Audit

   Managers, my understanding is that this restructure may have been

   precipitated by the view that the NOM role was not working as well as

   had been hoped. Although it made sense for there to be a single point of

   contact for the establishment and running of a branch, the skills required

   for each of the three roles were distinct and not all NOMs felt comfortable

   operating across the spectrum of activities. For example, NOMs who had

   previously been Project Property Managers may not have had expertise

   managing people, while those who had previously been FTLs may not

   have had project management skills, although some training on project

   management skills was provided.

c. In respect of the division between training and auditing through the

   separation of Area Training and Audit Managers into Area Audit

   Managers and Area Training Managers, my understanding is that the

   training and audit functions were separated following the settlement of

   the GLO. As far as I understand, this change was implemented for the

   benefit of the Postmasters and the individuals performing the training

   and audit roles. In my view, the division of the audit and training functions

   into distinct roles was beneficial as it meant that auditors could

   concentrate on auditing and could build up their knowledge and

   expertise in audit. It also allowed individuals who had previously



                                                                              19
                                                                                             WITN08410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




             performed both audit and training functions to select the role they

             preferred.

55.   1 recall that between 2012 and 2016, during the time I was an FTL, there were

      a large number of recruits to the Audit Team. My understanding is that this high

      level of recruitment was driven by the large amount of activity within the team

      due to Network Transformation. During this time, there were a large number of

      branches being opened and closed, and therefore there was an increased

      demand for both trainers and auditors. In addition, vacancies were created

      within Audit Team due to POL employees, who had previously been members

      of the Audit Team, taking up positions within the Network Transformation team.

56.   1 recall that between 2016 and 2018, during the time I was a NOM, the number

      of trainers / auditors was reduced significantly. My understanding is that this

      was because the Network Transformation project was coming to an end and

      therefore there were fewer branch openings and closings, and therefore less

      demand for training and auditing functions.

57.   I have been asked to describe the relationship between the Audit Team and

      other teams in POL, particularly the teams responsible for the contractual

      liability of Postmasters ("Contract Team"), debt recovery ("Debt Recovery

      Team") and security ("Security Team").

58.   1 have set out at paragraphs 59 to 61 below the standard interactions that the

      Audit Team would have with each of the teams responsible for security, debt

      recovery, and the contractual liability of Postmasters as part of the audit role.

59.   In relation to the Security Team, an auditor would contact the Security Team in

      a number of circumstances, for example if the Sub-postmaster admitted any
                                                                                      20
                                                                                     WITNO8410100
                                                                                   WITNO8410100




fraudulent activity (see section 9.3.3 on page 15 of POL00084801), or if the

auditor discovered a discrepancy over a certain threshold during an audit of a

Crown Office branch. As at March 2011, the threshold for contacting a member

of the Security Team in this case was £1,000 (see section 9.3.2 on page 15 of

POL00084801). I do not recall what the threshold was to contact a member of

the Security Team in relation to agency branches in 2011, however I believe it

would have been higher than £1,000. My reason for saying this is because there

were no Contracts Advisors for Crown Office branches, and therefore any

discrepancy above the threshold would have been escalated directly to the

Security Team. However, as there were Contract Advisors for agency branches,

it is likely only larger discrepancies which would be escalated directly to the

Security Team. In addition, POL00088623 which is version 7.3 of Performing a

Branch Audit, Chapter 3 of the Audit Process Manual dated January 2019,

states at section 9.3.2 that the Security Manager must be contacted if a

discrepancy over £5,000 was identified. The same document states at

Appendix A— Crown Offices, at page 24, that discrepancies greater than £1,000

should be reported to the Crown Cluster Manager and the Security Manager.

The usual practice was for the auditor to call the relevant Security Manager and

inform them of the admission or discrepancy. The Security Manager would then

make a decision as to whether they would attend the branch. Once the auditor

passed the case to the Security Manager, the Security Manager would take the

case forward and that would be the end of the Audit Team's involvement in the

matter, unless the Security Team had any issues to clarify with the Audit Team.

The Security Team would request the audit working papers if they considered

that they may wish to continue to investigate the matter. If the Security Team
                                                                              21
                                                                                          WITN08410100
                                                                                        WITNO8410100




      did not request the working papers, the papers would be retained by the Audit

      Team for 60 days and then destroyed. This was the total of the routine

      interactions between the Audit and Security Teams.

60.   In relation to the Debt Recovery Team, I do not recall that the Audit Team had

      any routine interactions. However, in some circumstances an audit might have

      been triggered by certain information, including information from the Debt

      Recovery Team. For example, there may have been an existing debt, the

      recovery of which was being pursued by the Debt Recovery Team. In these

      circumstances, the existence of the debt may have been shared with the Audit

      Team by the Debt Recovery Team. I describe in greater detail the circumstances

      in which an audit might have been triggered at paragraph 90 below.

61.   In relation to the Contract Team, an auditor would contact the Contract Team in

      a number of circumstances, including if the auditor discovered an unexplained

      discrepancy over a certain threshold during an audit. During these calls, the

      Contract Advisor would ask the auditor a number of questions, including

      whether the Postmaster was willing to settle the amount of the discrepancy. The

      threshold for contacting a member of the Contract Team in March 2011 was

      £1,000 (section 9.3.2, POL00084801) and the same in January 2019 (section

      9.3.2, POL00088623), however I do not recall if the threshold otherwise

      changed over time. Once the auditor passed the case to the Contract Advisor,

      the Contract Advisor would take the case forward and that would be the end of

      the Audit Team's involvement in the matter, unless the Contract Advisor had any

      issues to clarify with the Audit Team. If the amount of any discrepancy did not

      cross this threshold, the results of the audit would be sent to the relevant


                                                                                   22
                                                                                            WITN08410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




      Contract Advisor once the audit working papers were finalised at the same time

      the results were sent to other stakeholders, including the Postmaster. This was

      the total of the routine interactions between the Audit and Contracts Teams.

62.   I did not have any routine interactions with the POL legal team during the time

      I was a member of the Audit Team, however I am aware that other members of

      the Audit Team did have interactions with the POL legal team. My recollection

      is that this was primarily experienced senior members of the Audit Team who

      would present teach-ins to the POL legal team on Horizon and the audit

      process.

63.   1 do not believe that the relationship between the Audit Team and other teams

      within POL changed significantly during the time I was a member of the Audit

      Team, although I believe that changes may have occurred after I left the Audit

      Team in April 2020.

64.   I have been asked whether I consider now, and whether I considered at the

      time, that it was important for the Audit Team to have organisational

      independence. I did not consider at the time whether it was important for the

      Audit Team to have organisational independence. It is important when

      considering the function of audit of branch accounts to understand what the

      Audit Team did: the function of the Audit Team was confined in that auditors

      were not performing a forensic role and as such no audit qualifications were

      required. The role of the auditor was to confirm whether the amounts recorded

      in Horizon were consistent with what was physically present in a branch, i.e. it

      was essentially a "stock taking" exercise and not a forensic or exhaustive

      testing of the accuracy of the branch's accounts. There was little scope for

                                                                                     23
                                                                                             WITNO8410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




      subjectivity or opinion, as there was either a discrepancy between the Horizon

      figures and the stock in the branch, or there was not.

65.   1 was never conscious of any influence from other teams within the business as

      to any components of the audit process, including which branches should be

      audited. The Audit Team was not responsible for selecting which branches




66.   In light of the fact that the audit team did not possess any control over

      determining the branches to be audited, scheduling the audits, or any discretion

      in the audit process, coupled with the limited nature of the branch audit (i.e. it

      was not a forensic audit but a stock-taking exercise), I do not now consider that

      it is important for the Audit Team, performing the function that it had, to have

      organisational independence. In hindsight, I consider that it may have been

      more important for the Audit Team to have organisational independence if the

      function that it was performing was more akin to a forensic audit.

67.   I have been asked whether I was aware of any concerns raised about the

      independence of POL's auditing activity and if so, what the nature of these



      aware of any concerns ever being raised about the independence of POL's

      auditing activity.




      and POL00088557 and to describe the process by which auditors were

      recruited.


                                                                                     24
                                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




69.   1 have considered the documents described at paragraph 68 above. My

      recollection is that the vast majority of auditors were recruited internally from

      within POL. By 'internally', I mean from existing POL employees, being people

      with Post Office email addresses and who had access to the POL intranet site.

      This might include Crown Offices, Network Services, Product and Branch

      Accounting ("P&BA"), or from elsewhere within the business.

70.   My recollection of the recruitment process was that any job vacancies would be

      posted internally on the 'Success Factors' platform which was a page available

      on the POL intranet site which contained adverts for all the vacancies available

      for application within the business. Applications would include an application

      form and a Curriculum Vitae.

71.   The team leaders, which included me from time to time for the duration of the

      period I was a member of the Audit Team, would then "sift" the applications

      using a matrix to assess suitability based on the application form and the

      Curriculum Vitae. The matrix would include a list of various skills and

      competencies that we would score each applicant against, such as

      "organisational skills". I do not recall how these skills and competencies were
      i ce ...   ~.l:   i.   ~   ~   ...   ~   ~ ~      •       •   'iii   ..   i    ^. I




72.   Applicants who had been identified following the initial "sift" were then invited

      to attend an interview. Following the interview, successful applicants would be

      recruited and begin the induction process.




                                                                                    25
                                                                                           WITN08410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




73.   As far as I recall there was no financial or other vetting process because the

      applicants were already POL employees and I believe these checks would

      already have been carried out.

74.   On rare occasions we did recruit externally. I recall that we hired externally

      during the time I was an FTL, when there was a high level of activity and

      approximately 160 auditors. External recruits would be required to undergo a

      vetting process.

75.   The process described at paragraphs 70 to 73 above was the same process

      how I was recruited to the FTL role in 2012. I recall that I was interviewed by

      Lesley McNally and Alan Currie.

76.   1 have been asked whether there was a minimum level of qualification or

      experience an individual was expected to have before they conducted branch

      audits. There was no minimum level of educational attainment required to be

      recruited as an auditor. I am not sure whether there was a minimum level of

      educational attainment required to be hired within POL in the first instance, in

      which case this effectively would have been the minimum educational

      requirement to become an auditor, given that the vast majority of auditors were

      recruited internally.

77.   In order to be recruited as an auditor, the application process was designed to

      ensure an applicant had the appropriate aptitude for the role. This would be

      assessed on factors including their experience within POL and their

      performance within their current role. Desirable experience would have

      included applicants who had a strong knowledge of how a branch operated and

      the many stock items within a branch.

                                                                                    26
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




      Page 3 describes the following knowledge and skills as being necessary for that

      role:

           a. An understanding of business strategy, policies, Post Office operating

               procedures and network transformation processes;




               which Post Office Ltd operates;

           c. Excellent knowledge of the Post Office Horizon system;




           f. An awareness of Audit & Compliance procedures;

           g. An awareness of training, interventions and evaluation techniques; and

           h. An understanding of the range of products and services provided by Post

               Office Ltd.

79.   1 consider that the knowledge and skills set out at paragraph 78 above are an

      accurate reflection of the knowledge and skills which would have been required

      for an applicant to be recruited to the Audit Team at the time. Although the

      document is undated, I believe that the document must date between April 2018

      and April 2019, when the training and audit functions were separated, as the

      role is for a Training and Audit Advisor.

      '•      X11:'          s• .• -              •    • - •   '   •   '•   r   '.•-

      describes the following technical skills and experience as being necessary for

      that role:
                                                                                       27
                                                                                            WITN08410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




         a. Good working knowledge of POL accounting processes and Horizon




         c. An awareness of Audit & Compliance procedures;

         d. Ability to be mobile and travel as required, working outside of normal




         f. Strong communication skills;

         g. High attention to detail and can spot things away from ordinary practice;

         h. Be numerically competent; and

         i.   Ability to write reports.


81.   I consider that the knowledge and skills set out at paragraph 80 above are also

      an accurate reflection of the knowledge and skills which would have been

      required for an applicant to be recruited to the Audit Team at the time. Although

      the document is undated, I believe that the document must date from after April

      2019, when the training and audit functions were separated, as the role is for

      an Audit Advisor only.

82.   I have been asked whether there was a minimum level of training auditors

      received, including any induction or refresher training. Upon recruitment to the

      Audit Team, auditors would receive an induction training course which I recall

      was approximately one week in duration. I was not involved in the induction




                                                                                     28
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




      training during my time in the Audit Team and therefore am not in a position to

      speak to what that training involved.

83.   After induction, a buddy system was employed whereby a new auditor would

      be partnered with an experienced auditor. The new auditor would then attend

      audits with the experienced auditor. The new auditor would essentially undergo

      a period of shadowing which could last from several weeks to several months,

      depending on the competence and confidence of the new auditor. The amount

      of time before an auditor might be sent out by themselves or as a lead auditor

      might also have depended on the level of auditing activity within the team at the

      time. If there was a greater focus on training at the time an auditor was

      recruited, it might have taken a longer period of time before the new auditor got

      the requisite amount of experience.

84.   I believe an auditing skills matrix was used and a new auditor had to be

      assessed as competent on all skills before they would be sent out by

      themselves or as a lead auditor. In addition, we would generally perform a

      greater amount of quality assurance on new auditors, to allow us to identify and

      close any skill or knowledge gaps.

85.   In relation to ongoing training, there were a number of resources available to

      auditors which were constantly being updated and it was expected that auditors

      would familiarise themselves with. It was expected that auditors would

      familiarise themselves with any updates in the Audit Process Manual, and any

      updates on EASE. EASE would record any operational updates to the Audit

      Process Manual. Reviewing updates on EASE was an administrative task that

      auditors could work on when they were not in the field completing an audit. I

                                                                                    29
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITN08410100




      recall that the schedule for upcoming audits was circulated each day, and any

      operational updates would also generally be attached to that schedule to draw

      the changes to the attention of the Audit Team.

86.   In addition, there were also team meetings which were held on an

      approximately quarterly basis where the entire team would discuss updates in

      practices and procedures, amongst other things. If there were any significant

      changes in audit practices and procedures, a national meeting of auditors might

      be called where the changes were introduced. Additional training tools such as

      quizzes may also have been used for new products and stock.

87.   Auditors could also request additional training, including during the regular

      catch ups between auditors and team leaders (121 meetings"). I recall that I

      generally received these kinds of requests in relation to lottery and ATMs, as

      these were technical products which were not available at all branches and

      therefore an auditor might not have been as familiar with. For example, if an

      auditor noticed that they were scheduled to perform an audit at a branch that

      had a particular product, they could make arrangements to go and brush up on

      this product in advance of the audit.

88.   I have been asked whether I consider now, and whether I considered at the

      time, that auditors had the necessary training and experience. During the time

      I was a member of the Audit Team and to this date, I considered that, in general,

      all auditors at POL had the necessary training and experience to perform their

      role. However, I recall that there was a small number of auditors whose

      performance at times did not meet the expected standards. My expectation is

      that this should have been addressed as part of the quality assurance process

                                                                                    IM
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




      close the performance deficit. I do not consider that there are any inherent or

      systematic issues with the training provided to auditors.




89.   I have been asked to consider POL00085286 and describe the circumstances




      Audit Process Manual ° (Version 8.0) (2010)". Upon my review of this document,

      it appears from the face of the document that it may more accurately be

      described as version 9.0 of Chapter 1 of the Audit Process Manual, which is

      dated January 2011. Accordingly, I have also reviewed POL00084650 which is

      version 8.0 of the that document. Any changes between versions 8.0 and 9.0

      would be summarised on page 2 of P0L00085286. Given there are no changes

      listed, I believe there are no differences between versions 8.0 and 9.0 of "Audit




90.   The circumstances when an audit may be scheduled are set out in order of




         a. 'Transfer f Closure' audits (type 10/12): these audits were mandatory

             when a branch was being transferred from one Postmaster to another or




         b. 'Robberies / Burglaries' audits (type 20/21): these audits were

             mandatory following any security incident at a branch, including a




                                                                                    31
                                                                                     WITN08410100
                                                                                   WITNO8410100




c. 'Special request' audits (type 200): these audits would take place when

   an Area Manager or Contract Advisor had concerns about a branch; for

   example, following a branch visit. Royal Mail might also have contacted

   an Area Manager or Contract Advisor if they had concerns about their

   stock, and the POL manager may have requested a Special request

   audit. Special request audits have now ceased, as all decisions to audit

   a branch (with the exception of Transfer I Closure and Robberies /

   Burglaries audits) are based on a risk assessment of the branch which

   is based on data analysed by the Network Monitoring Team.

d. 'Cash Centre' audits (type 1): these audits were specific to Cash

   Centres and did not relate to auditing branch accounts. I believe these

   audits have also been abolished.

e. 'Risk-driven' audits from the Financial Branch Performance Profile

   (' FBPP") (type 100): these audits were scheduled based on risk

   assessments which was analysed by the Network Monitoring Team. For

   example, an audit might be triggered if the data suggested that a branch

   was carrying a high volume of cash, which had not been returned when

   requested. My understanding is that this is more akin to the current

   approach to scheduling branches for audit.

f. 'Follow up activity' audits (type 475): I do not specifically recall these

   audits. but I recall that they may have taken place a short period of time

   after an earlier audit occurred, particularly if a discrepancy was identified

   at that earlier audit, to verify that the branch was now operating as

   expected.

                                                                             32
                                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




         g. 'Random audits' (type 150): my recollection is that these audits

            occurred when the Scheduling Team had gaps in the schedule which

            they needed to fill. They would select branches from a list of branches

            that had not recently been audited. I do not know how these branches

            were selected from the list. Additionally, a random audit may have been

            scheduled at a nearby location during the induction training of a new

            auditor, so that arrangements can be made for the new auditor to attend

            an audit with an experienced lead auditor without having to travel a great

            distance.

         h. 'Compliance only' audits (type 400): these audits were not financial

            audits and would not require a full financial verification, but instead would

             confirm that proper process and procedures were being followed at the

             branch, such as the safe or secure room in a branch was secured

            appropriately or that each person working on a stock unit was using their

            own Horizon ID. My recollection is that these audits would be scheduled

            to take place in the afternoon to fill in the gaps in the schedule because

            they could be completed relatively quickly.

91.   I had no involvement in the scheduling of audits during the time I was a member

      of the Audit Team, however my recollection is that the circumstances described

      at paragraph 90 are a comprehensive list of the circumstances in which an audit

      would be scheduled. In addition to the categorisation of audits described above,

      audits could either be a Financial Assurance Audit or a 'full audit, known as a

      Tier 2 Audit. During a Financial Assurance Audit, not all the assets in a branch

      would be checked, but only cash and a selected number of stock items and


                                                                                      33
                                                                                             WITNO8410100
                                                                                           WITN08410100




      vouchers, or a selected number of stock units. Items not verified were deemed

      to be "assured". If any discrepancy was identified during a Financial Assurance

      Audit, the audit would be upgraded to a Tier 2 Audit. Financial Assurance Audits

      would typically be used to audit large Crown Office branches with a large

      number of stock units so as to minimise the amount of time these branches

      needed to be closed, so that they could open to serve the public as soon as

      possible. I recall that Financial Assurance Audits were also performed at agency

      branches during the first years I was a member of the Audit Team, in which case

      only cash and high value stock would have been audited. I recall that transfer /

      closure audits, robberies / burglaries audits and special request audits would

      always be Tier 2 Audits. My recollection is that risk-driven audit, random audits,

      and follow up activity audits could be either a Financial Assurance Audit or a

      Tier 2 Audit.

92.   I have been asked how promptly audits were completed once they had been

      scheduled. My recollection is that audits generally took place at the time they

      were scheduled to occur. The only circumstances in which an audit might not

      proceed is if there were extenuating circumstances, such as an auditor

      becoming ill or difficulties with travel to the audit site.

93.   In relation to how quickly audits were scheduled, although I was not a member

      of the Scheduling Team, my understanding is that an audit would be scheduled

      depending on the type of audit and the prioritisation of certain types of audits.

      For example, an audit would be scheduled more urgently if it was for a transfer

      or closure of the branch. This is because the steps for closure would be finely

      scheduled, such as the removal of alarms or safes and therefore the closure


                                                                                     34
                                                                                             WITN08410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




      audit needed to occur on a specific day. Similarly, for a robbery or burglary, my

      recollection is that the Audit Process Manual stated that an audit should be

      scheduled on the day of the incident if possible (see section 3.5 of

      POL00084650). This was necessary because an audit was necessary before

      the branch could re-open. I do not recall that there were any requirements as

      to when special request or random audits needed to be scheduled.

94.   I have been asked to describe any enquiries or investigations which were made

      prior to a branch visit. Before the 2019 1 2020 changes described at paragraphs

      40 to 45 above, auditors were not required to do any significant preparation

      before the audit. The auditor's obligations for planning were set out in section 5

      on page 6 of Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter 3 of the Audit Process Manual

      (POL00084801) and recorded that the auditor must check the audit type,

      branch name and other details provided by the schedulers. There might be

      some notes on the schedule, however little explanation was provided as to why

      an audit had been scheduled. On some occasions an auditor might have

      received a call from the relevant Contract Advisor with some additional context

      or background information. The auditor would also check whether there were

      any pending error notices/transaction corrections with P&BA/ Finance Service

      Centre ("FSC"). However, after the 2019 12020 changes, there was more

      explanation given to the auditor as to why an audit was occurring. The auditor

      was given access to the ARD which explained why they were undertaking the

      activity, and the auditor would then provide the information to the Sub-

      postmaster as part of the pre-audit conversation. In addition, there may have

      been a phone call to the stock team to check on any issues with stock, but my


                                                                                     35
                                                                                             WITN08410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




      recollection is that this practice was ad hoc and that the work in relation to the

      background to the audit had already been completed by the Network Monitoring

      Team.

95.   1 have been asked how frequently branches were audited. There was no

      minimum frequency for audits of a given branch. The only exception was Crown

      Office branches, which were required to be audited every two years during the

      majority of the time I was a member of the Audit Team.

96.   I have been asked whether there was any variation between the scheduling of

      audits of Crown Office branches and other branches. Other than the

      requirement for Crown Office branches to be audited every two years, the

      triggers for scheduling an audit were generally the same as for other branches,

      as set out at paragraph 90 above. There was occasionally a robbery or burglary

      in the Crown Offices, which triggered a robbery / burglary audit. There were

      also closures of Crown Offices during the time I was a member of the Audit

      Team due to a programme of these offices being transferred to agency

      branches, which triggered transfer / closure audits. The Area Manager could

      also make a special request for an audit of a Crown Office. However, my

      recollection is that special requests were not made as frequently, possibly

      because the Crown Office branches were generally under more scrutiny, and

      because risk audits were more likely to be triggered by the FBPP if there were

      concerns rather than an Area Manager making a special request.

The audit process

97.   I have been asked to consider POL00083966, POL00084801, POL00087627,

      P0L00088745, P0L00088204, P0L00088252, P0L00088634, P0L00084003,

                                                                                     36
                                                                                          WITN08410100
                                                                                        WITNO8410100




      P0L00085652, P0L00084977, P0L00085652, P0L00086765, P0L00086831,

      P0L00086839, P0L00087716, P0L00087614, P0L00088628, P0L00088830,

      POL00084979, POL00084978, and POL00088445, and to set out the sources

      of information I would expect an auditor to have considered when completing

      an audit, and whether those sources varied according to the type of audit being

      conducted.

98.   I have reviewed the documents listed at paragraph 97 above. Upon my review

      of these documents, it appears from the face of some of these documents that

      they may more accurately be described as different versions of the documents

      to those described. In these cases, I have reviewed both the documents

      provided to me, and the document which appears to match the description in

      the Rule 9 Request, as follows:

        a.     In respect of "Retention of Audit Papers, Chapter 9 of the Audit

               Process Manual" (version 5.1) (POL00088634), this document

               appears to be version 5.0 of Chapter 9. Accordingly, I have also

               reviewed POL00088750 which is version 5.1 of that document. The

               changes between versions 5.0 and 5.1 are summarised in the version

               control table on page 2 of P0L00088750.

        b.     In respect of "Condensed Guide for Audit Attendance" (version 2,

               October 2008), document POL00085652 does not appear to match

               the Inquiry's document description, being "Requirement of Network

               Field Support Advisors at audit, following discovery of discrepancy".

               As such, I have also reviewed P0L00084813, which does match the

               stated description.


                                                                                  37
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




         c.     In respect of "Training Guide: Compliance Audit Tool" (December

                2013), document POL00086839 of the Guide. Accordingly, I have also

                reviewed POL00034503 which is Version 1.1 of the Guide, dated

                January 2014. The changes between versions 1.0 and 1.1 are

                summarised in the version control table on page 2 of POL00034503.

99.    In my experience, the relevant sources of information to be considered by an

       auditor would be stated in Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter 3 of the Audit

       Process Manual (POL00084801). If there were any changes to these sources,

       then the Chapter would be updated either during an annual review or as part of

       a separate review, and those changes would be communicated to the Audit

       Team as described in paragraphs 85 to 86 above.

100.   In section 8.2 on pages 11 to 12 of Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter 3 of the

       Audit Process Manual (POL00084801), there was a list of all the material which

       needed to be printed from Horizon against which the physical cash and stock

       in the branch would be verified, and this was modified whenever Horizon was

       updated. This process was to be followed for every audit. For example, it would

       instruct an auditor to print a pre-transaction log before they arrived at a branch

       to check if any transfers had been made on the day of the audit. Other printouts

       might be required to obtain data from other terminals, such as the ATM or the

       National Lottery.

101.   The auditor would then progress by physically checking stock units. In smaller

       branches there may only be one stock unit, whereas larger branches might

       have had many stock units. Each stock unit would include all manner of things,

       including cash, stamps, travellers' cheques, milk tokens (when they were in

                                                                                      38
                                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       use) and tax discs. The auditor would work through each stock unit, check what

       they were looking for was there, hand in their working papers to the lead auditor,

       and then repeat this process until all the stock units and the safe in the branch

       had been checked.

102.   1 have been asked to comment on whether the sources would change according

       to the type of audit being conducted. In my experience the sources of

       information would not change. However, the stock and products to be audited

       would change depending on what was present at the branch. The only

       exception that I can recall is that during Financial Assurance Audits described

       at paragraph 91 above (which occurred before the 2019 / 2020 changes

       described at paragraphs 40 to 45 above) only certain stocks or stock units

       would be audited, such as stock with the most value or stock unit the most cash

       and stock in a branch. After the 2019 / 2020 changes, the auditor would check

       all stock units.

103.   I have been referred to the evidence of Susan Harding (WITN03980100,

       paragraphs 23 to 32) and asked to consider the role of the local suspense

       account in the audit process, as well as any impact its removal would have on

       the audit process. I have considered paragraphs 23 to 32 of Ms Harding's

       evidence which contain detailed information on and issues regarding the

       operation of the 'local suspense account' which I was not aware of. I do not

       recall being aware of the IMPACT program either at the time it was being

       implemented, or subsequently. I believe this may be because the IMPACT

       program occurred prior to me joining the Audit Team. I am, however, aware of

       the existence of a suspense account, and an auditor would check this as a


                                                                                      39
                                                                                                WITNO8410100
                                                                                              WITNO8410100




       source of information during the audit process. This was because the amount

       in the suspense account would form part of the ultimate Horizon figure, against

       which all physical cash and stock would be verified.

104.   I understand that a view was expressed in the evidence of Susan Harding

       (WITN03980100, paragraph 31) that, given the way that the suspense account

       was operated, it could be theoretically possible for someone to "hide" shortfalls

       or discrepancies. I have not personally experienced instances of this, but I have

       heard of instances where auditors state they have experienced it. I do not,

       however, recall any specific incidents.

105.   If the 'local suspense account' is the same as the suspense account that I am

       aware of, the impact on the audit process would be minimal - it would just be

       one less source of information for the auditor to check. Upon reviewing versions

       of "Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter 3 of the Audit Process Manual" dated

       May 2007, (POL00087540), and November 2009 (POL00084287), and

       Appendix J to Chapter 3 dated November 2015 (POL00087785), it is apparent

       that, as a general requirement, auditors were required to check suspense

       accounts as part of the audit; however the specific requirements changed over

       time. I do not recall any specific changes to the audit process being introduced

       as a result of the removal of the 'local suspense account'.

106.   I have been asked to comment on what enquiries an auditor would make if they

       discovered a discrepancy during an audit. If there was a discrepancy at the end

       of the audit, the auditor would first check that the audit figures had been inputted

       correctly and then, if there was still a discrepancy, they would ask the

       Postmaster if they had an explanation. If the discrepancy was unexplained and
                                                                                               WITNO8410100
                                                                                             WITNO8410100




       above the threshold, the auditor would then follow a process set out in the Audit

       Process Manual described at paragraph 61 above and speak to the Contract

       Advisor. It was not the responsibility of the auditors to investigate the cause of

       the discrepancy (for example POL00083966 at section 2 states: "The [audit]

       role is not an investigative one nor is its primary function to detect fraud"). The

       auditor's role was limited to checking the assets and verifying the figures

       against Horizon data. If any investigation into the cause of the discrepancy was

       required, that would be conducted by teams other than the auditors. If it was

       clear that the discrepancy related to a specific product, the investigation was

       likely to be carried out by the product team in P&BA.

107.   I have been asked to consider if auditors were explicitly instructed not to

       consider the cause of incorrect Branch Trading Statements, discrepancies and

       shortfalls. I do not recall any such explicit instructions being given, although I

       note that in section 3.1 in POL00084801,, auditors were required not to

       "speculate" on the cause of the outcome of the audit or the honesty of agents

       or staff either overtly or by implication. As stated in paragraph 106 above, the

       auditors were there to verify the branch assets against Horizon data. It was not

       the auditor's responsibility to investigate the cause of any discrepancy.

108.   With reference to the email dated 26 March 2020 at POL00088823, I have been

       asked if I am aware of a practice in which auditors asked Postmasters to make

       good discrepancies on the day of audit. If there was an unexplained

       discrepancy and the Contract Advisor was contacted by the auditor to inform

       them of the discrepancy, it was common practice to ask for the Contract Advisor

       to ask the auditor to ask the Postmaster if they could make good the shortfall


                                                                                       41
                                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       (not that they must). I became aware of this practice, which was part of the

       standard audit process when I joined the Audit Team in 2012. After the 2019 /

       2020 changes, we no longer asked that question, and this was one of the

       changes incorporated in our full revision of audit practices.

109.   1 have been asked if I am aware of auditors being given instructions on taking

       payment from Postmasters. I am not aware of any instructions in the relevant

       Chapters. Before the 2019 / 2020 changes, it might be that post-audit

       conversations would happen between the Contract Advisor and the auditor, who

       would advise the auditor (to inform the Postmaster) or the Postmaster directly

       on how payment could be made and the options available to the Postmaster,

       but I was not aware of auditors doing so.

110.   I have been asked to consider whether, when a discrepancy or shortfall was

       discovered, Postmasters were able to provide their own information or

       undertake their own investigation. As stated above in paragraph 106, the

       responsibility of auditors was to verify the branch's assets against Horizon data,

       it was not to investigate the cause of any discrepancy. Any issue with the cause

       of a discrepancy found at an audit would be referred to the appropriate team. If

       it was clear that the discrepancy related to a specific product, the investigation

       was likely to be carried out by the product team in P&BA. Before the 2019 /

       2020 changes, a "Record of Significant Comment" would be made in the audit

       report where a Postmaster could add comments about the discrepancy, such

       as describing what they believed at the time to have caused the discrepancy,

       or the fact that they did not know the cause of the discrepancy. I do not have

       any recollection of seeing a "Record of Significant Comment" which alleged that


                                                                                      42
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




       errors in the Horizon data were the source of the discrepancy. The auditors may

       be aware of what the Postmaster had to say about the discrepancy at the time,

       but this was because the auditors were present when the discrepancy was

       discovered. The audit report would be sent to the appropriate stakeholders,

       such as the Contract Advisor, for further action, including taking forward any

       necessary investigation to look into the cause of a discrepancy. It is possible

       that the Contract Advisor might decide to suspend the Postmaster upon being

       informed of a large unexplained discrepancy, in which case, the Postmaster

       would no longer have access to the branch. As a result, the Postmaster may

       not have had an opportunity to undertake their own investigation into the cause

       of the discrepancy. After the 2019/2020 changes, the Postmaster would be

       informed of the discrepancy by the auditors and there would a post-audit

       conversation where the Postmaster could discuss the discrepancy and next

       steps with the auditors. In addition, as I explain in paragraph 111 below, after

       the 2019 / 2020 changes it would be highly unlikely for the Postmaster to be

       suspended on the day of the audit. They would therefore have an opportunity

       to undertake their own investigation after the audit. I was not aware of any

       practice, pre or post 2019 / 2020 changes, of Postmasters investigating the

       cause of a discrepancy during the audit process.

111.   I have been asked to comment on the information communicated to

       Postmasters while a branch audit was being conducted. The information that

       auditors were required to communicate to the Postmaster at an audit would be

       set out in Chapter 3 of the Audit Process Manual. Before the 2019 / 2020

       changes, at the start of the audit the auditors would introduce themselves and


                                                                                    43
                                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       hand over their ID cards. If asked why the audit was taking place, the auditor

       was to not offer an explanation. During the audit, the Postmaster would be

       informed by the auditors of the steps in the audit in order to assist with the

       conduct of the audit. The auditors would request access to the necessary

       assets (such as asking the Postmaster to open the safe in the branch) and ask

       the Postmaster about the stock and the cash. If there was a discrepancy, the

       auditors might ask the Postmaster for further information, such as if there was

       anything else that may belong to that stock unit. At the end of the audit, the

       auditors would break down the audit findings to the Postmaster. If the

       discrepancy was over the threshold, then the auditor would call the Contract

       Advisor, and the Postmaster would be informed of this fact. After 2019 / 2020,

       a few changes were introduced. The ARD was used and the Postmaster was

       given an explanation of why their branch was being audited. If the Postmaster

       was not present for the audit, the auditors would endeavour to contact them to

       inform them; if they were within a reasonable travel distance, they would be

       invited to attend the branch. There was also a more stringent process in place

       for Contract Advisors to suspend a Postmaster as a result of findings at an audit.

       I understand that a higher level of authorisation and a rationale document was

       required. It is highly unlikely, post the 2019 12020 changes, that a suspension

       would be made on the day of an audit.

112.   I have been asked to comment on the processes in place which allowed a

       Postmaster to raise issues or concerns during an audit. Before the 2019 / 2020

       changes, Postmasters could have done so, but this would have only been

       through an informal conversation with the auditors. After the 2019 / 2020


                                                                                      44
                                                                                             WITN08410100
                                                                                           WITNO8410100




       changes, the audit report contains a space where Postmasters could note any

       concerns, and this would go to the relevant stakeholders. Postmasters could

       also provide feedback in a satisfaction survey. For the majority of the time that

       I was a member of the Audit Team, the satisfaction survey was run through the

       'Kendata' platform; although I recall that this later became defunct and a

       different method was used. Following the 2019 / 2020 changes, a satisfaction

       survey was no longer used, and I understand that instead the Scheduling Team

       would contact branches randomly by phone following an audit and ask a series

       of questions about the audit.

113.   I have been asked if it was possible to conduct a branch audit in circumstances

       without access to Horizon. It was possible to conduct an audit without Horizon

       being accessible within the branch, although I recall that this did not happen

       often. It is possible that an auditor would not be able to access Horizon

       because, for example, the power was down or the branch had been

       disconnected from electricity, or the Horizon kit had been damaged. Whether

       the audit would proceed would depend on the circumstances of each incident

       (section 1 of POL00084003). For example, if it was a closure audit or audit

       which needed to take place on that day, then it was possible to proceed with

       the audit. The process to follow was set out in "Compliance Team Process for

       Auditing Branches Without Access to Horizon" (POL00084003). If it was a

       closure, the process to follow was set out in "Closure Process when Horizon is

       not operational" (POL00088628). I recall that the auditor would complete the

       audit working papers with values for the counted stock units. The auditor would

       then return these papers to the FSC, previously known as the P&BA, who would


                                                                                     45
                                                                                                 WITNO8410100
                                                                                               WITNO8410100




       reconcile the cash and stock figures against the central Horizon records. I recall

       audits being carried out in such a situation where there had been flooding in the

       North. It would not be possible to conduct an audit without               access to

       Horizon (either through the branch or centrally), as there would be nothing to

       verify the cash and stock figures against.

114.   1 have been asked to describe any variation between the audit process in

       respect of Crown Office branches and other branches. Before the 2019 / 2020

       changes, the only difference between auditing Crown Office branches and other

       branches was the frequency of audits, as set out at paragraph 95 above. In

       addition, given the size of some Crown Offices, in some circumstances a full

       financial audit, being a Tier 2 Audit, would only be undertaken in respect of

       certain stock units, and then other units would be assured, i.e. a Financial

       Assurance Audit would take place. If a Crown Office was scheduled for a

       Special request audit, transfer / closure audit, or robberies / burglaries audit

       then all stock units would be subject to a full financial audit, i.e. a Tier 2 Audit.

       This is the same for other branches. My recollection is that Crown Office

       branches ceased being audited around the same time as the NOM role was

       introduced, being approximately 2016.

115.   I have been asked to describe the involvement Area Training and Audit

       Managers had at the time an audit took place. My recollection is that Area

       Training and Audit Managers (active between April 2018 and April 2019 as

       described at paragraph 33 above) would not generally have been present at an

       audit. The only exception to this is if they needed to step in and assist due to

       unforeseen circumstances, such as an auditor falling ill or being unable to


                                                                                         46
                                                                                                WITN08410100
                                                                                              WITNO8410100




       attend the audit location, or if they were attending the audit to perform

       observational quality assurance. When performing observational quality

       assurance, l may have assisted in tasks as part of the audit process, for

       example counting currency or stock. Finally, in order to support the auditor, an

       Area Training and Audit Manager may have attended an audit if it was occurring

       at a location nearby. I do not recall that, as an Area Training and Audit Manager

       or any other role I held within the Audit Team, that I was ever scheduled to

       attend an audit as an auditor (lead or otherwise). However, section 3.1 of

       version 5.1 of Retention of Audit Papers, Chapter 9 of the Audit Process Manual

       (POL00088750) provides for when an Area Audit Manager had been

       designated as a lead auditor, so it must have been a possibility for managers in

       the Audit Team to lead an audit.

116.   l have been asked to consider POL00002841 and FUJ00001894 and describe

       any involvement Fujitsu had in the audit process. I have considered these

       documents. My recollection is that Fujitsu had no involvement in the audit

       process. The only involvement that I recall that Fujitsu had is that they would

       create a Global User Account for every auditor. The Global User Account was

       a unique account which allowed an auditor to log on to any branch with

       managerial level access. However, Fujitsu had no involvement in the actual

       audit process nor any oversight as to how audits took place. On reflection, I do

       not consider that Fujitsu ought to have had a role in the POL audit process, as

       auditors had access to all the information that was necessary to perform the

       'stock taking' function they were required to do. However, if the function of audits




                                                                                        47
                                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       had been more akin to a forensic audit it may have been appropriate for Fujitsu

       (or a third party) to play a role in the analysing the integrity of the data.

117.   1 have been asked whether auditors had access to information to which a Sub-

       postmaster did not have access when they were conducting a branch audit.

       Auditors did not have access to any information at the branch which Sub-

       postmasters did not also have access to. There were different levels of access

       which could be granted on Horizon, so for example a clerk did not have the

       same access as a Sub-postmaster. Sub-postmasters had 'manager' level

       access, which was the same level of access which was granted to auditors by

       the Global User Account.

118.   Reports which may need to be printed out during an audit are listed at pages

       20 to 21 of "Audit Trail Functional Specification" (FUJ00001894). The reports

       are also listed at section 8.2 on pages 10 to 11 of Performing a Branch Audit,

       Chapter 3 of the Audit Process Manual (POL00084801). My recollection is that

       these reports were accessible through either the Global User Account or

       through the managerial access held by Sub-postmasters. I believe that it was

       best practice for an auditor to ask the Sub-postmaster to grant them access

       rather than using their Global User Account, Page 1 of POL00002841 states

       that the Audit Global User Account was to be used "if there is no one available

       in the branch with manager access to add them to the system" which accords

       with my recollection. In addition, Appendix G —Access to the Horizon System

       of version 7.3 of Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter 3 of the Audit Process

       Manual on page 33 of POL00088623 states that "You should request the

       AGENT/POSTMASTER to add you to the system, if this is not possible due to


                                                                                       48
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       no one in the branch having managers access, then your Global User ID should

       be used to access the system". Accordingly, given Postmasters routinely

       granted auditors access to the system, I do not believe that auditors had access

       to additional information in the branch which Sub-postmasters could not have

       accessed.

119.   1 have been asked to explain my understanding of an Audit Global User

       Account. POL00002841 sets out some background in relation to Global User

       Accounts, and states on page 1 that field team members have two accounts:

       Trainer; and Audit (Emergency Manager). Trainer accounts were to be used in

       Counter Training Offices only and allowed the trainer to reset the kit and clear

       the transaction history. This was so that different training sessions could be run

       each day and not carry over past transactions. Audit (Emergency Manager)

       Global User Accounts are those described in paragraph 116 above and allowed

       the auditor to log on to the kit at any branch and print out the reports necessary

       for an audit.

120.   1 have been asked to describe what, if any, audit measures were in place in

       respect of Audit Global User Accounts. My recollection is that there was a list

       which was circulated to the relevant stakeholders, such as Audit Managers,

       periodically which listed all individuals with Global User Accounts. We would

       then review these lists and confirm whether there were any individuals who no

       longer required access because, for example, they had left the business. i am

       not aware of any additional auditing or whether the usage of the Global User

       Accounts was monitored.




                                                                                      49
                                                                                           WITN08410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




121.   1 have    been asked     to consider POL00085431,        POL00088887, and

       POL00088634, and describe how a branch audit finding was communicated to

       a Postmaster. As described at paragraph 98a above, I note that POL00088634

       appears to be version 5.0 of Chapter 9 of the Audit Process Manual while

       POL00088750 is version 5.1 of that document. The changes between versions

       5.0 and 5.1 are summarised in the version control table on page 2 of

       POL00088750.

122.   Once an audit had been completed, the auditor would have a close of audit

       meeting with the Sub-postmaster. This requirement is described in section 13.1

       on page 18 of Chapter 3, 'Performing a Branch Audit' of the Audit Process

       Manual (POL00084801). During this meeting, the auditor would go through the

       findings of the audit, including breaking down any discrepancies identified by

       category, if relevant. The Sub-postmaster may have been shown the working

       papers as part of the meeting but would not have been provided with any written

       confirmation of the outcome of the audit on the day.

123.   The auditor would then finalise their working papers and produce an audit

       report. More recently, the audit report was generated using the Audit Reporting

       Tool ("ART"), which was a Microsoft Excel tool (see page 1 of POL00088887).

       The audit report would be sent to the Sub-postmaster in the following days

       (either physically via post or latterly via email (see page 4 of POL00088887)).

       Prior to the introduction of ART, the Audit Team used a similar tool called the

       Financial Audit Tool ("FAT"). The auditor was also required to call the branch

       two days after sending the branch the audit report to confirm the Sub-

                                                                                    W
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       postmaster's understanding of the content and highlight their responsibility for

       the return of the Declaration of Compliance (see page 18 of POL00084801).

124.   1 have been asked which stakeholders in POL were informed of branch audit

       findings, and how this occurred. As described at paragraph 59 above, an auditor

       would have called the relevant Security Manager to inform them of the audit

       results if a Postmaster had admitted to fraudulent activity or a discrepancy over

       the threshold was identified during audit. If a Postmaster admitted to fraudulent

       activity, in addition to informing the Security Manager, a Record of Significant

       Comment needed to be completed by the auditor so as to record that statement,

       or it could be completed by the Postmaster directly, and the Postmaster would

       be asked to sign the Record of Significant Comment to confirm its accuracy.

       Likewise, as described at paragraph 61 above, an auditor would have called

       the relevant Contract Advisor to inform them of the audit results if a discrepancy

       over the threshold was identified during audit.

125.   Regardless of whether the Security Manager or Contract Advisor had been

       contacted on the day of the audit, the relevant stakeholders would receive a

       copy of the audit report once it had been completed by the lead auditor in the

       days following the audit. During the time I was an FTL, a NOM and an Area

       Training and Audit Manager, once the report was completed it would be

       uploaded to a SharePoint site and any interested stakeholder could access the

       audit report (see page 4 of POL00088887). During the time the FAT and ART

       were used, it was not necessary to email the stakeholders copies of the audit

       reports as the platform where the documents were managed would

       automatically distribute the reports. I do not recall who had access to the


                                                                                      51
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       SharePoint where audit reports were stored, but it would have included the

       Security Team, Contract Advisors, the Audit Team, the Area Manager and

       Regional Manager and potentially others. I do not recall that there was any

       process for the removal of audit reports after a certain period of time.

126.   During the time I was an Area Audit Manager, I believe the communication of

       audit reports to internal stakeholders may have changed. The report was

       instead disseminated using a program which allowed the report writer to add

       people to the distribution list and then the report was automatically distributed.

       While I cannot recall exactly, I believe the teams and individuals who received

       a copy of the audit report would have been broadly the same as described in

       paragraph 125 above.

127.   1 have been asked whether I had any concerns regarding the reporting process.

       During the time that I was a member of the Audit Team, and now, I did not have

       any concerns about the reporting process. The individuals who received a copy

       of the audit report were defined in the Audit Process Manual and I considered

       that they were the right teams and individuals to receive a copy of the report.

Quality Assurance

128.   1 have     been asked     to consider POL00086424, POL00086831, and

       POL00033398, and describe my involvement in conducting quality assurance

       reviews.

129.   As an FTL, one of our responsibilities was to carry out quality assurance.

       Quality assurance took multiple forms, as follows:




                                                                                      52
                                                                                                   WITNO8410100
                                                                                                 WITNO8410100




          a. '"Paper assurance" or Quality Assurance Review ("OAR") involved

                 requesting a random sample of audit workpapers for audits which had

                 been completed, and reviewing those papers to ensure that all practices

                 and procedures had been followed thoroughly;

          ii i   r                       f   ~ f   ~   .   ~   ~   4. ~   ~   .'     '.... . •



                 branches while audits were being carried out and reviewing the practices

                 of the lead auditor to ensure that all practices and procedures were

                 followed and that the lead auditors behaviour at the branch was

                 appropriate; and

          c. "Training assurance" involved attending training sessions in branches

                 and the classroom to ensure that all training practices and procedures

                 were being followed thoroughly. It was necessary for an FTL to complete




130.   My primary responsibilities in relation to quality assurance are set out under

       'Section 2 ---- Responsibilities of a Regional Network Manager & Field Support

       Team Leader' on page 2 of P0L00086424. While I was an FTL, the policy was

       for us to complete at least six QARs each quarter, with at least two of those

       being observational QARs. We were also required to perform six reviews of

       each auditor every year, with two of those being observational QARs. We would

       discuss the findings of those QARs at 121 meetings with the relevant auditor.

131.   On approximately a quarterly basis, FTL's would meet and exchange QAR

       reports which they had completed to discuss and critique the results which had

       been reached by the FTL. We would seek consensus amongst the FTLs as to



                                                                                        53
                                                                                                 WITN08410100
                                                                                               WITNO8410100




       what score the audit papers should receive. This process was known as the

       "levelling process" and is described on page 4 of POL00086424.

132.   An example of the forms that were used to perform quality assurance is

       POL00112462, which sets out the metrics on which an auditor would be

       assessed. I was not involved in the development of this skills matrix, as I was

       likely quite a junior FTL at the time it was developed, if it was not already

       developed by the time I joined the Audit Team. However, I recall that there was

       a desire to align (to the extent possible) the skills matrix with the Institute of

       Internal Auditors standards ("HA Standard 2300"), mapping it across to the

       limited scope of the audit. This is also reflected in section 2 of Quality

       Assurance, Chapter 11 of the Audit Process Manual (POL00086028). I do not

       recall why it was thought desirable to align the skills matrix with the IIA Standard

       2300, but I recall that the I IA Standard 2300 was referred to consistently in the

       context of quality assurance over the duration of my time in the Audit Team. I

       think that the alignment between the I IA Standard 2300 and the quality

       assurance function within the Audit Team contributed to my belief that the

       quality assurance function was adequate. In hindsight, I do not necessarily

       consider that the metrics being assessed conformed with the requirements set

       out in IIA Standard 2300.

133.   POL00033398 appears to be a presentation by the Risk & Compliance Team

       titled "Assurance Review: Quality of Auditing" dated February 2011. This

       document pre-dates my time in the Audit Team, and I do not recall ever having

       seen it before prior to being provided it by the Inquiry. However, in the limited

       time available to produce this witness statement, I have not had time to carry


                                                                                          54
                                                                                                WITN08410100
                                                                                              WITNO8410100




       out an extensive search of my emails or underlying documents to confirm that

       I did not receive a copy of that document at any point. I may have seen other

       presentations    which     reported    on    the   findings,    conclusions     and

       recommendations in respect of an annual review in relation to the quality of

       branch auditing within POL, but I do not specifically recall this occurring.

134.   I recall that the quality assurance exercise did not take place around the time

       that the NOM role was created (September 2016). I believe that I was not

       required to perform any QAR while I was in the NOM role. Quality assurance

       was reintroduced later as a responsibility of the audit managers while I was still

       in the Audit Team. While I cannot recall exactly when this occurred, I believe

       that it may have been around the time the Area Training and Audit Manager role

       was split into the constituent parts of audit and training, being April 2019.

135.   I have been asked to describe my contribution to the policies and guidance

       applicable to the quality assurance process.

136.   I recall that I had responsibility for reviewing and updating Chapter 11 --- Quality

       Assurance of the Audit Process Manual for a portion of the time that I was an

       FTL (see POL00086424). I do not recall how long I had that responsibility for.

       However, I recall that in September 2012 (at the time POL00086424 was

       produced), my involvement with updating the Audit Process Manual was fairly

       limited because I had only recently joined the Audit Team and did not yet have

       experience with the quality assurance functions of the Audit Team. I recall that

       Peter Jackson and Paul Humber took on larger roles within that review process.

137.   I have been asked to explain my understanding of the 'three lines of defence'

       model. POL00086831 appears to be a report to the POL Executive Committee

                                                                                        55
                                                                                            WITN08410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




       dated October 2013, potentially authored by Malcolm Zack, titled "Internal Audit

       — Future options". I do not recall ever seeing this document prior to it being

       provided by the Inquiry and it does not appear to me to be the kind of document

       which would have filtered down to someone at my position within the

       organisational hierarchy. Page 3 of POL00086831 refers to the 'three lines of

       defence model'. I do not recall ever having heard that phrase prior to being

       directed to document POL00086831 by the Inquiry. I do not have any

       understanding as to what the model means beyond what is set out in

       POL00086831.

138.   1 have been asked to describe the measures in place to ensure that the quality

       of audits was consistent across England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

       The quality assurance processes, as set out in Chapter 11 of the Audit Process

       Manual, were identical in respect of branches located in England, Wales,

       Scotland and Northern Ireland. I am also not aware of any difference in practice

       in relation to the quality assurance exercise conducted in the various devolved

       jurisdictions across the UK, and do not recall any specific measure which were

       put in place to ensure that the processes were adhered to consistently across

       the United Kingdom.

139.   The only significant difference I recall between the jurisdictions was that even

       prior to the changes to our ways of working during the time I was an Area Audit

       Manager (including the requirement of a minimum of two auditors at any audit,

       as described at paragraph 44 above), all audits in Scotland required the

       attendance of at least two auditors. I believe this was because of a requirement




                                                                                    56
                                                                                                 WITNO8410100
                                                                                               WITN08410100




       under Scottish law, but I do have any further recollection as to why this was the

       case.

140.   1 have been asked whether I consider now, and whether I considered at the

       time, the quality assurance process was effective. In years which the quality

       assurance exercise did take place, it was designed to ensure that auditors were

       following the correct processes as set out in the Audit Process Manual and had

       the key skills required to complete their jobs. These included: the ability to verify

       stock, cash and currency at a branch; attention to detail in the verification and

       report writing process; and clear and legible communication. As described at

       paragraph 16 above, the audit process was essentially a "stock taking"

       exercise. I believe that the QAR and observational OAR process was effective

       at ensuring this function was met and these standards were met. I considered,

       at the time that I was a member of the Audit Team and now, that the quality

       assurance process as designed, when it was active, was effective at ensuring

       that auditors were following the processes they were obliged to follow based on

       the Audit Process Manual. The exception is that between September 2016 and

       approximately November 2019, I believe that the quality assurance program did

       not exist, in which case there was no effective quality assurance of audit during

       those years.




141.   1 have been asked to consider POL00088739 and POL00085682 and describe

       my involvement in reviewing and updating the policies, guidance and

       instructions which were relevant to the audit process.



                                                                                         57
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




142. As described above at paragraph 22 above, the key document governing the

       process to be followed in relation to auditing was the Audit Process Manual. All

       other documents relating to practices and procedures were derived from the

       Audit Process Manual.

143.   As described at paragraph 22 above, when I was an FTL, I was assigned certain

       chapters of the Audit Process Manual which I was responsible for reviewing on

       a yearly basis and updating as necessary. It is also possible that chapters would

       need to be updated more frequently than on the yearly basis, for example, if a

       major change in processes had been rolled out. Although I do not recall all the

       details as to when I was responsible for various chapters of the Audit Process

       Manual, I do recall that at some point I was responsible, in conjunction with

       other FTLs, for Chapter 5 — Closure and Chapter 11 — Quality Assurance.

144.   During the time that I was a NOM, I did not have any responsibilities for updating

       the Audit Process Manual, and therefore had no formal involvement with the

       review of policies, guidance and instructions during the period from September

       2016 to April 2018.

145.   During the time that I was an Area Training and Audit Manager and Area Audit

       Manager, I recall that we did have some responsibilities for updating chapters

       of the Audit Process Manual, but my recollection is that it was a less structured

       process than when I was an FTL, and I may not have had specific chapters

       assigned to me.

146.   I have been asked to describe the process by which audit policies, guidance

       and instructions were kept under review. POL00085682 appears to be a paper

       authored by Sue Ricardson titled "Review of post Office Ltd Audit Processes

                                                                                      58
                                                                                              WITN08410100
                                                                                            WITNO8410100




       and Tools October 2011 ". The date of this paper pre-dates my joining the Audit

       Team. However, the statement on page 3 that "[C]urrently all of the Audit

       Process Chapters are reviewed against an annual rolling timetable and are the

       responsibility of the Network Services Team Leaders" accords with my

       recollection of the review process, except that chapters were reviewed by Field

       Team Leaders rather than Network Services Team Leaders. The paper states

       at page 3 that, following the complete review in the 2011/2012 Financial Year,

       that "LW]e have returned to BAU ["Business as Usual'] in the on-going revision

       of the processes and tools", which I believe would have been the case when I

       joined the team in April 2012.

147.   POL00088739 appears to be an email from Jo Milton to Alison Clark and

       myself, and copied to Tim Perkins and Zoe Brauer, dated 14 January 2020 in

       relation to the revision of certain chapters of the Audit Process Manual. I recall

       that in 2019, following the settlement of the GLO, as part of the 2019 / 2020

       changes, there was a complete review of the Audit Process Manual to reflect

       the new audit processes and procedures required as part of POL's 'new ways

       of working'. The two major themes which I recall from the 'new ways of working'

       were working to better support Sub-postmasters and to rebuild trust with Sub-

       postmasters. I have described some of the major changes at paragraphs 40 to

       45 above. I recall that Jo Milton was a contractor who was overseeing the

       process of reviewing the Audit Process Manual. I was heavily involved in the

       redrafting of various chapters of the Audit Process Manual at this time because

       I was one of the most experienced audit managers within the team at the time.




                                                                                      m
                                                                                               WITNO8410100
                                                                                             WITN08410100




148.   As part of the review process, I worked with Jo Milton, Alison Clark and others

       to review the Audit Process Manual to ensure that it was fit for purpose in light

       of the new ways of working. The 'new ways of working and changes required

       to the audit process had already been determined by more senior teams within

       POL and cascaded out to the relevant teams. Our role was to then update the

       Audit Process Manual to reflect these changes and therefore facilitate the 'new

       ways of working'. We were not involved in the design of the new ways of

       working. I recall that Alison Clark, who was my line manager at the time, and I

       did most of the drafting of the revised chapters, following consultation with other

       stakeholders, including auditors, and then we would send the draft to Jo Milton

       who would consolidate the draft and then send it on to other stakeholders for

       review, l recall that the revised chapters of the Audit Process Manual were being

       reviewed by the legal department at this time. I believe that Zoe Brauer listed

       in copy on POL00088739 may have been a member of the legal team.

149.   I have been asked whether legal advice was sought when reviews of audit

       policies, guidance and instructions were undertaken. Other than in relation to

       the review of the Audit Process Manual in 2019 — 2020 as part of the 2019 /

       2020 changes, as set out at paragraph 148 above, I do not recall having any

       interaction with the POL legal team. As set out at paragraph 62 above, I did not

       have any routine interactions with the POL legal team, and I am unsure whether

       legal advice was ever otherwise sought in relation to audit policies, guidance

       and instructions.




                                                                                       60
                                                                                            WITNO8410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




KNOWLEDGE OF BUGS, ERRORS OR ISSUES WITH THE HORIZON SYSTEM

150.   1 have    been asked     to consider POL00088935,          POL00088209, and

       POL00087879, and confirm whether I was aware of the trend of increasing debt

       and average audit loss, and. if so, what I considered to be the cause of this

       trend at the time.

151.   1 have reviewed the documents referred to in paragraph 150 above.

       POL00088935 appears to be a report authored by Rod Ismay, Head of P&BA

       dated 2 August 2010 in relation to concerns about the reliability of Horizon.

       POL00088209 appears to be a report authored by Angela Van Den Bogerd

       dated 1 August 2016 in relation to a Mitigation Proposal for Agent Branch

       Losses. I do not recall ever having seen these documents previously, and they

       do not appear to me to be the kind of document which would have filtered down

       to someone at my position within the organisational hierarchy. At the time

       POL00088935 was authored, I was still a branch manager at the Stockport

       Crown Office. However, in the limited time available to produce this witness

       statement, I have not had time to carry out an extensive search of my emails or

       underlying documents to confirm that I did not receive a copy of either document

       at any point.

152.   POL00087879 appears to be a document titled 'Approach to Business Risk,

       Branch Audit and Accountancy Support for Operators'. Although the document

       is undated, I believe from the information contained in the document that it may

       date from 2016. I do not recall ever seeing this document, however I have not

       carried out an extensive search of my emails or underlying documents to

       confirm that I did not receive a copy of this document at any point.

                                                                                    61
                                                                                               WITN08410100
                                                                                             WITNO8410100




153.   1 do not recall that I was ever aware of a trend of increasing debt and average

       audit losses. The function of the Audit Team was to carry out the audits which

       were scheduled, and report back the findings to other teams within the

       business. The Audit Team were not involved with the analysis of the results or

       strategy decisions relating to these results.

154.   As a manager of auditors, although I do not specifically recall this occurring, it

       is possible that we may have received information in relation to some statistics,

       such as the number of audits that had been completed during the previous year.

       This is because there were targets for the number of audits to be completed in

       a year in the Audit Plan (see section 3.1 of "Audit Plan & Scheduling, Chapter

       1 of the Audit Process Manual) (POL00085286), and so it may have been

       relevant for us to have this information. However, I do not recall that we were

       routinely sent information in relation to the total or average audit losses which

       had been identified by auditors in our team. The value of losses identified at

       audit did not relate to any of our performance indicators, and so I do not think it

       would have been relevant for the audit team to have information of this nature.

155.   I have been asked whether I had, or was aware of, any concerns regarding the

       robustness of Horizon during the time I have been employed by POL. In relation

       to the scope of "robustness", I have been asked to specifically consider:

          a. the accuracy and integrity of the data recorded and processed by the

              Horizon IT System;
          b. the extent to which deficiencies in the Horizon IT System were capable

              of causing and / or caused apparent discrepancies or shortfall in the

              branch accounts;


                                                                                       62
                                                                                            WITN08410100
                                                                                          WITNO8410100




          c. the ability of the Horizon IT System to identify errors in data and

             discrepancies or shortfalls in branch accounts and the cause of the

             same; and

          d. the ability of the Horizon IT System to continue to operate satisfactorily

             in the presence of adverse conditions.

156.   During the time I worked in Crown Offices, from 1987 to 2012, 1 was never

       aware of any issues or problems with Horizon. I did not personally encounter

       any problems with Horizon during the time I was an Assistant Branch Manager

       or Branch Manager and do not recall being told of concerns or being made

       aware of systematic or specific issues by others.

157.   Once I joined Network Services and became a member of the Audit Team, I

       likewise was not aware of any systemic issues or problems with Horizon as part

       of my role. I personally do not recall instances where Sub-postmasters asserted

       during or after an audit that a shortfall was due to an error with Horizon,

       although this may well have happened. I do recall hearing that allegations had

       been made regarding the robustness of Horizon. Although I cannot be sure

       exactly when I first became aware of these allegations being made, I believe it

       may have been around the time of the Panorama program in 2015. I do not

       recall that concerns regarding the robustness of Horizon being raised by Sub-

       postmasters at audit was a trend identified or discussed by the Audit Team.

       After the Panorama program, I believe that I became more aware of questions

       about the robustness of Horizon around the time the GLO was made in March

       2017. Through my work at POL and the media I have come to be aware of

       'Second Sight', but 1 was not aware of their operation at the time of their

                                                                                    63
                                                                                           WITN08410100
                                                                                         WITNO8410100




       investigation. Around the time of the GLO settlement and the 2019 / 2020

       changes, I recall that the Audit Team received some communications regarding

       the integrity issues with Horizon, including receiving a presentation on Known

       Error Logs (see POL00112803).

158.   While I was a Contract Advisor between April 2020 and April 2021, although I

       was aware of concerns regarding the robustness of Horizon in the wake of the

       GLO, I do not recall that any of the Sub-postmasters raised concerns with me

       regarding the robustness of Horizon, nor that there were any Sub-postmasters

       who had significant discrepancies arise during this time. However, I was only a

       Contracts Advisor for one year, and I believe that there were very few audits

       during this year because of COVID-19.

159.   While I do not have any recollection of being made aware of any concerns

       regarding the robustness of Horizon during the time I have been employed by

       POL (except to the extent set out at paragraph 157 above), I have not carried

       out an extensive search of my emails or underlying documents to confirm that

       I was not sent any material which indicated that there may have been concerns

       with the robustness of Horizon.

OTHER MATTERS

160.   I do not consider the Chair of the Inquiry should be aware of any other matters

       which I recall or have knowledge of.




                                                                                   64
                                                             WITNO8410100
                                                           WITNO8410100




Statement of truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:         G ISO
Dated:       22/05/2023




                                                      65
                                                                                   WITNO8410100
                                                                                 WITNO8410100




Index to First Witness Statement of Alexander Simon Talbot


 No.   URN                Document Description                  Control Number
 1.    POL00083966        Audit Charter (version 4.0)           POL-0081024


 2.    POL00084801        Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter POL-0081859
                          3 of the Audit Process Manual
                          (version 5.1, 2010)
 3.    POL00085682        Review of Post Office Ltd Audit    POL-0082740
                          Processes and Tools October 2011

 4.    POL00085769        Business Loss Programme Board         POL-0082827
                          ONCH — Cash Loss deficiencies

 5.    POL00086765        Network Auditing Approach,            POL-0083823
                          Methods and Assurance

 6.    POL00086831        Post Office Ltd Executive             POL-0083889
                          Committee: Internal Audit Options

 7.    POL00088445        Process document - Agent Debt         POL-0085503
                          (undated)

 8.    POL00033398        Draft Post Office Training        POL-0030333
                          Presentation on Assurance Review:
                          Quality of Auditing (Version 0.5)
 9.    POL00032698        Assurance Review - Recruitment        POL-0029633
                          (Vetting & Training) (27 October
                          2009)
 10.   POL00088453        POL°s advertisement for Training      POL-0085511
                          and Audit Advisor Role (undated)

 11.   POL00088557        POL job advertisement for Audit       POL-0085615
                          Advisor role within Loss Prevention
                          (undated)
 12.   POL00085286        Network Support Team Policy /         POL-0082344
                          Process - Audit Process Manual
                          Volume 4 Chapter 1 Audit Plan and
                          Scheduling (v9
 13.   POL00088750        Retention of Audit Papers,            POL-0085808
                          Chapter 9 of the Audit Process
                          Manual (version 5.1)
                                                                                WITNO8410100
                                                                              WITNO8410100




14.   POL00084813   Condensed Guide forAudit               POL-0081871
                    Attendance (version 2, October
                    2008)
15.   POL00084650   Audit Plan & Scheduling, Chapter 1 POL-0081708
                    of the Audit Process Manual
                    (Version 8.0)
16.   POL00087627   Follow Up Audit Process, Chapter   POL-0084685
                    3b of the Audit Process Manual
                    (Version 3.0)
17.   POL00088745   Closures, Chapter 5 of the Audit       POL-0085803
                    Process Manual (Version 8.0)

18.   POL00088204   Network Support Team               POL-0085262
                    Policy/Process document,
                    Robbery/Burglary Audits, Chapter 6
                    of the Audit Process Manual
                    (version 6.0)
19.   POL00088252   Performing a Cash Centre Audit,    POL-0085310
                    Chapter 7 of the Audit Process
                    Manual (Version 5.0)
20.   POL00088634   Retention of Audit Papers, Chapter     POL-0085692
                    9 of the Audit Process Manual
                    (Version 5.0)
21.   POL00084003   Compliance Team Process for            POL-0081061
                    Auditing Branches Without Access
                    to Horizon (version 1.0)
22.   POL00085652   Requirement of Network Field           POL-0082710
                    Support Advisors at audit, following
                    discovery of discrepancy (version
                    1.0)
23.   POL00084977   Former Subpostmaster End To End POL-0082035
                    Debt Review (version 0.5,
                    December 2009)
24.   POL00086839   Training Guide, Compliance Audit       POL-0083897
                    Tool (December 2013)

25.   POL00087716   Training-Aide for Branch Asset         POL-0084774
                    Checking (version 1.7)

26.   POL00087614   Terms of Reference Audits (version     POL-0084672
                    1, April 2015)



                                                                         67
                                                                                WITNO8410100
                                                                              WITNO8410100




27.   POL00088628    Closure Process when Horizon is      POL-0085686
                     not operational (version 3.2)

28.   POL00088830    Checklist for Audits (4 July 2019)   POL-0085888


29.   POL00084979    Network Field Support Team           POL-0082037
                     (formerly Audit) (undated)

30.   POL00084978    Network Field Support Team           POL-0082036
                     flowchart - Audit Discrepancy
                     Process
31.   WITNO3980100   Witness Statement of Susan           WITNO3980100
                     Harding

32.   POL00034503    Training Guide: Compliance Audit   POL-0031438
                     Tool (December 2013)
33.   POL00088623    Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter POL-0085681
                     3 of the Audit Process
                     Manual (version 7.3, 10 January
                     2019)
34.   POL00112462    Financial Audit Spreadsheet &      POL-0104989
                     Quality Assurance Review - Excel
                     tool (version 4.2)
35.   POL00087540    Performing a Branch Audit,         POL-0084598
                     Chapter 3 of the Audit Process
                     Manual (version 3.9, 17 May 2007)
36.   POL00084287    Performing a Branch Audit, Chapter POL-0081345
                     3 of the Audit Process
                     Manual (version 4.3, November
                     2009)
37.   POL00087785    Performing a Branch Audit,           POL-0084843
                     Chapter 3 of the Audit Process
                     Manual (version 5.7, 13 November
                     2015)
38.   POL00088823    Email from Jo Milton to Alison       POL-0085881
                     Clarke, Simon Talbot, Hugo
                     Grenyer dated 26 March 2020 re:
                     Transfer/Opening/Closure Pack,
                     Transfer Audit Chapter and
—         —    —     Workaid--------




                                                                         68
                                                                              WITNO8410100
                                                                            WITNO8410100




39.   POL00088887   A short guide to the Audit Reporting POL-0085945
                    Tool (ART)


40.   POL00086424   Quality Assurance, Chapter 11 of    POL-0083482
                    the Audit Process Manual (Version
                    2.0)

41.   POL00088739   Email from Jo Milton to Alison Clark POL-0085797
                    and Simon Talbot dated 14 January
                    2020 re: revised audit chapters

42.   POL00088935   Report from Rod Ismay, Head of   POL-0085993
                    Product & Branch Accounting to
                    Dave Smith, Mike Moores and Mike
                    Young regarding dated 2 August
                    2010 "Horizon — Response to
                    Challenges Regarding Systems
                    Integrity"
43.   POL00088209   Report from Angela Van Den          POL-0085267
                    Bogerd dated 1 August 2016"
                    Agent Branch Losses - Mitigation
                    Proposal"
44.   POL00087879   Approach to Business Risk, Branch POL-0084937
                    Audit and Accountancy Support for
                    Operators (undated)

45.   POL00086028   Quality Assurance, Chapter 11 of    POL-0083086
                    the Audit Process Manual (version
                    1.2)
46.   POL00112803   Email from Branch Insights dated   POL-0110222
                    29 November 2019
47.   POL00002841   Global User Accounts Guidance for VIS00003855
                    Sandra McBride dated 01 September
                    2016
48.   POL00085431   Guide to sending reports/documents POL-0082489
                    post audit dated 05 November 2010




                                                                       69
