                                                                                          WITNO8060100
                                                                                     WITNO8060100




                                                       Witness Name: Alvin Finch
                                                       Statement No.: WITNO8060100
                                                       II     (IIf• FTt.]iyZ~Y~C


                         POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




                      FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF ALVIN FINCH




I, Alvin Finch, will say as follows...




INTRODUCTION


   1. I am a former employee of Fujitsu.

   2. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry

       (the "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 30

       January 2023 (the "Request").




BACKGROUND


   3. I have been asked to set out my professional background. Prior to working at

       Fujitsu I worked in the defence and travel industries. A lot of this work was in

       computer communications, I also worked on document and book

       keeping/accounting systems.




                                         Page 1 of 6
                                                                                        WITNO8060100
                                                                                   WITNO8060100




  4. I joined Fujitsu in around 2004 and worked there for about three months

     before leaving. I do not recall my exact job title but it was a support engineer

     of some kind. I spent time with different "experts" of parts of the system. Much

     of the software/techniques employed was similar to previous projects I had

     worked on in other companies.

  5. Due to my short period at Fujitsu I never actually had a proper day-to-day

     role. I was working through different areas that people in the team were

     supporting. This include reading tickets that were coming in and deciding how

     they were to be administered.

  6. I left because I was very uncomfortable working there as I felt there was

     culture of fear. I found myself being bullied by a member of staff and walked

     out of the company.



  KEL system


  7. I have been asked about the KEL system and database. I remember looking

     at this and going over how these records were brought in, categorised and

     distributed to local teams.

  8. I cannot recall whether the KEL system was adequate.

  9. I cannot recall the process a person would follow to search a KEL database to

     determine if a similar error or problem had arisen before. I had started looking

     at this but then I left the company.


PInICL and PEAK systems

  10. I remember these systems but not their names.

  11. I do not remember how service tickets were assigned and prioritised, or when

     they would be considered closed.

                                     Page 2 of 6
                                                                                         WITNO8060100
                                                                                     WITNO8060100




SSC


  12. I believe I was in the SSC during my time at Fujitsu. It was a very strange

      environment. We were told everything had to be fixed as quickly as possible

      in any way that it could. This was because any long-term outages would cost

      money.

  13. 1 felt there was a huge pressure on staff to get things fixed. There was one

      individual in particular who placed a lot of pressure on me. There seemed to a

      priority of short-term fixes over long term solutions. I felt this pressure came

      from the top.

  14. 1 can't remember the structure of the teams in the support services.

  15. 1 don't recall how many people worked on the SSC. I was gradually getting to

      know people before I left.

  16. 1 don't recall the different positions or roles of people on the SSC.

  17. 1 don't recall what qualifications or experience were required to be a member

      of the SSC. I remember a lot of the team seemed to have been there for a

      number of years, having been pulled through from ICL to Fujitsu. There didn't

      seem to be many newer employees. I appeared to be the exception coming

      from the outside. In terms of my own recruitment I just went through an

      interview and was asked about various aspects of the system which I had

      worked on in the past.

  18. 1 never finished the training which would have consisted of working in each

      area of the system before specializing in one.

  19. 1 don't know how members of the SSC were briefed or instructed to carry out

      their work.




                                      Page 3 of 6
                                                                                       WITNO8060100
                                                                                      WITN08060100




   20. 1 don't know about the working relationship between the SSC and other

      teams. I was aware of other parts of the support services but I was not directly

      involved.

   21. I remember there being some contention about the proportion of service

      tickets being referred to the SSC and here being issue of calls being put

      through that shouldn't. However I cannot recall the detail.

Identification and rectification of bugs, errors or defects

   22. I have looked through the bugs listed in Appendix 2 of Bates and others v

      Post Office Limited (No. 6) "Horizon Issues" [2019] EWHC 3408 (QB).

      However, I do not recall or remember any of the bugs listed.

   23. I never got on to any proper bugs fixing. There were bits and pieces people

      went through with me but it was too long ago to remember.

   24. I do not recall the process Fujitsu would follow when a bug, error or defect

      was identified.

   25. I have been asked in what circumstances a work around would be offered to

      an identified bug rather than implementing changes to the Horizon IT System

      code. In the first instance you would look for a work around to keep things

      running, but I can't remember the details.

   26. I can't remember much interaction with SPMs.

   27. 1 don't think there was pressure not to pass information to SPMs in relation to

      potential bugs, errors and defects as such, but we were told to keep things

      confidential.

   28. I don't know if the SSC investigated problems that were suspected to be

      related to third-party software.



                                         Page 4 of 6
                                                                                          WITNO8060100
                                                                                       WITN08060100




   29. I have been asked if I ever felt under pressure to avoid finding bugs, errors

       and defects in the Horizon IT software. It certainly seemed like that. The

       approach was to keep everything going rather than reporting back. There

       seemed to be a pressure to get a fix in and keep going. For overnight

       transactions, there seemed to be an approach of finding a quick fix and

       getting everything working, even though it didn't seem that the issue had been

       resolved.

   30. I have been asked whether any pressure was placed upon me or colleagues

       not to pass information to Post Office in relation to potential bugs, errors and

       defects within the Horizon IT System. I don't know, but the protocol was that

       we kept it confidential within the system.




Remote access


   31. I do not recall anything about remote access.


General


   32. 1 didn't know what happened on the SPM end so I do not know if SPMs had

       access to adequate advice and assistance in how to use the Horizon IT

       System.

   33. I think a cause of the problems experienced in using the Horizon system was

       the worry about keeping the system running at all costs.



Statement of Truth
I believe the content of this statement to be true.




                                        Page 5 of 6
                                        WITNO8060100
                                       WITNO8060100




Signed:_       GRO
Dated:     10-March-2023




                           Page 6of6
