WITN04230100
WITN04230100

Witness Name ; John H Bennett
Statement No.: WITN0423_01
Statement No; 1

Dated; 2nd September 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF JOHN _H BENNETT

1. | have spent my full professional career in the IT Industry . | started as
a programmer in 1966 with English Electric Computers and soon moved into
sales and then sales management with ICL. Following time as a Regional
Customer Services Manager | became Director of an ICL Business Division
before becoming Sales and Marketing Director for ICL (UK) . | became ICL
Director for the Benefits Agency/Post Office Counters business from 1994 to
the beginning of 2000.. After two years as Group Executive Director for

Fujitsu Services | left the company in 2002.

2. | was appointed to lead the sales team bidding for the BA/POCL PFI
contract in 1994. Some two years later the contract was awarded to ICL. ICL
Pathway was established and | was asked to continue on the project as
Managing Director . The PFI contract was substantially modified after three

years and a new service based contract was agreed with the Post Office .
WITN04230100
WITN04230100

The Benefits Agency ceased to be involved from that time. | continued with
ICL Pathway until the beginning of 2000 at which time the service contract
had achieved Acceptance by the Post Office and the national roll out of

computer systems to the Post Office network was underway.

3. | was the ICL sales manager in charge of the team submitting the ICL
bid for the BA/POCL contract. When this original contract was changed a
small team from ICL negotiated the new service contract with the Post Office .

| was not a member of this team.

4. The main aim of the Horizon Project was to bring computerisation to all
the Post Offices in the UK to replace the paper driven systems . All
transactions would be processed through the new system giving both a more
accurate and better service and providing a platform to win new business for
the Post Office Network . For the Benefit Agency there was a need to move to

a more secure, cost effective system with lower levels of fraud.

5. ICL Pathway was dedicated to the contract and all staff were 100%
assigned to this task. The goal was the successful delivery of the system to

the satisfaction of all parties.

6. The procurement started in 1994 and led to a contract with ICL in
1996. The subsequent service contract with the Post Office was agreed in

1999.
7. There was a major challenge in getting full clarity of the specification of
requirements. Due to time pressure within HMG the original PFi contract was
signed by all parties with many items still to be agreed at a future date.
Another key challenge for ICL Pathway was the management of multiple sub
contractors. This included a number of small companies with innovative
products which were critical to the ICL Pathway solution. These companies

required careful management by senior managers in ICL Pathway.

8. Using PFI methodology to define and deliver a complex bespoke IT
system had never been done before (or since) . | was uncertain how this
would work. The subsequent re-negotiated contract with the Post Office was
a more established IT service based contract . The fact that this was
between two parties and not three made for a more manageable
arrangement. At this stage | considered the Horizon Project a complex but

achievable project.

9. All the risks to ICL Pathway were well recorded in a comprehensive
risk register which was regularly reviewed and updated. The Post Office and

the Benefits Agency were involved in this process.

10. The main purpose of the Initial Go Live (IGL) was to pilot the new
systems in a selected number of Post Offices to ensure that all aspects of
implementation were satisfactory. This was the first opportunity to use the
new system in a real environment. Prior to IGL all testing was conducted in -

house in a purpose built test centre.

WITN04230100
WITN04230100
WITN04230100
WITN04230100

11. Although IGL only involved a small number of Post Offices there were
many lessons learnt by all parties and these were carried forward to future

releases for national roll-out.

12. There were regular software releases after IGL which were tightly

controlled and required Post Office agreement to implement.

13. | The comprehensive change control process adopted by ICL Pathway
recorded and tracked all changes applied to the system and required both ICL

and Post Office sign-off.

14. | Anumber of internal audits were carried out by ICL on the ICL
Pathway developments and the recommendations were acted upon. The
most significant independent external audit of the full Horizon Project
(including ICL Pathway, BA and POCL) was undertaken by PA Consulting
Group in October 1997. The HM Treasury Review took place in 1998 which

led to Ministers determining the way forward for the Horizon Project.

15. A major challenge in the preparation for the national roll-out was
dealing with the large scale of the operation. There were 1000's of staff to
train most of whom were not Post Office employees . There were in excess of
17,000 Post Offices most of which were in premises not owned by the Post
Office. The physical condition of these was very variable with very limited

information available . Each office had to be surveyed to determine what
works were needed prior to roll-out. This would lead to physical, electrical and
network programmes of work. All of this had to be carried out with the support
of the Post Office in such a way to minimise the disruption to the ongoing

business.

16. All known errors in the system (hardware, software, documentation,
process, procedures, training, etc) were logged, monitored and corrective
actions agreed. Each subsequent release would implement fixes as agreed

with the Post Office.

17. Some of the delays to the Horizon Project were caused by the
incomplete or missing specifications in the original PFI contract. There was a
substantial delay in HMG awarding the contract due to its scope and
complexity . HMG was under pressure to stop further procurement delays and
this led to the contract being placed with numerous areas left for future
agreement . Many of these were of course difficult to resolve and required

considerable effort and time to address by all parties.

18. Some of the delays to the Horizon Project were caused by issues and
technical problems within ICL Pathway. Extra resources were employed

within ICL Pathway to bring these delays under control.

19. Some of the delays to the Horizon Project were due to the difficulties
and complexities with the key systems being developed by POCL and the BA

(particularly CAPS). All these systems had to work together with those being

WITN04230100
WITN04230100
WITN04230100
WITN04230100

developed by ICL Pathway in order to deliver the end to end requirements of

the Horizon Project.

20 ~All these delays were of serious concern to everyone. and confidence

in the timely delivery of the Horizon Project was badly effected.

21 These delays impacted the business case of all parties. For ICL
Pathway there was a substantial cost base with large numbers of staff,
extensive accommodation and equipment investments. The structure of the
original contract allowed for no revenue returns until the system was fully
accepted, installed and delivering a flow of transactions through the Post

Office network.

22.. ICL continued to provide all the funds and resources to ICL Pathway to
allow it to fulfil its contracted obligations and to make a success of the
project. All suggestions that ICL Pathway was in breach of contract were

firmly rejected.

23. ICL Pathway was not involved in the decision making process which
led to DSS _ withdrawing from the project. DSS staff had made it clear for
quite some time that they viewed the payment of benefits directly to claimants
through the UK banking system to be a viable and cost effective alternative to

the contracted arrangements with the Post Office.

24. |The DSS withdrawal removed considerable complexity from the
WITN04230100
WITN04230100

project. It allowed ICL Pathway to focus its attention on to the requirements of
just one client, the Post Office. This led the way to a restructured contract . All
this meant that the project became more viable both from a technical and

management point of view

25. | HMG conducted a series of wide ranging reviews of all the issues
leading to the cancellation of the Benefit Payment Card system. This included

input from ICL. These reports should be available to the Inquiry.

26 =A small team from ICL and ICL Pathway was established to negotiate
the restructured contract with the Post Office. | was not a member of this

team.

27. The roll-out of Horizon was a huge undertaking. This required
extensive and thorough planning and a large number of resources from both
ICL Pathway and the Post Office. Each of the 17,000 Post Offices had its own
plan covering site preparation, training, equipment and network deliveries, go-
live support teams, post installation support and helpdesks dealing with

equipment, software, applications, documentation and procedures.
28 Atall times the Post Office was the ultimate authority on all aspects of
Acceptance and roll-out. All ICL Pathway activities needed to have explicit

agreement from the Post Office.

29. The process of resolving incidents , whether hardware, software,
documentation, process, training, etc, was as expected very busy during the
early days of roll-out. This lead to adjustments of the timescales of the

national roll-out.

30. Throughout the roll-out the Post Office had full visibility of ICL
Pathway's key activities including all the incident recording and resolution

processes.

31. Installing new computer system in over 17,000 Post Offices was a
highly complex and resource demanding operation for both ICL Pathway and
the Post Office. Both parties worked closely together to achieve this and there
was a collective view that the key objectives were being achieved. As in the
early days of any major IT project there were a range of incidents and

problems requiring constant and professional attention by all parties.

32. There was a finite limit to the resources and expertise available for the
delivery of the Horizon Project . At no time was it considered that these were

not up to the challenges faced.

33.  Atall times during the project ICL Pathway reported directly to the CEO
of ICL ( Keith Todd and then Richard Christou) who personally attended and
reviewed progress and provided a corporate oversight of the work undertaken

by ICL Pathway..

34 Fujitsu HQ in Tokyo took a close interest in the Horizon Project and

WITN04230100
WITN04230100
placed a highly qualified and dedicated team to work alongside ICL Pathway.
This team attended and contributed to all internal project and management

meetings. They reported regularly to their Fujitsu management in Tokyo.

35. The Post Office were determined to succeed with the Horizon Project
since it was not practical to continue to run such a wide and diverse estate of
Post Offices on what was basically a paper driven system. There had been
earlier attempts at delivering IT solutions but none of these had progressed

beyond limited pilots.

36. | Throughout the period from procurement to roll-out ICL Pathway had
operated on an open and transparent management approach. All project
processes and outcomes were rigorously recorded and shared as appropriate
with all levels of management both within ICL Pathway itself and more widely

in ICL, Fujitsu and the Post Office.

37. The Post Office Horizon Project was a challenging and exciting
business venture for ICL. It was an opportunity to exploit and develop its skill
base and to grow its reputation in the field of large and demanding IT

services.

WITN04230100
WITN04230100
WITN04230100
WITN04230100

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true

10
