                                                                                              WITNO6620100
                                                                                             WITNO6620100




                                                     Witness Name: Tina Louise Jordan
                                                     Statement No.: WITNO6620100
                                                     Dated: I 1/5/202-3


                           POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




                FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF TINA LOUISE JORDAN




    I, TINA LOUISE JORDAN, will say as follows.. .




    INTRODUCTION


       1. I worked for Post Office between 1984 and 2016 as a counter clerk, ABM

          (1996-1998), BM (1998-2013), auditor and trainer (2013-2016). Horizon

          training was basic, and I learned as I went along over several years until I was

          regarded as a go-to person by other BMs and trainers/auditors to problem

          solve.




    BACKGROUND

                                              counter I was expected to    find any
      2. To begin with, whilst working or the

          discrepancies as part of my role. I didn't experience any issues with balancing

                                                   always told it was our mistake as
         that I attributed to Horizon as we were

         Horizon couldn't possibly be wrong.



                                          Page 1 of 4



I
                                                                                                            WITN06620100
                                                                                                           WITN06520100




                3. The first time I absolutely knew there was a problem was when I was the BM

                   at Newbury PO. I really cannot remember much of the details, but it was

                   something to do with a rem in. I used to rem in the stock and then transfer out

                   to individual stock units. This was done in my own BM stock unit, which was

                   used for little else, transfers of cash and stock, bulk transactions, that sort of

                   thing. When I did my weekly balance, I was several thousand pounds out. I

                   looked for it and rang our helpline to report the discrepancy. I remember

                   having to chase it as nothing was done and I knew I couldn't possibly be that

                   much out. I decided to pull of several reports on Horizon, including the whole

                   weeks' transactions, rems in and out. I spent hours and hours proving every

                   entry on my weekly balance to no avail. I then started checking the addition

                   on some of the reports and even though I'd remmed in and transferred out

                    stamps correctly, there was a discrepancy between the stamps I had on hand,

                    what then left on hand. It took weeks of ringing the helpline before an error

    ---------       notice was issued to correct the issue.

                4. I then started working for the audit/training team and was often asked if

                   Horizon could be wrong by Subpostmasters and I always said no, as I had

                   only had this one definite issue myself over many years. I used to try and help

                   Subpostmasters by looking for issues if it was fairly recent or advising them to

                   contact the helpline. I sometimes found errors but often didn't.

                                                                                        overview and
                5. I always felt the training I delivered was very basic — it gave an

                   balancing was practiced during the classroom training several times, but it

                                                                                                training
                   wasn't at all helpful at troubleshooting and problem solving. In-branch
                                                                   individual branch. If you are shown
                   was dependant on the transactions at that
                                                                    remember what you were shown
                   how to do something a few times, you won't


     a,f.
                                                     Page 2 of 4
e
                                                                                                 WITN06620100
                                                                                               VVITN06620100




         if it takes months to be relevant — if it takes ages for
                                                                    a balance discrepancy,
         the balancer won't have a clue where to look for it. it
                                                                    was then dependant on
         how pushy the Subpostmaster was at asking for help
                                                                     and chasing a response.
         That's about it as far as support went. To be fair, by the time I was training,

         there were fewer and simpler transactions in the majority of branches, so it

         shouldn't have been an issue. It's the bigger branches that seemed to

         struggle more. The smaller branches that struggled were when a new

         Subpostmaster really wasn't up to the job and were left to fail despite me

         raising concerns.

      6. I felt sorry for some postmasters — the ones who seemed conscientious and

         cared about what was happening to their business. However, as an auditor,

         was often told by subpostmasters that there was an issue with Horizon and

        they were tens of thousand of pounds short and it couldn't possibly be a

        mistake, and yet they were inaccurate, didn't balance every week and didn't

        have prescribed security processes in place — not all subpostmasters are

        honest and would jump on the bandwagon. A couple of branches spring to

        mind but there would be others I can't now recall. Wild Riding in Bracknell was

        one branch I thought was dishonest but blamed Horizon. Barton Stacey was a

        branch which blamed Horizon but was incompetent despite training and

        support given several times, around balancing and mobile vans.

  7. To summarise, I think the training was a "one size fits all" package which

       would be ok for most small branches but not the larger ones or ono with
                                                                                         GRO
       complex transactiorior lots of transactions. Some of the subpostmasters
GRo
       weren't up to the job and some were dishonest, but most were honest — some




                                         Page 3 of 4
                                                                                      WITN06620100
                                                                                     WITN06620100




       of those weren't knowledgeable to insist help and support was given via the

       helpline.


Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed: J          G   RO


Dated:      \   )   6 j 29 2~




                                         Page 4 of 4
