                                                                                   WI TN04790200
                                                                                 WITNO4790200




                                             Witness Name: Philip Kevin Boardman

                                                      Statement No.: WITN0479 02

                                                                        Exhibits: Nil

                                                          Dated: 8 November 2022

                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




       SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF PHILIP KEVIN BOARDMAN




I, MR PHILIP KEVIN BOARDMAN, will say as follows:

1. This witness statement is made to clarify and supplement my first witness

   statement dated 4 August 2022 (First Witness Statement).

2. Having again reviewed one of the exhibits to the First Witness Statement, titled

   'End to End Re-Architecture Feasibility Study Business Requirements' dated 21

   February 2003 (WITN0479_01/1), I wish to make changes to paragraphs 19 to 21

   of the First Witness Statement as set out below. To illustrate these changes, any

   additions I have made to the First Witness Statement are shown in bold and

   underlined, and any deletions are bold and struck through.

      19.   At the time I was engaged to work on the Programme, it was explained to

            me that the key driver for the Programme was Post Office's business

            needs following a decision by various government departments, which

            included Inland Revenue and the Department for Work and Pensions

            (DWP)L concerning the payment of benefits. These drivers were explained

            by Stephen Hirst, Post Office's Finance Director/Chief Financial Officer

            and Sue Harding, Post Office's overall manager for the Programme, in

            initial meetings.


                                    Page 1 of 2
                                                                                        WI TN04790200
                                                                                      WITNO4790200




         20.   The DWP and other various __government departments paid benefits by

               issuing weekly Giro cheques to benefits recipients, which could be

               retrieved at Post Office branches. The —DWPThese government

               departments would also advance the funds that were required for Post

               Office to pay out the Giro cheques issued to benefits recipients, which

               provided Post Office with a source of cash flow. Post Office also relied in

               part on the footfall of these customers for its business.

         21.   The DWP and other various government departments had decided to

               stop paying benefits by issuing Giro cheques to benefits recipients, and

               would instead pay benefits directly into recipients' bank accounts. WM

               DWPThese _-government departments had also decided to cease itsthe

               practice of pre-paying Post Office the funds needed to pay benefits

               recipients. Instead, the DWPDepartment of Trade and Industry (DTI)

               would allow Post Office to take out a loans from the DWPDTI on

               commercial terms and at commercial interest rates, for which they would

               require   a   robust statement         of cash holding      as   security

               (WITN0479 01/1).



Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.



Signed:
                   GRO
Dated:             8th November 2022




                                        Page 2 of 2
