WITNO0650103

WITNESS: SEEMA MISRA

STATEMENT NO: WITNO065_01

EXHIBIT: WITNO065_01/3

EXHIBIT 3

The following documentation comprises the exhibit referenced as exhibit 3

in the witness statement of Mrs Seema Misra referenced WITNO065_01.
WITN00650103

22/02/2022, 12:07 Postmaster, 45, cries as the High Court quashes her criminal conviction | Daily Mail Online
Privacy Policy |Feedback [JESISUEEI Tuesday, Feb 22nd 2022 (2PM 12°C 3PM 11° 5-Day Forecast
Mail Online
Home U.S. | Sport | TV&Showbiz | Australia | Femail | Health | Science | Money | Video | Travel | Best Buys | Discounts
ADVERTISEMENT

Postmaster, 45, cries as the High Court 9% 9v°|Ene:yoursearen
quashes her criminal conviction for sovemeevet

theft and false accounting which saw

her jailed when she was pregnant

+ Seema Misra served four months of a 15-month sentence in 2011 while pregnant
+ She was suspended from her post office she ran in West Byfleet, Surrey in 2008
+ She was convicted of theft and false accounting which has finally been quashed

+ Ms Misra will speak to lawyers about filing a claim for malicious prosecution

By ANTONIA HOYLE FOR THE DAILY MAIL
PUBLISHED: 00:25, 24 April 2021 | UPDATED: 01:52, 24 April 2021

8 2

shares View comments

Sitting in the High Court as her name was read out yesterday, it took Seema Misra a
few moments to compute that her criminal conviction had finally been quashed.

Only after her eyes met with other sub-postmasters and her social media feed
revealed the news did she allow it to sink in. Then, tears fell.

‘It was very important that | came to court and heard it from the judges myself, after
waiting so long, but it didn't feel real at first. | wanted to double check,’ says Mrs
Misra, 45, who served four months of a 15-month sentence in 2011, while pregnant,
after being wrongly convicted of theft and false accounting.

‘| felt a mixture of emotions. Happy and grateful, but also angry and betrayed that
this happened and that it has taken so many years for my name to be cleared.’

Follow
Dally Mail

Sylvie Gatrill dead:
Bread, Brookside and
The Responder actress
passes away aged 70
following cancer battle
as tributes pour in for
‘beautiful’ star

https:/www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-9506003/Postmaster-45-cries-High-Court-quashes-criminal-conviction.htm!
2102/2022, 12:07 Postmaster, 45, cries as the High Court quashes her criminal conviction | Daily Mail Online

| Ae iN a

© Bradley Page AVIS AB)
Sitting in the High Court as her name was read out yesterday, it took Seema Misra a few
moments to compute that her criminal conviction had finally been quashed

She feels vindicated not only by the verdict but the finding the Post Office withheld
information that would have given her and the 38 other sub-postmasters whose
convictions were quashed a fair trial.

‘They did this deliberately,’ says Mrs Misra, who ran a post office in West Byfleet,
Surrey.

‘They played with people's lives. Those at the Post Office who knew what was going
on should go to prison.’

esterday’s ruling sleep did
with taxi driver husban:

asily for Mrs Misra, who lives in nearby
1 and sons/
J

"Every half hour I'd have a nightmare that | didn't hear my alarm, or missed my train,’
she says. '| knew we'd get justice. But it shouldn't have taken this long.’

Next week she will speak to lawyers about filing a claim for malicious prosecution.
Yet no compensation will make up for her family’s financial ruin, let alone the
emotional hell they endured.

Before yesterday's ruling sleep didn't come easily for Mrs Misra, who lives in nearby Knaphill
with taxi di } Mrs Misra and

>it wasn't sexual
harassment’: John
Barrowman defends
exposing himself on
Doctor Who set and hits
‘out at cancel culture for
“trying to strip my
career after 35 years’

> Kate Garraway reveals
she has to get up every
two hours to help care
for husband Derek
Draper and changes his
bed linen SEVEN times
aday

oti Mabuse QUITS
Strictly! BBC
professional dancer
confirms departure after
seven years as she
focuses on talent show
Judge roles on rival ITV
channel

Cruz Beckham's debut
cover shoot taken aged
46 is slammed for its
‘disgusting double
standards’ as shirtless
teen poses in his
underwear

> sparkling infinity
pools, swim-up bars
and cliff-top hideaway:
What does it take to
make YOUR summer
holiday the dreamiest

yet?
‘AD FEATURE

> Kate Garraway
accompanied Covid-
stricken husband Derek
Draper to Mexico for
treatment - and explains
he would die in three
days without care

[ Dragons*
Den star Steven Bartlett
in relationship with
French entrepreneur
Melanie Vaz Lopes after
flying 22 hours to Bali to
declare his love for her

Little Mix's Perrie
Edwards shares
heartwarming snaps of
her son Axel as he tums
six months old

Sweet

audience today as she
continues to suffer with
‘cold-like' Covid
‘symptoms - but palace
says she'll continue
light duties

How to look after your
gut: From what to eat to
when to exercise, as
well as the digestive
health products that
really CAN help

https:/www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-9506003/Postmaster-45-cries-High-Court-quashes-criminal-conviction.htm!

WITNO0650103
22/02/2022, 12:07
are pictured together above

‘No amount of money can make up for the struggle | went through,’ says Mrs Misra,
who was suspended from her post office in 2008 after auditors found a £74,609
shortfall she couldn't explain.

Her conviction has cast a shadow over every aspect of her life since her week-long
trial at Guildford Crown Court in October 2010 saw her imprisoned while eight
weeks pregnant with

Arespectable woman so ashamed of her conviction she begged a prison officer to

hide her handcuffs with their coat as she was led away to jail, she would have
considered suicide, were it not for the new life growing inside her.

She gave birth two months after her release, on tag, after which the shame of her
conviction made life unbearable.

‘People stopped talking to us,’ she says, while Mr Misra adds: 'I was beaten up and
called a 'f***ing P*ki, coming to this country and stealing old people's money.’

They moved house but Mrs Misra, who developed depression, still felt unable to
show her face at the school gates. '| assumed everyone knew, and they weren't
talking to me because | was a criminal.’

She feels vindicated not only by the verdict but the finding the Post Office withheld
information that would have given her and the 38 other sub-postmasters whose convictions
were quashed a fair trial

She didn't throw a birthday party for her youngest son for eight years. '| didn't want
everyone to know that} GRO} mum was the one who went to prison,’ she explains.

Mrs Misra, who sold the post office for less than half the price she paid, started
helping her husband run his taxi firm. But while she was in prison, Mr Misra had to
single-parent and the business floundered. The couple's second property in London
had already been seized to pay off the missing money.

Even on her release, Mrs Misra was unable to get work because of her conviction.
Once a financial controller in the City, she says: 'I thought I'd be able to become an
Uber driver, but couldn't. When | applied for funds to do courses to re-enter the
financial industry | wasn't allowed.’

Even the most mundane activities caused pain. ‘Whenever | filled out a form for
something like car insurance I'd have to state my conviction. It brought the bad
memories back.’

SHARE THIS RELATED ARTICLES

Postmaster, 45, cries as the High Court quashes her criminal conviction | Daily Mail Online

> AD FEATURE

ADVERTISEMENT

py’ as
he adjusts to living at a
specialist college in
documentary trai

Lottie Moss posts
more sexy bikini selfies

Kate is ‘mortified’ by her
behaviour

Iwas scared of losing
myself: Zoe Hardman,
39, reflects on the ‘dark
days’ of going through
‘early menopause as she
details importance of
talking about the
subject

alice Evans issues
rambling apology for
being absent on Cameo
after giving herself an
‘embarrassing’ black
eye - as she seeks full
custody of her kids with
loan Gruffudd

inside Lydia Bright's
incredible farm-themed
second birthday party
for daughter Loretta as
doting mum pulls out all
the stops with a
miniature pony

Dancing On Ice's Sally
Dynevor anticipates lift

carries a pillow after

https:/www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-9506003/Postmaster-45-cries-High-Court-quashes-criminal-conviction.htm!

WITNO0650103
22/02/2022, 12:07
ARTICLE

| Compensation bill for

FF Amazon plans to open
postmasters whose

dozens of NO cash
‘Amazon Fresh’...

Postmaster, 45, cries as the High Court quashes her criminal conviction | Daily Mail Online

> surviving the dreaded
skate-off

During her trial she refused to plead guilty. She assumed justice would prevail, but
thinks racism was partly to blame for her conviction at the hands of an all-white jury.

‘The court documents read 'The Queen vs Seema Misra.’ It played with people's
emotions. Why would people believe the Asian lady over the Queen?’ she says.

So contentious has the case been that Mrs Misra wants to thank her barrister, Paul
Marshall, 'who has found himself unjustifiably pursued by the Post Office for
releasing documents that they themselves made public in 2013’.

Last night, there was champagne. But Mrs Misra will cherish the everyday changes
most.

‘All those forms | had to fill in stating my conviction,’ she says quietly. '| won't have to
do that any more.’

Share or comment on this article: Postmaster, 45, cries as the High Court quashes
her criminal conviction

>Dr Alex George says

his late brother Liyr's

21st birthday was ‘hard’

as he tells his followers

‘there is always hope for
day’

> strictly star Nadiya
Bychkova's ex-fiancé
‘launches bid to win her
back’ after she returns
home following Kai
Widdrington romance

Argent, 34, and Anthea
Turner, 61, shock
viewers as they bump-
and-grind on new show
The Real Dirty Dancing

>*1 am Fundoni
Madonna, 63, slips into
a racy sheer shirt and
displays her VERY
youthful complexion as
she shreds on the
electric guitar in fun clip

ADVERTISEMENT

Comments 2
‘Share what you think

Add your comment

{

l Oldest 1 Bestrated__[___Worstrated

]

The comments below have been moderated in advance.

Loading.

The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of
MailOnline.

We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Jane Seymour stuns in
a slinky red dress as
she leads the celebrity
arrivals at the premiere
of her latest movie
Ruby's Choice in
Sydney

https:/www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-9506003/Postmaster-45-cries-High-Court-quashes-criminal-conviction.htm!

WITNO0650103
