                                                                                      WI TNO5060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




                                                Witness Name: Michael John Wilcox
                                                Statement No.: WITNO5060100
                                                Dated: 26 October 2023


                       POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




            FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF MICHAEL JOHN WILCOX




I, Michael John Wilcox will say as follows.




Introduction


  1.    I am a former employee of Post Office Ltd. and (apart from 18 months), held

        various positions within the business between 5 th February 1973 until I

        retired on 28th January 2022. The roles I undertook during this period are

        shown in detail below.


  2.    This statement is provided in response to the Rule 9 Request dated 6th

        October 2023 to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry in relation to

        criminal prosecution case studies.


  Background


  3.    My roles with the post office are as follows:


        •      5th February 1973 — 1975. Telegram Messenger Boy.


                                      Page 1 of 45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WI TNO5060100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WI TN05060100




•   1975 — 1979. Employed as a counter clerk. (Mainly at St Andrews

    Cross Crown Office in Plymouth). This involved general customer

    service and end of week balancing.

•   1979 —1985. Employed on "writing duties" in the Head Office covering

    such duties as:
    r
                                                                                                                                                                                     Involved compiling Cash Account reconciliation
        ------------------




                                                   r




                                                       -----------------------------------------------------




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ------------
                             Accounts
    I                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                             Branch:                                                                                                                                                 for the Head Office with the associated counter

                                                                                                                                                                                     transactions from St Andrews Cross Crown

                                                                                                                                                                                     office.
    I                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                           I




                             Remittance                                                                                                                                              Despatching cash / stock remittances and
    r




                               -




                                   -




                                       -




                                           -




                                               -




                                                   r




                                                                                                               -------------------------------------------------------------------




    I                                              I
                             Unit:                                                                                                                                                   receiving inward remittances from Post Offices.

                                               _-
                             Counter                                                                                                                                                 This involved the administration work for the
    I                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                             Services              ;                                                                                                                                 Sub Post Office network in Devon and Cornwall

                             Branch:                                                                                                                                                 area. (Remuneration, Annual Leave, Audits and


    L                                                                                                                                                                                Recruitment).



•   1985 — 1989. Auditor. Duties were as directed by my Line Manager.

    Responsible for undertaking audits either alone or as part of a team,

    and training new Sub Postmasters, within the Devon and Cornwall

    area.

•   1989 — September 1997. Promoted to Audit Manager in 1989:

    Responsible for managing a team of auditors covering Devon and

    Cornwall, programming audits and arranging the resource for new




                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 45
                                                                                WI TN05060100
                                                                            WI TN05060100




    Sub Postmaster training. Overseeing the closures and transfers of

    offices to new Sub postmasters.

•   September 1997 — January 2011. Investigation Manager. (Other

    names Security Manager, Fraud Advisor, or Investigator). The role

    involved investigating possible criminal offences against the Post

    Office or its clients. The role also involved giving advice or assistance

    to Crown Office Managers and Sub Postmasters who were

    experiencing "balance problems", presenting loss prevention and

    security advice (by way of a PowerPoint presentation) at Crown Office

    meetings and regional NFSP meetings. Depending on the job title/role

    at the time, I have also dealt with Physical Security Issues, Robbery

    and Burglary liaison with Police and Bravery Award recognition.

•   January 2011. Reluctantly took redundancy due to a business

    reorganisation which resulted in my "office base" being moved from

    Plymouth to Swindon.

•   March 2011 — September 2012. Relief Post Office manager with

    Martin McColl's: Covering for Post Office managers who were on

    leave or sick. Conducting audits and undertaking training of new staff.

•   September 2012 — March 2014. (Administration and accounting work

    at a local school).

•   March 2014 — September 2016. Network Transformation Manager:

    After the statutory 3 years break since my redundancy, I was allowed

    to return to the Post Office and was made aware of vacancies within

    this area-based team. As such I was part of the transformation project

    team which assisted with the relocation of Post Offices into retail


                            Page 3 of 45
                                                                                        WI TN05060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




          outlets or transform offices on site to a new working model (Local or

          Mains office). This was meant to be a 12-month contract which lasted

          2 '/% years.

     •    September 2016 — 28th January 2022. Part time manager / counter

          clerk at a local Sub Post Office: Counter service, balancing and

          general managerial roles. From 2020 to January 2022 I was involved

          in counter work only, due to a full-time manager being employed.


     •    Total of 47.5 years Post Office service. 41.5 years working with Post

          Office accounts.


4.   In relation to my role as an Investigation Manager the details are set out

     below.


5.   My transformation from Audit to Investigation was triggered by a business

     review and reorganisation in 1997. I was at the time, an Audit Manager in

     Plymouth. The review was going to split the Post Office into Royal Mail and

     Post Office Counters. This had a knock-on effect for the old Post Office

     Investigation Department (POID). The POID historically dealt with

     investigating problems with both mail (Postal staff) and counter clerks

     regarding financial matters. The split meant that there would be very little (if

     any) "expertise", in the security team, regarding Post Office accounts. I had

     been working in audit for 12 years and other accounting roles for 10 years

     prior to that. (All prior to HORIZON). As such I was approached and asked

     to apply for the role of Investigation Manager.




                                   Page 4 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




6.   I recall attending a training course prior to taking up the post, as there was

     a "National Training event" taking place in Croydon. Over the course of my

     time in the "Security Team", as an investigator I attended various training

     courses including refresher courses and ad hoc meetings / training events

     when any new legislation was introduced, which would affect my role.

     Courses attended were as follows:


     •    INVESTIGATION AWARENESS WORKSHOP - August 1997 (2 days)

     •    SUSPECTED OFFENDER INTERVIEW WORKSHOP — March 1999

          (5 days)

     •    WITNESS INTERVIEW WORKSHOP - April 1999 (3 days)

     •    SEARCH AWARENESS COURSE - December 1999 (2 days)

     •    PROSECUTION PROCESS COURSE — March 2002 (2 days)

     •    AUDIT & INVESTIGATOR COURSE FOR HORIZON (1 day course

          delivered by ICL Pathway).

     •    On 26th August 1999, I became a member of the International Institute

          of Security, following the completion of course 137 of the International

          Professional Security Association. (IPSA).

     •    In June 2005 I obtained a City & Guilds NVQ level 4 in Investigation.

     •    I also on at least 2 occasions took part (or sat in on) new Sub

          Postmaster and staff, classroom training sessions for HORIZON. This

          was dependant on space availability.

7.   I understood my role to involve investigating possible criminal offences

     against the business or its clients. To include protecting the integrity of the

     business. The role would include undertaking interviews (under caution or



                                   Page 5 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




     otherwise), undertaking searches, analysis of data and the preparation of

     reports for senior management, Solicitors office and Contracts manager. I

     would also be required to give and obtain witness statements and prepare

     papers in the case of any court proceedings. Away from any criminal

     investigation I was also required to give assistance to Crown offices and

     Sub Postmasters regarding loss reduction and security issues. All

     investigations would be conducted, taking into consideration, the rules of

     Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE 1984), and the Criminal

     Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (CPIA 1996), Regulation of

     Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA 2000), Data Protection and Human

     Rights Acts 1998. The official policy is detailed at (POL00031008).



8.   During my time in the Investigation Team my line managers, as I recall were

     Geoff Hall (when a Regional Team with the Headquarters in Bristol). Then

     when the team became a National team, my Line Managers were Dave

     Posnett, Paul Whittaker, Ged Harbinson and finally Jason Collins.



9.   From the time I started working in Investigation I was always a "lone worker"

     based initially in a room in a Crown Office then later in the Security Suite in

     the Mail Centre, both in Plymouth. Initially (prior to HORIZON) my manager

     was based in Bridgewater some 80 miles away and my nearest colleagues

     were based in either Bristol or Bournemouth some 125 miles away. Latterly

     the Head Office and my line manager were both based in London some 250

     miles away. I did not therefore have the opportunity to work within a group,

     on a day-by-day basis, like some of the teams. I therefore did not, on a daily


                                   Page 6 of 45
                                                                                       WI TN05060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




     or weekly basis, "associate" with many of the National Team. When I

     needed, or someone else needed a second officer then it would normally

     be Gary Thomas (Bournemouth) as my first port of call. On the occasions

     that I did work or meet other members of the team (meetings etc). I found

     them to be very pleasant and mainly very experienced. Of the people I

     conducted investigations with I found them to be competent and

     professional. The only time I had any disagreement with colleagues, was at

     a senior management level and was in connection with my annual

     performance     assessment     for   2008-2009.     I   do   not   recall   any

     "disagreements" with colleagues regarding work or work ethics.


10. Throughout my time in the investigation team, my only role in disciplinary

     matters would be if I had taken part in an investigation and there was no

     evidence of a criminal offence but did show that there were failings in control

     or security. Then a report would be prepared for the relevant person. This

     report would highlight the failings identified, the person responsible for the

     failings (if known) and any recommendations to correct the failings. A

     discipline report would also be prepared for the contract's manger / retail

     line when a criminal offence was discovered, and legal proceedings could

     follow. Once the discipline report was issued, I would have no further input

     to any decision regarding disciplinary action taken.


11. Interviewing persons accused or suspected of a criminal offence was part

     of my role as an investigator. Interviews were conducted in accordance with

     PACE 1984 Codes of Practice. Most of the taped interviews I conducted

     were voluntary attendees, i.e. suspects who were not under arrest, and the


                                   Page 7 of 45
                                                                                 WI TNO5060100
                                                                             WI TN05060100




interview would be conducted at a mutually agreeable venue (sometimes

prearranged). On occasions, if it were necessary for the Police to assist in

an arrest or search then the suspect would be arrested and interviewed at

a Police station. If anyone being interviewed required, or attended with a

solicitor then full pre-disclosure would be given before the commencement

of any interview. We used a standard crib sheet during interviews as

reminders of procedures and questions. This was so a set format could be

followed for standardisation, across the team, of casework papers and

reports and also assisted with the correct PACE guidelines. The crib sheet

would set out (from memory) reminders such as:


•    Explaining what would happen during the interview.

•    Opening tapes in front of interviewee and solicitor if present.

•    Introductions of persons present for the benefit of the tape.

•    Caution and checking the understanding of the caution.

•    Explanation of Legal Rights and the rights to a friend being present

     (Friend not applicable at a Police Custody Suite).

•    Points to cover during interview. i.e., background, experience, training,

     staffing and role at the office.

•    Conclusion of the interview and signing and sealing of the tapes.

•    Anything else which needed to be covered under the interviewing

     section of PACE 1984.

Dependent on the outcome of the interview, reports for Legal Services and

the Discipline Manager would be prepared if necessary.




                              Page 8 of 45
                                                                                         WI TN05060100
                                                                                     WI TN05060100




12. As far as I recall there were several forms which had to be completed as

      part of a trial bundle if it was going to proceed to a court trial. One of which

      was for the disclosure of evidence, one was for the disclosure of unused

      material, and one was for disclosing any documentation that may harm the

      prosecution and help the defence, CS006C, CS006D and CS006E.


13.   These forms were completed by the Investigator (when no plea or a not

      guilty plea was given at the first hearing). The summary forms would not be

      completed for a first hearing, but Legal Services would copy all disclosure

      material to the defence prior to a hearing. Disclosure documentation in a

      prosecution bundle bore the name of that investigator as the Disclosure

      Officer.


14. I do not recall taking part in any disclosure matters specifically for civil

      proceedings.


15. I was not involved in any type of Litigation Case Strategy, and it would be

      fair to say I wouldn't really know what that involved. I assume my Offender

      report and / or evidence would be used to support a case.


16. Part of our Security (Investigation) Team objectives was to "Ensure the

      personal delivery of all operational casework to time". As I recall, I think we

      were tasked with submitting an offender report (Red Label Case) within 10

      days of interview. This report would be sent to the Casework Management

      Team for Compliance and correctness checks, and I believe it then went to

      Legal Services for advice on any charges, if the case was deemed to have

      sufficient evidence. Once the report had been submitted by me (and


                                    Page 9 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5060100
                                                                                 WI TN05060100




     therefore my objective target met), I would not generally need to liaise with

     other Post Office departments in respect of the progress of the case. There

     may be, on occasions that just before my 1 to 1 meeting with my Line

     Manager, I would contact Legal Services for an update on specific cases so

     that I could feed back the progress during my meeting. This would also

     allow me to update the Contracts Manager I Retail Line of any

     developments as per the previously mentioned Team Objective under the

     subheading "Sufficient Stakeholder Engagement". I cannot recall if

     Casework Management or Legal Services had timescales to deal with

     cases, but if they did, I would have been conscious of this and chase them

     up if getting close to any deadline set. I believe there was a central

     database, probably accessed by the Casework Management Team to track

     the progress of cases.


The Security Teams Role in relation to criminal investigations and

prosecutions.


17. In respect of the organisational structure of the Security Team, to the best

     of my knowledge I can confirm that during my employment with The Post

     Office, specifically between 1979 and 2011 I witnessed many business

     reorganisations:


     •    Initially the head office was based in Plymouth.

     •    There was a reorganisation to move the business into Regional Areas

          and my head office was moved to Torquay. (Circa 1990)

     •    Reorganisation again and head office moved to Bristol.



                                  Page 10 of 45
                                                                                         WI TNO5060100
                                                                                     WI TN05060100




      •    Further reorganisation and head office moved to London.

      •    Name changes from Post Office to Post Office Counters to Consignia,

           back to Post Office Counters then as it is now Post Office Ltd.


18. As previously explained, being a lone worker in Plymouth I was away from

      the daily hustle and bustle of the head office and didn't interact with the

      wider Security Team. I was not totally on top of who did what except for the

      people I had direct contact with or who I reported to. In all fairness I was

      just interested in doing my job to the best of my ability and didn't really need

      to know who did what outside of my strand. There was however a database

      on the Security Intranet site which I could access if there was ever a need

      to find out such information... i.e., Physical Security problems.


19.   There were 2 teams of investigators which made up the National Team.

      was in the South Team with possibly 5 other investigators (who were based

      in Bournemouth, Eastleigh, Croydon and Brighton). The North team (I think

      had 8 members) and were based in other areas like Sheffield, Liverpool,

      Scotland and Northern Ireland. The structure and the role of the security

      team changed many times including our job titles. I was at any one stage a

      Fraud Adviser, Investigation Manager, Investigator, Security Manager and

      probably many more.


20. As such my job description changed and at times as well as being

      responsible for Criminal Investigations, I was also responsible for Physical

      Security at Post Offices. This involved inspections at Post Office outlets and

      liaison with the Police regarding external crime.



                                    Page 11 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5060100
                                                                                    WI TN05060100




21. I am aware that within my strand of the security team, I had a line manager

      who I reported directly to. There was then a casework team and a Financial

      Investigation team. There were several senior managers with different roles

      which I cannot recall. At the time of my leaving in 2011 the Head of Security

      was John Scott. The security team consisted of 5 strands. Besides the fraud

      strand the one I may have had communication with the most was the

      physical security strand.


22. In respect of my involvement in the development of any Post Office Policy

      I can confirm that I had no direct input into the development or management

      of any of the security policies on the security database. As previously

      stated, there existed on the intranet a security database in which all security

      policies were stored. These were accessible to anyone in the security team.

      I recall that whenever any changes or new policies were introduced, due to

      a change in legislation etc, then all team members would receive

      notification of such changes and I believe there was a system for "flagging

      up" when you had accessed and acknowledged the new policy document.


23. Any changes to policy which directly affected our day-to-day routine would

      also be communicated and discussed at local and national team meetings.


24.   The main legislations that governed the conduct of Investigations whilst I

      worked there, as I recall, were:


      •    Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 Codes of Practice. (PACE)

      •    Criminal Procedures and Investigation Act 1996. (CPIA)

      •    Data Protection Act 1998. (DPA)


                                   Page 12 of 45
                                                                                    WI TN05060100
                                                                                WI TN05060100




      •    Human Rights Act 1998. (HRA)

      •    Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. (RIPA)

      •    Health & Safety at Work 1999. (HAS)

25. Any complaints regarding the conduct of an investigator during an enquiry

      would be dealt with by following the guidelines in "Procedures & Standards

      — Standards of Behaviour and Complaints Procedure dated October 2007".

      (POL00104806). I had no staff to manage and as such I would not have got

      involved in any complaint's procedures.


26. With regard to supervision of investigation cases: I was directly supervised

      by a line manager, who was latterly based in London. I would have

      telephone contact with him 24 / 7 if required. We held a regular 1 to 1

      meeting (either at my office or his) every month. I believe there was a

      weekly conference call with all team members along with a monthly or

      bimonthly team meeting which we all attended. Especially during my 1 to 1

      meeting I was able to discuss current and ongoing cases, my thoughts, and

      suggestions of the best way to progress cases. Current cases would often

      be "spot checked" to see that everything was being dealt with and presented

      in line with the compliance of case files and in a timely manner.


27.   On completion of an interview my report and the case papers would be

      submitted within the 10-day timescale, via my line manager to the

      Casework Management Team.




                                  Page 13 of 45
                                                                                      WI TN05060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




28. Here the file would be checked for breaches in compliance and reported

      back if any found. I seem to recall that at the time there were around 50 or

      60 points that would be checked for compliance.


29. This did however ensure that all case files from all the investigators were

      presented in a standard format and followed Legal Services guidelines.


30.   The file would then be forwarded to Legal Services for a decision on the

      adequacy of evidence to obtain a successful prosecution. They sometimes

      advised further investigation on a matter that required more attention before

      making a recommendation on charges, if applicable.


31. If the legal department recommended charging, then the file would go to a

      designated senior manager for authority to continue with the prosecution.


32. At any stage in this process any "errors or wrongdoings" could have been

      noted and the file returned to me for correction.


33.   Throughout my time in the Security Team, and even before when I was an

      auditor, I believe the policy and practice regarding the investigation and

      prosecution of Crown Office staff and the policy and practice regarding the

      investigation and prosecution of Sub Postmasters or their staff, has

      basically remained the same.


34. I do not believe there is a distinction in the decision on prosecution when a

      suspected crime has been committed by one or the other. The only

      difference to note is that Crown Office staff are employees of Post Office

      Ltd and as such can be dismissed. Sub Postmasters however have a


                                   Page 14 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




      contract for services with the Post Office and therefore can have their

      contract terminated.


35. Sub Postmasters are responsible for the staff they employ and therefore in

      the case of misconduct by sub office staff, the Post Office would ask the

      Postmaster to stop employing that person. (Irrespective of whether the Post

      Office decides to prosecute or not).


Audit and Investigation.


36.   The circumstances for an investigator to attend an audit of a branch would

      depend on different factors. It was very rare for an investigator to attend an

      office along with an auditor, unless there was known, or suspected criminal

      activity and it was certain that interviews would be required on the day and

      to secure evidence.


37.   Normally the lead auditor would report by telephone to their line manager

      (Audit Manager), if there were any discrepancies or anomalies at a Post

      Office outlet. The auditor (not being PACE trained) and speaking from my

      12 years' experience in the audit team, would need to gather enough

      information to enable the completion of the audit and for a decision on the

      next steps to be taken by their line manager.


38.   This information required would normally consist of:


      •    Amount of loss.


           When loss started.



                                   Page 15 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




     •     How was the balance completed when a loss existed.


     •     Are they able to repay loss?


39. I reiterate this is based on my previous experience and not necessarily

     current at the time but seems realistic.


40. It would normally stand that if an audit shortage was reported to the

     Investigation Team and if an investigator and a second officer were

     available (and could reach the branch in a reasonable time) then they would

     go to the office while the auditors are still there. (Dependant on the amount

     of the shortage).


41. The aim of the visit would be to obtain and secure any evidence which

     supports (or doesn't support) a criminal offence at the office. (If there is

     any). If there have been admissions of a suspected criminal offence then it

     would be prudent to undertake a taped interview with the suspect and get

     a first account at that time.


42. Interviews could take place, normally at the office if enough privacy is

     attainable and the suspect did not require legal representation or a Post

     Office friend to be present.


43. I have on occasions either after visiting the office on the day, or when unable

     to attend an office, pre-arranged an interview with the suspect for a future

     date. This would be especially true if they required legal representation, and

     in that case, the interview could normally be undertaken at the solicitor's

     office.


                                     Page 16 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




44. Where a shortfall was identified following an audit of a Post Office branch,

      and the Audit Manager had reported the fact to the Security team. The initial

      investigation would always be conducted by an Investigator (if the case met

      the Casework Management triggers).


45. If following an interview there was suspected evidence of a criminal offence,

      then a case file would be prepared and forwarded to Legal Services for

      advice on the sufficiency of evidence to continue with a successful

      prosecution. If the legal department deemed there was enough evidence

      for charging, then the file would go to a designated senior manager for

      authority to continue with the prosecution. If there was not enough evidence

      to support a criminal prosecution as either indicated by the investigator's

      report or advice from Legal Services, then a decision on whether to try for

      repayment of the shortfall (under the terms of the Postmasters contract)

      would be undertaken, I believe, by the Civil Litigation department of the

      Legal Services Team. I can only assume that the authority to proceed with

      civil litigation in a non-criminal case, would fall to a senior manager in the

      retail / contracts side of the business. Obviously if the Sub Postmaster has

      voluntarily repaid the "shortfall" then there would be no need for civil

      recovery.


46.   The Financial Investigation Unit (FIU), as I understand, would deal with

      recoveries etc. in a criminal case only. This came into force when the FIU

      was set up, I believe sometime after the time of the Proceeds of Crime Act

      (POCA) 2002.




                                   Page 17 of 45
                                                                                           WI TNO5060100
                                                                                       WI TN05060100




47. The Contracts Manager had control over contractual matters for the Sub

      Postmaster. It would be their decision regarding precautionary suspension

      in the case of reported shortages. Later after receipt of an Investigator or

      Auditors report they would decide on any further action regarding

      reinstatement or termination of contract. They would have no direct input

      into decisions regarding criminal prosecutions.


48. I am aware of occasions where the Contracts Manager would try and

      challenge a suspension or prosecution, but this was mainly due to a staffing

      issue where there would be an impact on customer service. If criminal

      proceedings were being pursued, then the Contracts Manager would need

      to let this take preference over any action he decided to take.


49.   The Contracts Manager role has been in place for many years and my only

      recollection of any differences would take me back to 1985 when the overall

      control for Sub Postmasters came under the Counter Services Branch and

      then disciplinary matters were dealt with locally by the head of that

      department.


50. I would like to explain the triggers for raising a case file, (as I recall), as they

      were not just limited to discrepancies in a branch.


51. All calls, reports or documentation was initially screened by the Casework

      Management Team in London. This may be by way of calls received from

      the Security Helpdesk, anonymous tip offs, discrepancy reports, missing

      vouchers, DWP anomalies or Sub Postmasters asking for help.




                                    Page 18 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5060100
                                                                                    WI TN05060100




52. If deemed necessary i.e. Casework Management could not deal with the

      enquiry by a simple call or close the enquiry as no further action, then the

      enquiry would be allocated to an investigator (normally by location or on

      occasion by workload). This then became a case file and would be afforded

      a green jacket and form part of an investigators case workload. A green

      jacket was used to encapsulate all documentation and ongoing reports

      regarding the enquiry until completed.


53.   So, whilst a green jacket case was always raised to enable further

      investigation, the triggers for raising that case would be a decision by the

      Casework Management Team.


54.   The main trigger for raising a Theft 1 False Accounting case, I imagine,

      would prominently be a reported audit shortage. It would not be possible to

      allocate either a specific Theft or False Accounting title to the case until an

      investigation has been undertaken and any evidence of a crime (if any),

      reported.


55. It may be that after a full investigation the case heading may change or

      indeed the case closed. i.e.


      •    Theft (If the 5 points regarding the definition of Theft had been met)

      •    False Accounting (If the definition of False Accounting had been met)

      •    No crime identified but failure in procedure (Discipline Report).

      •    Advice given to Postmaster.

      •    No further action.




                                     Page 19 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5060100
                                                                                    WI TN05060100




56. I would like to clarify that I am using the above headings as a guide to try

     and explain the reason for different "triggers" in cases. They are not official

     headings. This was the same procedure throughout my time in the

     Investigation Team except for changes to location due to business

     reorganisations.


The process followed by the Security team investigators when conducting

a criminal investigation following the identification of a shortfall at an audit.

57. It would normally stand, (and I would say dependant on the amount of the

     shortage), that if an investigator and a second officer were available and

     could reach the branch in a reasonable time then they would go to the office

     while the auditors are still there.


58. The aim of the visit would be to obtain and secure any evidence which

     supports (or doesn't support) a suspected criminal offence at the office. (If

     there is any). If there have been admissions of a criminal offence, then it

     would be prudent to undertake a taped interview with the suspect and get

     a first account at that time.


59. If it was not possible to attend an office at the time, then I would contact the

     suspected offender by telephone and explain that I would like to interview

     them formally regarding the alleged shortage and decide (if possible, at the

     time) a mutually agreeable time and place for an interview to take place.


60. This would be followed up by the same request in writing and explaining

     their right to legal representation and / or a Post Office friend to be present.




                                     Page 20 of 45
                                                                                     WI TN05060100
                                                                                 WI TN05060100




61. All interviews and searches would be conducted in accordance with the

      Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 Code of Practice.


Decisions about prosecution and criminal enforcement proceedings.


62. If following an interview there was evidence of a suspected criminal offence,

      then a case file would be prepared and forwarded to Legal Services for

      advice on the sufficiency of evidence to continue with a successful

      prosecution. If the legal department agreed the evidence was sufficient,

      they would draw up the recommended charges to be brought. The file would

      then go to a Designated Prosecution Authority for permission to continue

      with the prosecution. I do not believe this chain of decision changed during

      my time in the Investigation team. (Subject to Business reorganisation and

      changes in name to roles and responsibilities). Criminal Investigation and

      Prosecution Policy (POL00031008) Paragraph 3.2.9 refers to "Decisions to

      prosecute in non-CPS cases will be taken by nominated representatives in

      the business with consideration to the advice provided by the Royal Mail

      Group Criminal Law Team".


63.   With regard to the Contracts Managers input into the decision -making

      process. I believe I have covered this in detail in the previous paragraphs

      47 and 48.


64. I cannot comment on what test was applied by those making prosecution

      and charging decisions as this was undertaken at a senior level and only

      when the final decision had been made were the case papers returned to

      me for whatever action needed to be followed. However, it may help the


                                  Page 21 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




      Inquiry if I am allowed, to draw on my previous years of Post Office

      experience. There always was from as far back as I can remember, an

      instilled factor that the Post Office, being Government owned, was using

      public money to operate. This money was on loan to Sub Postmasters and

      indeed all Crown Office staff and as such was entrusted to them with a duty

      of care under the terms of their contract. To maintain the integrity of the

      business and to uphold its value of one of the most trusted brands on the

      High Street, it had to be seen to safeguard public money and assure the

      public that the Post Office was a safe and secure place to transact their

      business.


65.   The prosecution decision makers would receive the case file which

      contained the Investigators report and all evidential documentation

      including the taped interview summaries and advice from Legal Services as

      to the suggested charges to bring.


66. I cannot comment on the circumstances or steps taken to restrain a

      suspect's assets as this was dealt with by the Financial Investigators. I have

      no knowledge of the chain of decision making in that team.


Training, Instruction, and guidance to Investigators within the Security

team.


67. My background profile at paragraph 6 of this statement details some of my

      training. Ongoing training was received as and when, either as refresher

      training during National Team meetings or whenever there was a change in

      legislation. Legal Services would often have a section at National Team



                                   Page 22 of 45
                                                                                    WI TN05060100
                                                                                WI TN05060100




      meetings to offer advice on case presentation and any changes in

      legislation or law that needed to be adhered to.


68. With specific emphasis on obtaining evidence from third parties, there

      would be occasions when further investigation was required, or documents

      required to prove or disprove a criminal offence. With legislation changing

      over the years obtaining evidence from third parties also changed.

      Sometimes our "working partners" i.e., Department for Work and Pensions

      and Fujitsu would have a contract with the business for the release of any

      documentation. Documentation from banks used to be obtained by the

      person involved in the enquiry signing a release form for the data to be

      released. Later with legislation from (DPA, RIPA or OPIA) we would also

      need to submit a "Data Protection Disclaimer" form confirming that the

      information was for a genuine investigation purpose. Any changes in

      procedure would be notified to us either by meetings, personally or

      notification on a policy change on the intranet.


69.   With regard to the Casework Management documents (POL00104747) and

      (POL00104777) I can confirm that I would have been informed about them

      and would have had access to the content on the Security Intranet site. I

      would also add that as this seems to be a major change to policy then we

      would have probably discussed the subject at a team meeting and 1 to 1

      meeting.


70. I understood the instructions given in these policy documents to be

      reinforcing the need for openness and honesty both in reporting and

      disclosure within the case reports.

                                   Page 23 of 45
                                                                                         WI TN05060100
                                                                                     WI TN05060100




71. This may be the time to clarify a point made about HORIZON bugs, errors

     and defects. Up until the time I first left the Post Office in 2011 and therefore

     my time in the security team, I was never given any indication of any failings

     within the HORIZON system. I was totally unaware of any proceedings

     taking place about HORIZON failings either criminal or civil.


72. I understood compliance checks were started for the reasons of

     standardisation across the team so that everyone's case files would follow

     the same pattern. They would also ensure adherence to policies and

     legislation. Compliance checks were undertaken by the Casework

     Management Team. The markings of compliance also formed part of the

     annual objectives for team members.


73. David Posnett's email (POL00118096) seems to confirm my understanding.

     Compliance checks were undertaken before I left the team, although this

     actual email was issued after I had left the Security Team. As such, I had

     no input as to the development, management, or amendment of the

     policies.


74. Documents (POL00118101) and (POL00118102) were issued after I had

     left the Security Team. My immediate thoughts on the Offender Report —

     Legal, is that it encapsulates all the details of a report that I would have

     previously been used to submitting. The only changes are that the headings

     are more prominent in each stage of the investigation and therefore makes

     the layout of the report more defined and standardised.




                                   Page 24 of 45
                                                                                      WI TN05060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




75. I can confirm that the failings statement as described at paragraph 2.15 was

      in force during my time in the Investigation Team.


76. I am unaware of the documentation (POL00118104) as I had left the

      Security Team when this was issued, therefore I do not know the reasons

      for its "reissue" and where the descriptions and categories were taken from.

      I understand the introduction of Identification codes was introduced in the

      late 1970's and were used by the Police in crime recording systems to

      describe the apparent ethnicity of a suspect or victim. The codes are

      recorded based on the "Police Officers" visual assessment.


77. As far as I am aware identification codes are used by all "Law Enforcement"

      agencies (Street Wardens, Security Guards, Bailiffs, or Customs) to help in

      identifying people and to assist in confirming it is the right person.


78.   With regard specifically to (POL00118104), I cannot recall my training

      course or material with which I originally learnt the codes. This would have

      probably been the Investigation Awareness Workshop and reinforced in the

      Offender Interview Workshop and the Prosecution Process Course.

      However, the document, although trying to give help in identifying which

      group to use, does use outdated and socially unacceptable words. I do

      wonder if this was an original form which has just never been updated since

      its inception?


79.   My understanding of why Security Team investigators used identification

      codes was so that the Police could enter the details on the Police National

      Computer (PNC). As I recall, if an offender was found guilty of a crime, then


                                    Page 25 of 45
                                                                                   WI TNO5060100
                                                                               WI TN05060100




      the Post Office were obliged to inform the Police as to that fact. We

      completed a form NPA01 which gave details of the offender details and

      offence. It is my understanding that this form had to be fully completed

      (including identification code) for the Police to accept it.


80. If at the time of interview a suspect offender refused to give personal

      information, then they would need to attend a Police Station later to give

      this information.


Analysing HORIZON data, requesting ARQ data from Fujitsu and

relationship with Fujitsu.


81. As far as I can recall, I never had a case assigned to me where anyone I

      interviewed, attributed a shortfall to problems with HORIZON.


82. I would obtain ARQ data on any investigation where unexplained losses

      were involved whether there was a suspected offence, or if I was trying to

      assist a Sub Postmaster in investigating losses at their office.


83. I do recall that when HORIZON was first introduced there was a limited

      number of requests that could be made for ARQ's per month. I remember

      that on occasions I would need to wait until the following month before my

      request could be honoured. There was an early change to the contract with

      Fujitsu which allowed an increase in requests. I do not know what increase

      and it may even have been open ended.


84.   On the occasions where I had requested ARQ data as part of an

      investigation, I was not aware of any issue regarding the duplication of


                                    Page 26 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5060100
                                                                                 WI TN05060100




      transactions (or indeed any problems with HORIZON). As a matter of

      course I would normally sort the transactions into value order (in Microsoft

      Excel format), and it may have been possible, (depending on the value) that

      I would have identified any duplication in transactions if it had happened

      and indeed if it would have shown on the ARQ data I had.


85. I never had any direct contact with Fujitsu. As I recall there was a central

      contact point in the Casework Management Team. All requests for ARQ

      data or witness statements would be made through that person in writing,

      (normally email request). I have received witness statements from staff at

      Fujitsu regarding the integrity of HORIZON and, I think, whether there were

      any faults with a specific office to be included in that statement.


86.   Although I cannot recall the actual case, I remember that on one occasion

      the person who produced the witness statement was required to attend

      court. I seem to recall that in the end they were not required to give

      evidence.


87. If the person giving me witness statements was Gareth Jenkins, then my

      understanding was that he was the nominated representative for Fujitsu

      who was able to give a true and accurate account of the HORIZON

      workings and accountability.


88. At the time of my employment in the Security Team, I was not aware that

      Gareth Jenkins (if that was the person supplying the witness statement)

      was or wasn't classed as an expert witness. I did not use the phrase expert

      witness in any of my case papers.


                                   Page 27 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5060100
                                                                                    WI TN05060100




89. I now understand that "A expert witness" can express their independent

     expert opinion based on the information that is provided.           They must

     possess more knowledge than the basic information that an average person

     would know. An expert witness's overriding duty is to the court, rather than

     to the party instructing them.


Relationship with others


90. I am aware of Cartwright King Solicitors by name, but I cannot, without any

     documentation say whether they were agents for the Post Office regarding

     prosecution work or any other role.


Involvement in the Criminal Case Studies.


Prosecution of Susan Rudkin


91. I have been asked to provide a full account of my involvement in, and

     recollection of the criminal prosecution of Susan Rudkin. Also details of my

     initial involvement in the case. I think that this is best explained by starting

     at my initial involvement and what followed.


92. On the 20th August 2008, my colleague Gary Thomas and I were on an

     enquiry in the Worcester area. I received a telephone call, I assume from

     my Line Manager, informing me the Post Office Auditors were attending

     lbstock Post Office and the wife of the Sub-Postmaster had informed the

     auditors of an expected shortage of around £40,000. I was allocated the

     case, and we were requested to attend the office to undertake enquiries

     into the alleged shortage.




                                   Page 28 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5060100
                                                                                    WI TN05060100




93. I was informed that Michael Rudkin the Sub Postmaster, had spoken to my

      colleague Colin Price, who knew Mr Rudkin.


94. I contacted Colin Price and was told that Mr Rudkin had said that he would

      allow an interview to take place on his premises and said that his wife would

      cooperate fully with any investigation and would not require a solicitor.


95.   On arrival at the office, we were met by Mr Rudkin and after fully identifying

      ourselves, we then went into the Post Office area where Paul Field was

      compiling the audit. He handed me a statement which had been signed by

      Mrs Rudkin regarding the shortage at the office. (POL00045243)


96.   Mrs Rudkin agreed to be interviewed on tape in her private residence and

      she did not require any legal representation which confirmed Mr Rudkin's

      conversation with Colin Price.


97. Part of Post Office (and Royal Mail Group) policies are that any person

      being interviewed by an investigator (on tape or informally), is entitled to

      have a "Post Office friend" present with them. The role of this "Post Office

      friend" is to sit in on the interview. They are not allowed to take part in the

      interview at any stage but are allowed to take notes on the proceedings as

      long as they are kept confidential. The Post Office friend should be

      someone who works for the Post Office and someone who is not involved

      in the enquiry. The reason for not being allowed to say anything in the

      interview is because they probably wouldn't be qualified to advise and may

      say something which is not beneficial to the person being interviewed. This

      would be the role of a solicitor and this right should be exercised if advice


                                   Page 29 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5060100
                                                                                WI TN05060100




     is required. I seem to recall that Mr Rudkin had made some phone calls to

     "colleagues" with a view to acting as a friend for his wife, but no one was

     available. As it was her wish to have a friend present, I took the unusual

     approach of allowing her son Dale to sit in if she was agreeable. Unusual

     because Dale did not work for the Post Office so although I "broke" the Post

     Office friend rule it was not a legal entitlement. I could of course have

     suggested the interview was conducted at the Police Station, where the

     "Post Office friend" rule was not applicable, but I considered that to be

     unnecessary and "over the top" as Mrs Rudkin was agreeable and

     compliant.


98. Gary Thomas and I undertook a taped interview with Susan Rudkin and her

     son Dale was also present. During the interview we reiterated her legal

     rights and form GS001 was signed (POL00046546).


99. During the interview which is summarised (POL00050026) Mrs Rudkin

     explained that there had been mistakes made behind the counter (9.36 of

     tape summary).


100. She explains that due to staff costs and overheads the business has not

     been doing what it should be doing. (11.00 of tape summary).


101. She also confirms that she has not been putting money in when there were

     losses, and the cash would be inflated to make the Trading Statement right.

     (13.20 of tape summary).




                                 Page 30 of 45
                                                                                    WI TN05060100
                                                                                WI TN05060100




102. Mrs Rudkin agrees that there were also general bills to pay and says that

     she has "borrowed" money from the Post Office and paid it into her Lloyds

     bank account in Coalville. (13.31 of tape summary).


103. She says that she should have asked for help, but she didn't feel like she

     could. (15.07 of tape summary).


104. On trying to understand how the shortage got so high, Mrs Rudkin said that

     it started with the shortages and not being able to make them good. When

     she did pay some back, she would be short of money to pay bills. (19.27 of

     tape summary).


105. Mrs Rudkin says that she had a big shortage which she made good. (21.04

     of tape summary).


106. When discussing losses, she says that a new girl last year made some

     mistakes. She did not suspect any staff involvement but said they are

     mistakes and most of them they have been able to resolve and one or two

     have come back. (22.15 of tape summary).


107. Mrs Rudkin again reiterates that she believes it is just mistakes. (33.10 of

     tape summaries).


108. Following the interview Mr and Mrs Rudkin agreed to a search of the

     premises, with the appropriate forms signed, and gave me access to bank

     details and statements. (I seem to recall we may not have conducted a

     search as any documentation we requested was produced to us).




                                 Page 31 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




109. I later completed the offender report and associated paperwork

     (POL00046485) which was submitted to Legal Services via Casework

     Management.


110. At no time whilst in conversation with Mr Rudkin did he mention any

     concerns with HORIZON or correspondence to and from Paul Hemley.

     (POL00060416      & P0L00061521). I was unaware of any such

     correspondence regarding this enquiry and was also unaware of the

     incident report (POL00065265).


111. At no time throughout the interview did Mrs Rudkin suggest any concerns

     with HORIZON data and made no mention of any calls to the Helpdesk

     either reporting the losses or asking for help.


112. Based on the advice provided by Jarnail Singh dated 6'" February 2009

     (P0L00050881) to proceed with obtaining a summons, and according to

     my report, authorised by Dave Pardoe, Senior Security Manager.


113. I duly applied for a summons (POL00046537) based on the one charge of

     theft as per the Legal services advice (POL00045220). I cannot recall

     whether I served the summons personally, asked a colleague to serve it or

     posted it to Mrs Rudkin.


114. As Mrs Rudkin pleaded guilty to the offence at court, I played no further part

     in any criminal proceedings in this case. I would normally attend the plea

     hearing and sentencing of all my cases just in case the solicitor acting for

     Post Office Ltd required clarification on any points.



                                  Page 32 of 45
                                                                                      WI TN05060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




115. As part of the investigation, I requested HORIZON ARQ data, and my report

     to Jarnail Singh dated 29/1/2009 (POL00046505) shows that there was

     nothing untoward regarding these figures. I should point out that if Mrs

     Rudkin was inflating cash figures to cover up shortages, as claimed in her

     interview, then there wouldn't be any anomalies to find, as technically there

     wouldn't be any significant losses shown on the data.


116. With regard to the emails (POL00051258 & POL00046522) between

     myself and the Police. This was part of my investigation into the period prior

     to Mrs Rudkin's admissions to using Post Office money. I was instructed by

     way of email (POL00061322) by the Financial Investigation unit to revisit

     the Post Office accounts to try and identify any anomalies. As this period

     coincided with the date of a robbery at the office and the Police were the

     investigating authority in this, it made sense to use their intelligence and

     knowledge when reinterviewing Mrs Rudkin.


117. It would appear from notes made on (POL00051258) that a Police Officer

     was willing to sit in on a secondary interview with Mrs Rudkin if she agreed

     to attend a voluntary interview.


118. I believe at this time I was corresponding via her solicitor and as can be

     seen at (POL00046524) Mrs Rudkin declined the offer. This had no impact

     on my initial investigation as Legal Services advice on 6th February 2009

     (POL00050881) was to proceed with the summons.


119. I have been asked to comment on the impact that Mr Rudkin's letters

     (POL00044916) to Alan Cook (Managing Director of Post Office Ltd), and


                                  Page 33 of 45
                                                                                       WI TN05060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




     (POL00060421) to George Thompson (General Secretary of NFSP) had on

     the decision relating to the prosecution of Susan Rudkin.


120. I had no sight of these letters before the Inquiry however I was aware that

     Mr Rudkin had contacted the Managing Director for "help" with the situation

     at his Post Office.


121. It is apparent from the content of these letters although he states "is in no

     way an attempt to pervert the course of justice" it does however appear that

     he is using his position and contacts to try and influence the decision into

     any criminal proceedings.


122. This may also enforce my concern as highlighted in my report

     (POL00046485) where Mr Rudkin gave an indication that "there will be no

     prosecution when the money is repaid". In the end these letters had no

     impact on the decision to prosecute Mrs Rudkin.


123. With regard to the letters from Richard Nelson solicitors (POL00046524)

     and Dr AT Peden (POL00050993).


124. From the documentation I have sight of, I became aware of Mrs Rudkin's

     medical issues when in correspondence with Richard Nelson solicitors

     (dated 07/04/209) regarding the invitation to a second interview.


125. Apart from reporting the matter that Mrs Rudkin may not be fit to face a

     prosecution in my case file report, I had no part in decisions made in relation

     to the prosecution and criminal enforcement proceedings.




                                  Page 34 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




126. As I recall, official disclosure forms (Unused, sensitive, non-sensitive) were

     only completed when a case was going to trial, and this would form part of

     the bundle. In this case I would be the disclosure officer and all the

     documentation and schedules would be copied to Legal Services to ensure

     correct completion.


127. If a case was not going to trial because of a plea being made (as was the

     case of Mrs Rudkin), then as I recall, relevant disclosure to the defence,

     prior to any hearing, would be made by Legal Services.


128. As I recall, there were criminal enforcement proceedings taken against Mrs

     Rudkin and the paperwork supplied by the Inquiry confirms this.


129. Apart from using my initial offender report to form part of the enforcement

     evidence, I was not involved in either the decision or any further court

     proceedings.


130. I played no further part after the sentencing of Mrs Rudkin and my case file

     would have been closed.


131. I have been asked to reflect now on the way the investigation and

     prosecution of Susan Rudkin was conducted taking into account the

     witness   statement    supplied   to   the   Inquiry,   by   Mrs   Rudkin   at

     (WITNO1840100).


132. I would like to clarify that at no time was any mention or indication given by

     Mrs Rudkin or her family that she was unfit to be interviewed. Mr Michael

     Rudkin agreed previously that his wife would cooperate with any interview,


                                  Page 35 of 45
                                                                                         WI TNO5060100
                                                                                     WI TN05060100




     and I explained to Mrs Rudkin that I would like to conduct a taped interview

     with her, which she agreed to. As she was complying with our enquiry, I

     broke Post Office rules by allowing her son to sit in on the interview, but I

     took this decision so that she had some sort of comfort and support. The

     interview was conducted in her own premises which would have contrasted

     greatly with taking her to the local Police station. This is in complete contrast

     to her statement which suggests she was in no fit state to be interviewed.


133. When the right to legal representation was explained, this was declined by

     Mrs Rudkin and the relevant forms were signed on tape (POL00046546).

     Mr Rudkin also confirmed to Colin Price that his wife would not require legal

     representation. This contrasts with Mrs Rudkin's statement in which she

     says she was refused access to Legal Representatives.


134. During the taped interview with Mrs Rudkin (POL00050026) she admitted

     to taking money from the Post Office and having combined it with shop

     takings, gone to the High Street and paid the money into her Lloyds Bank

     business account to cover bills.


135. She said that part of the reason for doing this was that she was making

     good losses in the Post Office accounts. When I asked her about the losses,

     she said that mistakes had been made behind the counter. Mrs Rudkin

     referred to a "new girl" who made some mistakes. She also said that there

     were mistakes and most of them, they were able to resolve and one or two

     have come back.




                                   Page 36 of 45
                                                                                       WI TN05060100
                                                                                   WI TN05060100




136. Mrs Rudkin said that she should have asked for help, but she didn't feel like

     she could. At no time during the interview did she mention any calls to the

     helpline or mention suspected HORIZON failings. This contrasts with her

     statement in which she says she rang the helpline on many occasions.


137. During my time at the office and conversations with Mr Rudkin at no time

     did he mention any suspicion of HORIZON failings or his previous

     correspondence regarding accounting anomalies.


138. During the interview Mrs Rudkin said that she would inflate the cash and

     figures in the cash account to cover up the shortage.


139. This meant that there would not be a declared shortage in the final account

     and therefore the Post office would be unaware of any loss.


140. Mrs Rudkin also said that on occasions she would need to top up the wage

     bill and needed money to pay utility bills etc.


141. I was able to confirm the deposits into her bank account which supported

     her admissions to me on the taped interview.


142. At no time, was I made aware, either during the interview, at court for plea

     and again at court for sentence, did Mrs Rudkin allege failings with the

     HORIZON system as a defence.


143. Her witness statement (WITN01840100) dated some 13 years after her

     initial interview with me, appears to tell a different account of the events of

     the day and her "contact with the helpline with issues on many occasions".



                                  Page 37 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5060100
                                                                                 WI TN05060100




144. Had there been any indication, during the interview, or indeed anytime

     afterwards, that Mrs Rudkin had been reporting losses to the helpline, then

     I would have been able to check call logs and confirm this. Notwithstanding

     that she would have still been committing the offence of False Accounting.

     However, if true, I would have probably taken a different view if in fact she

     was not receiving adequate support and help from the Business into the

     losses.


145. I do not consider, on the evidence I had, that this investigation was reliant

     on HORIZON data to prove the case and therefore I believe that it was

     reasonable to believe the account given to me on the day, by Mrs Rudkin,

     was correct. Based on the evidence from that initial investigation, the

     decision to proceed with a prosecution and criminal enforcement

     proceedings would have been considered as per any other case.


146. Prior to the original court proceedings of Bates V Post Office I was

     contacted by Post Office Ltd, regarding my recollection of this case and it

     was agreed that it did not fall into the category of HORIZON reliability.


147. Apart from being aware of the correspondence to me regarding the

     suspension and subsequent termination of Mr Rudkin's contract

     (POL00060427 & P0L00061704) I was not involved in this decision. I

     assume this was dealt with by the Retail Line and I am not aware of any

     criminal investigation into his misconduct. With regard to (POL00136708) I

     have not seen this form prior to the inquiry and can only say that this is a

     form prepared by the Retail Lin in connection with disciplinary / contractual

     matters.

                                  Page 38 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




General


148. With regard to challenging the integrity of the HORIZON system and

     whether it was relevant to ongoing and future cases.


149. At no time from the installation of the HORIZON system to the time I left in

     2011, was I aware or made aware of any challenges regarding the integrity

     of the system. I neither heard of nor saw any official documentation or

     correspondence regarding such claims.


150. I would like to say that when I heard about the Inquiry, I tried to recall my

     caseload over the period and did not consider that I had any cases issued

     to me where the integrity of the system was brought into doubt.


151. I do recall being asked to sit in on an informal interview where a Sub

     Postmistress was experiencing losses after her Post Office had been

     moved into a Portacabin. I cannot recall her name or the office she was Sub

     Postmistress of, although it was outside my normal area. I think she was

     suggesting that the installation or wiring was faulty due to the move as there

     were no prior losses. This wasn't my case, and I am unaware of the

     outcome of any reports that may have been prepared although I think,

     though not sure, that we confirmed there was no evidence of any criminal

     activity.




                                  Page 39 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5060100
                                                                                WI TN05060100




152. At no other time, in interviews I conducted, has anybody inferred that

     HORIZON may be the cause of losses. I, therefore, at the time had no

     reason to doubt the integrity of the system.


153. I now understand, through following the Inquiry, that there were challenges

     to the system as far back as 2004. I also understand that Fujitsu was

     withholding information from the Post Office regarding known bugs, errors,

     or defects.


154. I do not know when the Post Office "officially" became aware of the problem,

     but I would have thought that someone would have or should have been

     reconciling these claims.


155. With regard to failures in HORIZON, if required, a witness statement would

     be obtained from a Fujitsu nominated person confirming the system was

     fully working. There was even a specific paragraph (as I recall) about the

     actual office under investigation confirming there had been no problems.


156. I would say that I probably requested witness statements from Fujitsu about

     2 or 3 times a year, so these statements continually reinforced to me that

     the system was totally reliable.


157. I would go as far as to say that even when I was working in a Sub Post

     office in 2017 / 2018 I personally experienced a loss of £1000 after a

     morning's trading and having complete confidence in the system the loss

     was made good.




                                  Page 40 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




158. Following any concerns over the integrity of the system, then surely a

     detailed analysis of the system by Fujitsu (not just a basic ARQ request)

     should have been requested for every investigation to confirm there were

     no bugs, errors or defects that caused losses at the office under enquiry.


159. I would like to bring to the attention of the Inquiry some information which

     is based on my 25 years' experience in Audit and Investigation, which may

     or may not be relevant.


Unexplained Losses


160. On numerous occasions I would try and assist offices or indeed conduct

     investigations into unexplained losses. I would interpret this as losses that

     the Sub Postmaster genuinely had no idea of.


161. Listed below are genuine reasons that I have actually come across for

     unexplained losses:


     •    Staff Theft

     •    Spouse / Children Theft (Having access to Post Office cash)

     •    Opportunist Theft (Money left within reach of an outsider)

     •    Money falling into a mail bag or falling behind a shelf or a safe.

          (Unsecured bundles of noted left lying around)

     •    Remittances discrepancies (Sub Postmaster not checking incoming

          money)

     •    Customer being overpaid or incorrect change given.




                                  Page 41 of 45
                                                                                      WI TN05060100
                                                                                  WI TN05060100




     •     Keying error by clerk. (A £100 deposit keyed as £1000 will result in a

           shortage of £900)

162. The reason I bring this to the attention of the Inquiry is to show the many

     ways in which an unexplained loss could occur. It would be fair to say that

     in any of the cases above it may not be possible to ever prove how a loss

     occurred.


Prosecution Numbers


163. There has been a great deal of discussion regarding the increase in

     prosecutions since the installation of HORIZON.


164. During my role in Audit 1985 — 1997 the audit programme was a risk-based

     model and meant that Post Offices were audited according to their size. i.e.,

     A large town or Crown office would be subject to an audit every 12 months.

     A medium sized office would be subject to an audit every 24 months and a

     small rural office would be subject to an audit every 36 months.


165. This meant and was the case in many of my audit visits, that the office knew

     roughly when they would receive an audit. As this was pre-HORIZON all

     accounting paperwork was completed manually.


166. Therefore, it was possible for a small rural office to start "borrowing" money

     when the auditor left the premises and knew they probably had up to 3 years

     before being discovered.


167. When manual accounts were prepared any requests for additional cash

     because they had run short, would not be challenged, and could not be

                                  Page 42 of 45
                                                                                          WI TNO5060100
                                                                                      WI TN05060100




          proven that it was needed. With the introduction of HORIZON, it was a lot

          harder to hide or disguise fraud as the Post Office had access to

          transactions and cash holdings.


  In Conclusion

   168. I feel very angry that Fujitsu withheld information from the Post Office

          regarding bugs, errors, or defects for so long. If this had been disclosed

          earlier then it would have been possible for any such challenges, or indeed

          unexplained losses to be vigorously investigated. As such I do believe, in

          the early years, that the Post Office accepted that there was no impact on

          losses by the system.


   169. I have only just watched the oral evidence of Richard Roll o n 4th October

          2023 (although originally given on 9t" March 2023) and this is the first real

          indication, I have been given, that the system was not fit for purpose.




Statement of Truth


I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed:               GRO
Dated:            2So l i o I2_:




                                       Page 43 of 45
                                                                               WI TN05060100
                                                                             WI TN05060100




Index to First Witness Statement of Mike Wilcox


  No.          URN             Document Description         Control Number

  1.       POL00031008       Criminal Investigation and      POL-0027490
                             Prosecution Policy (version
                             1.1 Nov 2010)
  2.       POL00104806       Procedures & Standards -        POL-0080438
                             Standards of Behaviour and
                             Complaints
                             Procedure (version 2,
                             October 2007)
  3.       POL00104747       Casework Management             POL-0080387
                             Policy (version 1.0, March
                             2000)
  4.       POL00104777       Casework Management             POL-0080417
                             Policy (version 4.0,
                             October 2002)
  5.       POL00118096       Dave Posnett's email            VIS00012685
                             23/5/2011
  6.       POL00118101       Compliance - Guide to the       VIS00012690
                             Preparation and Layout of
                             Investigation Red Label
                             Case Files
  7.       POL00118102       POL template - Offender         VIS00012691
                             Report (Legal Investigation)
  8.       POL00118104       Identification Codes            VIS00012693
  9.       POL00045243       Handwritten & signed note       POL-0041722
  10.      POL00046546       Legal Rights Form dated         POL-0043025
                             20/08/2008 (signed by
                             Susan Rudkin)
  11.      POL00050026       Record of tape recorded         POL-0046505
                             interview of Susan Jane
                             Rudkin dated 20/08/2008
  12.      POL00046485       Report to Legal Services        POL-0042964
                             dated 02/09/2008
  13.      POL00060416       Letter dated 14/01/2005         POL-0056895
                             from Mr Rudkin to Paul
                             Hemley
  14.      POL00061521       Letter dated 18/01/2005 to      POL-0058000
                             Mr Rudkin from Paul
                             Hemley
  15.      POL00065265       Incident Report                 POL-0061744
  16.      POL00050881       Jarnail Singh advice dated      POL-0047360
                             06/02/2009
  17.      POL00046537       Summons dated 12/02/2009        POL-0043016
  18.      P0L00045220       Charge                          POL-0041699


                                 Page 44 of 45
                                                                     WI TN05060100
                                                                   WI TN05060100




19.   POL00046505    Memo dated 29/01/2009 to       POL-0042984
                     Jarnail Singh
20.   POL00051258    Email dated 31/03/2009 to      POL-0047737
                     Mike Wilcox
21.   POL00046522    Email dated 25/03/2009 to      POL-0043001
                     Mike Wilcox from DS Bacon
22.   P0L00061322    Email dated 18/09/2008         POL-0057801
                     from Financial Investigation
                     Unit
23.   POL00046524    Letter dated 07/04/2009        POL-0043003
                     from Richard Nelson
                     Solicitors
24.   POL00044916    Letter dated 25/02/2009 to     POL-0041395
                     Alan Cook
25.   POL00060421    Letter dated 03/04/2009 to     POL-0056900
                     George Thompson
26.   POL00050993    Letter dated 22/02/2009        POL-0047472
                     from Dr A T Peden
27.   WITN01840100   Mrs Rudkin's Statement         WITN01840100
                     dated 27/01/2022
28.   POL00060427    Letter dated 29/01/2010 to     POL-0056906
                     Mike Wilcox from Glen
                     Chester re Mr Rudkin
29.   POL00061704    Letter dated 29/01/2010 to     POL-0058183
                     Mike Wilcox from Glen
                     Chester re Mr Rudkin
30.   POL00136708    Summary Termination            POL-0125596
                     Report re: Ibstock Post
                     Office Branch - Mr Ernest
                     Michael Rudkin




                         Page 45 of 45
