                                                                                        WI TN05050100
                                                                                      WITNO5050100




                                                        Witness Name: Paul Whitaker

                                                        Statement No.: WITN05050100

                                                               Dated: 08 October 2023




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




                First Witness Statement of Paul Graham Whitaker




I Paul Graham Whitaker, will say as follows:-

INTRODUCTION

     1.   I am a former employee of Post Office Limited (POL) and held the position

          of Investigation Manager (later renamed Security Manager).

     2.   This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT inquiry

          (the "Inquiry") with matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 31 August

          2023 (the "Request")

     3.   Firstly, in preparation to providing this statement I was told that under

          certain circumstances POL could provide legal assistance to members of

          POL staff required to give evidence to the inquiry. I have been told that I

          meet the criteria for such legal assistance however I am yet to approach

          any legal firm in respect of this and make this statement without any legal

          assistance.




                                      Page 1 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                  WITNO5050100




   4.   Secondly, on receipt of the Rule 9 request dated 31 August 2023 I noted

        that a response was required by 28 September 2023. 1 immediately

        informed the inquiry that during that period I would be out of the country

        for much of September and unable to securely access the information

        sent to me by the inquiry to support my statement, nor have facility to

        write my statement. In all I have `lost' 19 days. I had also made the inquiry

        aware of this when they had firstly asked for my `dates to avoid' some

        weeks before.

   5.   Whilst I thank the inquiry for the seven-day extension granted to me, I feel

        that I must point out that this statement has been prepared under those

        circumstances.

BACKGROUND

   6.   I joined Royal Mail in July 1985 as a postal cadet in Sheffield. From 1986

        to 1994 I worked as a postman delivering and processing mail within the

        Sheffield area. Between 1994 and 1998, within the Royal Mail Letters

        function and based in Sheffield, I worked in a section of the organisation

        which dealt with the function, administration, and inspection of postal

        franking machines.

   7.   In September 1998 I joined the Post Office Security and Investigation

        Service (POSIS) as an Assistant Investigation Officer and was placed to

        work in its Parcel Group (North) section which was based in Royal Mail

        premises in York Place, Leeds.

   8.   At that time Royal Mail was essentially operating as three separate

        entities (Royal Mail Letters (RML), Post Office Limited (POL), and

        Parcelforce) under a Royal Mail Group corporate head. RML and POL

                                   Page 2 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5050100
                                                                                    WITNO5050100




        each had their own investigation function, but Parcelforce did not. As such

        at that stage, as well as dealing with corporate investigations, POSIS had

        Parcel Group sections which dealt with investigations into crime within the

        Parcelforce network.

   9.   On joining POSIS I recall that I had an initial period of induction training

        which covered relevant aspects of investigation, e.g., law, principles of

        investigation, evidence gathering, PACE etc, before being assigned to an

        established officer for `on the job' training. Further training modules were

        completed over the following year in subjects such a witness interviewing,

        and suspect interviewing etc. As I recall I received no specific training to

        do with POL work at this time, as, within parcel group I was not expected

        to undertake or assist with any POL investigations.

   10. In 1999 Parcelforce introduced its own investigation function, and in

        September of that year POSIS Parcel Group (North) was disbanded. Its

        operational staff in Leeds were then compulsorily transferred to different

        Royal Mail investigation functions. Some staff went into Parcelforce, and

        others to Royal Mail Cashco (the Royal Mail Groups cash carrying

        function). Despite having a background in mails work and no previous

        POL experience, I was sent to work for POL, initially based at their

        regional headquarters in Leeds in September 1999.

   11. I had no say whatsoever in where I was placed at this time.

ROLE & HEIRARCHY

   12. I worked as an Investigation Manager (later named a Security Manager)

        for POL from that time until around 2009 or so when I briefly, (a matter of

        two months or so), took over as Temporary Team Leader for the South

                                    Page 3 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITN05050100




     Investigation team of POL Security before soon returning to my role as

     Investigation manager. I left POL in January 2012 and took up a job as an

     Investigation Manager with RML.

13. Shortly before I joined I understand that POL Security had recently split

     into three operational areas (East, West and North). Working within the

     North Area, staff at the Leeds office generally dealt with investigations in

     the North Eastern counties of England. I joined an investigation team with

     another assistant investigation officer (John Downie, though we had both

     now been renamed Investigation Managers) and an Investigation

     Manager (John Hart) who was more senior in experience. The Leeds

     office also contained some investigation support staff. I recall that a

     further investigation manager was based in Tyneside, and they assisted in

     work in that area. We were all expected to undertake and lead

     investigation cases of our own as well as assist colleagues in cases that

     they were leading.

14. Above us in the hierarchical scale was a team leader, Les Thorpe, based

     in Peterlee whom I and the other investigation managers reported to. I

     believe that he then reported to a senior investigation manager based in

     Glasgow (Rashid Sarwar), who then reported to the North area Head of

     Security, (Duncan McFadyen) who was also based in Glasgow.

15. At that time the Security Department within POL was split into Physical

     Security and Investigation Departments. Physical Security being

     responsible for the provision of external security apparatus at Post

     Offices, (Safes, alarms, barriers, security audits etc.) with the Investigation

     department responsible for the investigation of suspected criminal losses


                                 Page 4 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




     to POL. Until very late in my time at POL which I will touch on later in this

     statement I performed duties only within the Investigation team and do not

     recall with any certainty the hierarchy within the physical security team

     from this early period.

16. Soon after I joined POL, perhaps around a year later, the security function

     within POL began a period of rapid change. The investigation function

     was streamlined and tinkered with a number of times. There were

     numerous geographical boundary changes and changes of management

     personnel and structure. I recall that in terms of hierarchy during the

     period around 2000 to 2007 or so, Tony Marsh headed the POL security

     function with Phil Gerrish as his Head of Investigations. Below Mr Gerrish

     was a regional (north/south) Senior Investigation manager and below

     them were localised team leaders. At the bottom of the pyramid were,

     Investigation Managers of which I was one.

17. Throughout this time, I was based in Sheffield and worked on

     investigations in the North of England. Alongside me in the Sheffield office

     around this time was Helen Dickinson, Kim Abbotts and latterly Helen

     Hollingworth (Rose). We tended to work together leading our own

     investigations and supporting each other where required.

18. During this period the team based in Sheffield saw a number of changes

     of manager, none of whom were based with us on site but we saw them

     regularly and remained in contact via email and telephone. Two of the line

     managers I recall from this time were Trevor Lockey, and Paul Dawkins.

19. Around 2007 or thereabouts I recall that Tony Marsh moved from Post

     Office Limited to become Head of Royal Mail Group Security and soon


                                 Page 5 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                               WITNO5050100




     afterwards Phil Gerrish left to join Royal Mail Letters as Head of

     Investigation. John Scott who had been Head of Physical Security at Post

     Office Limited became Head of Security. Mr Scott oversaw a period of

     change in Post Office Security as he tried to bring the investigation

     functions and physical security functions together to streamline the

     department. During this period, a number of investigation colleagues left

     POL, many of whom followed Mr Gerrish to Royal Mail Letters. I feel Mr

     Scott replaced these people with members of staff with more of an

     expertise in physical security, with staff displaced from other POL

     departments, or with staff recruited from outside of POL.

20. The team in Sheffield were relocated to POL premises in Future Walk

     Chesterfield in around 2009. Mr Scott had ordered that all localised teams

     should be brought together into POL premises and the premises the team

     used in Sheffield were owned by RML. As such around 2009 we who had

     been in the Sheffield office joined POL Investigation Manager, Chris

     Knight in Chesterfield. At that time, again there were many changes to

     personnel in the wider department, and as I didn't work in Physical

     security I cannot recall with certainty the hierarchy under Mr Scott at this

     time.

21. I recall that Mr Scott had a number of Senior Managers, but their remits

     and jobs changed regularly. Some of the senior managers I recall from

     this time were John Bigley, Tony Newman, Andy Hayward, lain Murphy,

     and Dave Pardoe however, as said, I do not recall their specific roles at

     specific times, as they often quickly changed.




                                 Page 6 of 45
                                                                                 WI TNO5050100
                                                                              WITN05050100




22. Around the time Mr Scott headed the department the geographical remit

     changed again and I along with other investigation managers began to

     work on investigations across the whole of the country, into Scotland and

     Northern Ireland.

23. I feel that Mr Scott focused more on bringing to POL Security a data

     driven model to proactively analyse and seek out risk and loss within post

     offices as opposed using the POL investigation team to investigate losses

     reactively. Mr Scott brought in much more data analysis in his loss

     management strategy and set up a dedicated team to do this, I recall

     Helen Rose being part of that team but unfortunately cannot recall other

     names.

24. Mr Scott also brought in a team to try to recoup losses through the

     proceeds of crime act and some investigators were trained as financial

     investigators. From memory, I recall that these included Ged Harbinson,

     Graham Ward, Helen Dickinson and Paul Southin.

25. Shortly before I left POL, perhaps around 2011 1 recall that Mr Scott

     stated that he was making the role I was in a dual skilled role combining

     aspects of both physical security management and investigation. I

     considered myself to be an investigator, I enjoyed that type of work and

     the world of physical security did not so much appeal to me, so when a

     role was advertised I left POL in 2011 and moved across to Royal Mail to

     work as an Investigation Manager.

26. Throughout my time with POL, I viewed that my role was to investigate

     potential criminal offences committed against POL or through POL. This

     consisted, in the main, of investigating theft and or fraud offences that had


                                Page 7 of 45
                                                                                 WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITN05050100




     been facilitated through a post office. Often by an employee or agent of

     POL but occasionally not. Potential offences were mainly facilitated

     through Subpostoffices, but occasionally Branch Offices or Cash Centres.

27. I am not aware of any policies regarding if or how POL treated Crown

     Office Employees differently when it came to investigating potential

     offences. As far as the work I was asked to do, everyone was treated the

     same, be that if they worked in a branch or crown office .

28. i felt that within the tenure of Mr Marsh as Head of Security I found the

     line management within POL investigation to be supportive and

     experienced, with many of the mangers having come through 'the ranks'

     as it were. They knew the Investigators role and the challenges it brought.

     However, I feel that when Mr Marsh, and others left POL, my line

     management under the leadership of Mr Scott, though reasonable

     insomuch as they were someone to manage staff, many lacked the

     experience and understanding within the investigation and criminal justice

     fields. Managers I remember and consider in respect of that statement

     were Andrew Daley and Alison Drake.

29. Immediate line mangers were involved day to day and knew such things

     as your general whereabouts, your caseload, and what work you had on

     at any given time. As said more often than not my manager worked

     remotely from me but we met regularly in Team meetings (probably once

     a week) to discuss what work was scheduled for that week, and also I

     would phone/email them and they would phone/email me should anything

     crop up which either party felt was relevant. I would say that my line




                                Page 8 of 45
                                                                                             WI TNO5050100
                                                                                           WITN05050100




              manager had good oversight of what I was doing though left me to

              progress my work day to day.

     30. Cases were regularly discussed with line managers and idea's relating to

              the progress of cases were exchanged not only with line managers, but

              also amongst my peers within the immediate team. Often reports and

              paperwork were sent to a manager for review before submission.

     31. In regard to complaints about the conduct of an investigation by POL

              security I do not specifically recall the process by which it would be dealt

              with. I do recall there being accountability though I am unsure of the

              actual process.

II111~I1 [t


     32. At the time of joining POSIS I had no formal specific investigation

              qualifications. However, whilst working for POL, around 2006 1 completed

              a Level Four National Vocational Qualification in Investigation

              Management. Most of my training to that point was 'on the job' shadowing

              and being supported by a more experienced colleague. Before I left POL

              in 2010 I had begun a Post Graduate Diploma in Security and Risk

              Management at Leicester University which I subsequently completed

              whilst working for Royal Mail.

     33. Whilst in POL I feel that the training in respect of the investigation role

              was adequate, and we were trained to a reasonable standard in

              investigation skills, and any specific major change to the law, policy, or

              techniques would be dissipated through training courses. As said, many of

              the skills were developed using 'on the job' training as initially you were

              normally placed with a more senior colleague who would assist and guide

                                          Page 9 of 45
                                                                                  WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITN05050100




     you through your early investigations. Through time and experience you,

     needed them less and less before you then became the colleague who

     would assist others.

34. The specific investigation training I had received and used in POL had

     been given to me whilst I was in POSTS parcel group. This had consisted

     of class room training modules spread across my first year with practical

     applications as I used the skills taught in my day-to-day work. I recall

     attending training courses covering suspect interviewing, witness

     interviewing, searching, and report writing. Throughout my time with POL I

     recall the odd `refresher' training course on these matters and others.

     Further comment, specifically on disclosure training and assembling files

     for crown court use is discussed later in this statement.

35. As said, when I assumed my role in POL investigations I had no previous

     experience of working behind the counter at a post office. Soon after I

     joined POL I recall being placed on `counter clerks' training, which was a

     couple of weeks training on an induction course designed for new entrant

     POL counter clerks. The course was for people to familiarise themselves

     with the counter clerk role and the working practices of POL prior to

     working in a post office. At that time Horizon was yet to be introduced and

     on the course I learned about post office stock balancing using a cash

     account book. I never considered myself an expert in this work as I, had

     no background in counter work, did not use the methods enough, and I

     always felt that anyone who used the systems and practices on a daily

     basis would have far more expertise in them than I would.




                                Page 10 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                                   WITNO5050100




36.   Specifically in respect of Horizon training, I recall going on a training

      course over a week or so as the system was being introduced. I cannot

      recall any other training I received on the system. I do recall however that

      the course I attended was not specifically for investigation staff as I

      remember being on the course with other post office staff, including some

      Subpostmasters.

37.   In regard to policies within the POL Security function. I can state that I

      was not involved at all in the development, setting, or management of

      policy. This was done at a more senior level than that which I was

      throughout my time with POL.

38. Also, I don't recall there being a `central repository' or such where

      investigators could specifically view policies. The dissemination of

      information contained within policy, as I recall and understand, was mainly

      through, training, team meetings, and special directives called

      'Investigation Circulars' which would be sent via email to investigation

      staff.

39. A number of pieces of legislation governed my role as an investigator.

      These included POL policies but also such things as the Police and

      Criminal Evidence Act codes of practice, the Criminal Procedures and

      Investigations Act, Human Rights Act, and as time went on in POL the

      Proceeds of Crime Act.

40. In the run up to the separation of POL from the Royal Mail Grou p I do not

      recall being involved in the development of investigation policies for post

      separation.




                                 Page 11 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5050100
                                                                                      WITN05050100




    41. Regarding development of policy, I have been asked to consider,

         Separation Project- Criminal Investigations Policy for Post Office Ltd,

         (POL00104900), and Activity Plan for POL separation project — Criminal

         Investigations Policy, (POL00105191), in my reply. Looking at the

         documents it appears that I was part of a working group looking at `inputs

         and outputs for investigation procedures' post separation. Whilst I vaguely

         recall being part of a focus group with the other people named on the

         document, I don't recall anything specifically discussed within it, nor how

         many focus group meetings I attended.

Audit and Investigation

    42. In respect of Audit and Investigation, I have been asked to describe my

         involvement with `Second Sight'. I can state that I am not aware of what

         that is so can only conclude that I have not been involved in any way.

    43. Though separate departments with POL the Investigation team worked

         very closely with the Audit team.

    44. I never worked for the Audit Team so cannot fully describe their remit

         however I understand that the Audit team were there to verify reported

         POL assets within a post office against what was actually there. As I

         understand it the audit team had a schedule of post offices they would

         visit. This schedule was based on auditing each post office over a period

         of time, but I understand that they also used a risk matrix within that to

         bring audits of particular offices forward if necessary. Also, investigators

         could contact the audit team scheduler in order to request an audit of a

         particular post office if required. As I understand it subpostmaster's or

         branch managers never knew when the auditors would attend.

                                    Page 12 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                                  WITN05050100




45. I recall that there were probably two reasons for an investigator to attend

      an audit. Firstly, when the lead auditor of the attending audit team had

      identified an issue with the audit they were performing at a post office.

      Usually this would be a difference or expected difference in what the

      auditor had verified in the post office account as to what had been

      declared by the person completing the account balance. I cannot recall if

      there were specific amount triggers in regard to whether the auditor would

      call or not. I do recall that towards the end of my time in POL Security

      there was a trigger that we would not investigate losses below £10,000,

      but do not recall precisely when that came in.

46.   In such an instance where there was a significant shortage, on discovery,

      the auditor, or members of the audit function would make phone calls to a

      number of people, including the investigation team.

47. In practical terms from my experience this would probably mean that the

      audit team called the investigation team local to where they were

      conducting the audit and reported that a shortfall was to be expected in

      the post office accounts of the branch they were at. This information was

      quickly disseminated to the respective investigator by their line manager

      who had designated them to investigate. If it was me I would then call the

      auditor, who was still on site to discuss their reported findings, and as a

      result, if the situation had not been resolved, then more than likely I would

      attend the Post Office.

48. Also, as we worked closely with the audit teams often they would call us

      directly to discuss their findings. I would then upwardly report what I had




                                 Page 13 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




     been told to my line manager before travelling to the affected post off ice if

     I felt it necessary.

49. On these occasions, on attendance, if I was the designated lead

     investigator I would generally speak with the auditor to establish if there

     had been any developments since their phone call to me and then speak

     with the Supostmaster or whomever was in charge of the post office. I

     would explain who I was, what my role was, and why I was there.

50. Once it had been established that evidence from the audit suggested a

     criminal offence may have been committed I would try to establish a

     potential suspect. To do this I would try to gather evidence to verify who

     had produced the most recent office balance, (perhaps the one from the

     day before) or cash declaration and who had signed the previous office

     balances. From examining previous cash accounts held on site I may try

     to look to see approximately when the declared cash holdings of the post

     office had been close to what POL said they should be. This might be an

     approximate indicator of a date when things perhaps could have started to

     go awry at the post office.

51. Depending on the individual situation, such as size of the office, amount of

     people there, their demeanour, room behind the post office counter etc. I

     would then either observe proceedings or leave the office to get out of the

     way. My intention at that point would have been to let the auditors get on

     with the audit until they had finished. I would not take part or assist in the

     audit in any way, as that was not my role.




                                   Page 14 of 45
                                                                                  WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITNO5050100




52. Though not always, many times, using the process described in the

     preceding paragraphs it was the Subpostmaster whom I felt I had

     reasonable grounds to suspect may have committed a criminal offence.

53. Investigators, in such circumstances, were encouraged by POL Security

     to gather evidence by way of an early interview of the suspect. As such I

     would invite the subpostmaster to give an early account of the

     circumstances as to why their office was found to be short.

54. In order to do this, I would invite the person suspected to an interview and

     explain the circumstances of the interview. I would explain that they were

     suspected of committing a criminal offence. We carried portable interview

     tape recorders and copies of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act codes

     of practice, and the interviews were carried out on the premises or in the

     home of the subpostmaster, (though always somewhere private).

55. Before commencing the interview, I would explain that during the interview

     they were entitled to have a solicitor present should they wish and also

     they could have a 'Post Office friend' present which could be the local

     National Federation of Subpostmasters representative or other official of

     the recognised union for the grade/position that they were.

56. The interview was always voluntary. Present always was the lead

     investigator and another investigator who was the support (second)

     officer.

57. l tended to use a script in order to ensure that I accurately covered off the

     criminal caution and suspect's legal rights once the interview tapes were

     running. Sometimes solicitors would attend, or arrangements would be

     made to postpone the interview until a time a solicitor was available,


                                Page 15 of 45
                                                                                  WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITNO5050100




     however my experience was that in the majority of interviews the suspect

     chose not to have a solicitor present. I would not give the suspect any

     advice in regard to whether they had a solicitor or not.

58. Similarly, sometimes the local representative of the National Federation of

     Subpostmasters attended and sat in on the interview. Whomever was or

     wasn't present it did not affect how I undertook the interview.

59. In the interview I attempted to obtain evidence in regard to the

     circumstances of the loss and gather any relevant evidence which had a

     bearing on the investigation. I would present the suspect with what was

     known at that time and the tapes would record their evidence. I'd ask for

     an initial account of why the auditors had found such a discrepancy and if

     appropriate challenge the answers given.

60. After the interview, its content would be reviewed, and reasonable lines of

     inquiry identified and investigated further before the case and evidence

     were submitted for a charging decision. I recall that we were bound by

     timescales for completion of a casefile, and though I can't recall the

     specific timescale I seem to remember it may have been two weeks or

     thereabouts from interview to the expected date that the file was

     submitted for charging advice.

61. The second reason I would have attended a Post Office was if I'd asked

     the auditors to attend a particular post office as it was under investigation.

     In order to gather evidence, I may have required an audit of the Post

     Office accounts.

62. If this was the case I would schedule the audit for the morning after the

     office had produced a balance and arrange for the audit team and


                                Page 16 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




     members of the investigation team to meet somewhere close to the post

     office beforehand in readiness to attend the post office before it opened

     for business the following day.

63. In such cases I would have briefed the audit team as to any suspicions I

     may have had in regard to potential places of discrepancy within the post

     office account.

64   Once at the post office I would introduce myself, other investigators, and

     members of the audit team. I would tell the subpostmaster, or person in

     charge, that I had called the audit of the office and ask that they give the

     auditor their attention for the time being and I would speak with them at

     the end of the audit.

65. Again, I would not take part in the auditing process at all, but once the

     audit was completed, the process for interviewing a suspect, if necessary,

     tended to be the same as noted in the previous paragraphs.

66. Other than the identification of potential suspect(s) I was not involved in

     further decision making beyond reporting my findings whilst at the post

     office. If anything of significance happened whilst at the office I would try

     to inform my line manager and, if relevant, the Subpostmasters line

     management as they were the ones who would be making decisions

     regarding the provision of service to the public from the affected post

     office branch.

67. Furthermore, in terms of later decision making, I believed my role to be

     one of evidence gatherer. I was not involved in decision making in regard

     to criminal charges, prosecution, or accepting a plea at court. I was not

     aware of any test which may have been used, or what legal advice was


                                Page 17 of 45
                                                                                         WI TNO5050100
                                                                                     WITNO5050100




         available to people making such decisions. I presented the evidence I had

         gathered from various sources, provided some analysis of that evidence

         in my report, and sent it off to others for further decision making. I had no

         `final say' in what happened with the case.

    68. Neither was I involved in the termination or not, of subpostmasters

         contracts. I recall that on completion of an interview, and submission of a

         case file I would have to provide a `discipline' report which essentially was

         the report that I had produced for the prosecution decision but with just

         the facts detailed, and no unsubstantiated observations. The contracts

         manager then made their decision on contract issues using this discipline

         report and whatever else they wished to use.

    69. Towards the end of my time with POL security it encouraged used of the

         Proceeds of Crime Act in order to recoup losses. Most of the work done in

         respect of this was by POL's in house Financial Investigators who would

         pursue this aspect of cases. Practically for investigators such as me it

         would mean such things as completing an authority signed by the account

         holder for the release of information from their bank, through to performing

         a search when attending the subpostoffice in order to identify possible

         assets, bank accounts, property, and the like.

    70. Such searches were always performed with the signed written consent of

         the suspect and documented accordingly.

INSTRUCTIONS/ GUIDANCE GIVEN TO INVESTIGATORS

    71. In respect of the Casework Management Document (version 1.0, March

         2000), (POL00104747) and Casework Management Document (version



                                    Page 18 of 45
                                                                                   WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




     4.0, October 2002), (POL00104777), I do not recall being provided with

     either document.

72. My understanding of the 2000 guidance on page 2, at the second, third,

     and fourth bullet points is that POL Lawyers would have the ultimate say

     on disclosure. Secondly, that as an organisation, within disclosure, care

     should be taken as evidence and unused material may contain perhaps

     commercially sensitive information that should not be in the public

     domain. An example of which, and relevant at the time the guidelines

     were produced, was the Benefits Agency and POL processes for payment

     and checking of benefits payments through a post office. This was

     commercially sensitive and perhaps should not have been in the public

     domain. This sort of thing, I feel is what the phrase within the guidance

     `maintaining good industrial relations' perhaps refers to. POL provided

     services and an access point for many secure products and services, and

     I feel that the guidelines refer to consideration of this when taking cases

     though court.

73. I do not however feel that this was relevant to it commercial relationship

     with Fujitsu in respect of any known bugs, failures, or glitches in the

     Horizon system. I strongly feel that these should have been disclosed at

     as soon as they were known of.

74. In regard to case file compliance, from the outset of my time investigating

     for POSIS compliance in regard to cases which would require a

     prosecution decision was strongly advocated by POL Legal Services and

     senior members of staff.




                                Page 19 of 45
                                                                                   WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




75. My understand was that these files should be complaint as they presented

     the evidence for consideration of criminal offences and were the basis of

     cases which may end up being progressed through the criminal courts.

     Compliance ensured that required information was set out in the files

     uniformly across POL, and Royal Mail, and that particular items within the

     file were in a common place where they could be routinely found by others

     processing the file.

76. Towards the end of my time with POL I recall there being a push on

     compliance, I do not specifically recall the precise reason, and I do not

     recall being involved in the development or introduction of the process,

     however I can only think that compliance in respect of files submitted for

     prosecution decision may have slipped to an unacceptable level, bringing

     in this renewed push.

77. I recall that in this process a compliance check list was sent out and files

     were scored against the check list by a compliance manager, whom I

     recall to be Ged Harbinson at the time. Mr Harbinson would score the file

     and would send the file back to the investigator if it did not attain the

     required compliance percentage score. I recall that the investigators line

     manager would also be copied in to Mr Harbinson's findings. I do not now

     recall what the required score compliance percentage score was.

78. In regard to my understanding of Para 2.15 of Guide to the Preparation

     and Layout of investigation Red Label Case Files, (POL00118101) I would

     say that any failing of the types identified in the document should be

     drawn to the attention of the prosecution decision maker in the report by

     the investigation manager highlighting them in bold type.


                                 Page 20 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




79. Similarly, should a matter be progressed through the criminal courts it

     would be reasonable to expect that matters highlighted in this way would

     be included on the relevant disclosure schedule. If there was evidence of

     Horizon system bugs errors or defects I feel that this evidence would

     clearly be relevant to the case and would pass the disclosure test in that it

     would be reasonably considered capable of undermining the prosecution

     case or assisting the defence.

80. Moving to my consideration of the document `Identification Codes'

     (POL00118104). I was not involved in drafting that document nor have

     any idea who did. I don't recall seeing that document prior to its recent

     inclusion in the public inquiry documents. Many of the terms used in that

     document appear to me to be offensive and outdated.

81. I recall as an investigator being required to include identity codes in

     casework reporting and always believed it to be a requirement of POL or

     Royal Mail Groups obligations as a non-police criminal investigation body

     in recording of crime data and statistics to the police. We were also asked

     to provide antecedent information about suspects which I viewed in the

     same way as a form of ancillary information we were required to obtain for

     an outside party.

82. I recall that in order to provide the identity code information required for

     reporting there was a document I used listing established Police 'IC'

     codes, but that document was not POL00118104, nor did it contain the

     terms listed in POL00118104_

83. I recall that in order to provide that information, after an interview I would

     tell the interviewee that I had some administration tasks to complete and


                                 Page 21 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                                   WITN05050100




     ask some basic antecedent questions. I would show them the document

     used listing the codes or go through its contents verbally and ask them

     what they considered themselves to be from the list of Police IC codes . I

     would then record their answer for use in the report_

84. It is difficult to state what analysis was done by investigators of Horizon

     data when someone attributed a shortage to Horizon. It depended on

     what had been said during the interview. If someone had stated that a

     loss had just appeared and offered nothing else, it was difficult to begin to

     find a place to start any analysis.

85. I can't specifically recall the steps I would have taken but if the

     subpostmaster could provide any relevant information about the loss

     being as a result of a particular product, or transaction, then I feel that

     some analysis would have been done in the area named.

86. In regard to analysis, I always viewed that my personal role was not to

     provide intricate analysis of systems and usually I would ask someone

     better qualified, perhaps a representative of a particular product within the

     National Business Support Centre, a POL security analyst, or on

     occasions Fujitsu representative to perform analysis.

87. 1 would do some basic analysis such as comparing cash on hand figures

     from previous cash accounts or declarations, examination of error notices,

     looking at transaction corrections, or when it was relevant, physically

     counting pension and allowance dockets against the declaration and the

     like, but beyond this level of analysis I recall that I would tend to seek

     expertise from elsewhere. If required I would then ask that this evidence

     was presented in a statement.


                                 Page 22 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                   WITNO5050100




88. I recall that early on after Horizon was introduced we had to send away for

      Horizon information though I can't recall who would provide it. However,

      towards the end of my time at POL, remote access to Horizon information

      via a portal on our computers was introduced where information could be

      downloaded directly to us.

89. Through my career with POL, I did not hold positions where I was privy to

      the contractual arrangements between POL and Fujitsu.

90.   I cannot recall arrangements between POL and Fujitsu in respect of the

      provision of ARQ requests, though I do not feel that they were provided as

      a matter of course for losses attributed to an unexplained Horizon

      shortage. I vaguely recall also that Fujitsu may have charged POL for

      provision of some ARQ information after a certain number of requests,

      however I don't not recall what the number of requests before that cost

      began. Also, I don't recall that I ever consciously considered this in any

      ARQ request I might have made.

91. I recall that ARQ data might be required if a case was committed for trial

      following a 'not guilty' plea at magistrates court. It may have been

      requested at this stage perhaps by the reviewing lawyer in their advice. If

      this ARQ data was part of the evidence then I feel that it would be

      disclosed to the Subpostmaster's legal team at the relevant point prior to

      the trial as part of the evidence.

92. That said I feel that in investigating cases, if it sufficed, I often would be

      satisfied with a 'catch all' statement to say that that the Horizon system

      was in good working at the time and did not throw up anomalies. If then




                                   Page 23 of 45
                                                                                          WI TNO5050100
                                                                                    WITNO5050100




        directed to obtain something in more detail by Legal Services I would go

        ahead and obtain whatever they had requested.

   93. In regard to contact with individual Fujitsu personnel I recall that requests

        in to Fujitsu from POL security were facilitated initially by a single point of

        contact. From reading documents provided I remember from my time with

        POL, Andy Dunks being a representative of Fujitsu who would be called

        on to assist in prosecutions, however beyond this I cannot recall any other

        Fujitsu employee name.

   94. I am aware of Gareth Jenkins name, but again this would be through the

        documentation provided by the inquiry. I do not recall any specific

        dealings I had with him or if he gave evidence to support any investigation

        or prosecution I was part of whilst working for POL.

RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHERS

   95. I recall dealing with Cartwright King Solicitors in their role as a prosecuting

        agent of POL in the midlands area. I think they prosecuted a case I had

        taken over after an investigator in the Midlands had left POL. This case

        was prosecuted through Birmingham Magistrates court, and I cannot

        recall anything about it other than this. That, I believe, was my only

        interaction with Cartwright King.

   96. As touched on earlier in my statement, I had regular engagement on a

        one-to-one level with local representatives of the National Federation of

        Subpostmasters when they represented their members in criminal

        interviews that I was part of.

   97. Their reps regularly sat in on interviews involving federation members.

        Quite often they would speak with their members beforehand and/or

                                    Page 24 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5050100
                                                                                   WITN05050100




         during a break in the interview. I never promoted or facilitated these

         meetings, however I did not object to them taking place if they and the

         suspect wished to confer.

    98. 1 was never present during these exchanges and would always excuse

         myself from the room or let them use another room if available until their

         private conversation was over. Following this, on restart of the interview I

         would explain on tape what had happened in the interview break and

         resume the interview.

POL v Lee Castleton

    99. From memory I do not recall any involvement with events surrounding Lee

         Castleton. The documents I have been asked to consider Marine Drive

         Post Office Summary of Events, (LCAS0000699), Audit report Marine

         Drive Post Office, (POL00082391_004), Letter from Cath Oglesby

         confirming Mr Castleton's suspension, (POL0082391_002), and witness

         statement of Cath Oglesby (LCAS0000609) indicate that I spoke with

         Catherine Oglesby in regard to shortages Mr Castleton was experiencing

         at the Marine Drive post office in early 2004.

    100. It looks like Ms Oglesby contacted me for advice, and I told her that, as Mr

         Castleton had engaged with retail line management from an early stage,

         declaring losses to her, and working alongside her to establish a cause for

         the losses, I felt this was not a matter for criminal investigation.

    101. As said I do not recall this exchange, but it appears consistent with advice

         which I may have given.

    102. Based on what is contained within the provided documents, if this

         information was disclosed to me by Ms Oglesby at the time I feel that my

                                     Page 25 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                    WITNO5050100




        decision would have been based on the fact that as soon as things

        appeared to have begun to go awry in the accounts of his Subpostoffice

        Mr Castleton immediately contacted his line manager, gave full disclosure

        of events, invited her scrutiny, and began an open dialogue with her in

        order to attempt to resolve the issue.

   103. In doing so it appears that there was no 'mens rea' or'actus reus' in

        respect of his actions, and this is what I may have explained to Ms

        Oglesby at the time leading to her report of our conversation.

   104. In respect of the conduct of this situation, from the reports provided it

        appears that Ms Oglesby explored Mr Castleton's reasons for the

        shortages in his branch and attempted to work with him. She put in

        measures to try to establish the cause of the losses and if another

        subpostmasters using the same hardware would experience the same

        results. When that didn't happen, and I am presuming Ms Oglesby was in

        receipt of the conventional thinking of the time within POL that Horizon

        was robust and infallible, her decisions and actions appear reasonable on

        the balance of probabilities, under the known circumstances at the time.

   105. Concerns I have about the conduct of this matter now are that the

        Horizon system was not robust, nor infallible so Mr Castleton's claims of

        spurious transactions were sadly not believed, and he and his family

        suffered tremendously as a result.

PROSECUTION OF ALLISON HENDERSON

   106. From memory I have little recollection of the prosecution of Allison

        Henderson other than I recall travelling to Norwich with Christopher Knight

        towards the end of my time with POL in order to assist as support officer

                                    Page 26 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5050100
                                                                                    WITN05050100




     during an interview with a subpostmaster. On reading the supporting

     documents provided by the inquiry, I can state that:-

107. I may have been aware of the case through general chat in the

     investigation office in Chesterfield where we were all based. Mr Knight

     was the lead officer for this case and would have probably asked the other

     investigators present in the office to assist in his interview of Ms

     Henderson.

108. i don't specifica►ly recall the event but presumably Mr Knight would have

     made the decision to interview Ms Henderson as it was normally the lead

     investigators decision to do so.

109. i would have volunteered to support him for no other reason than I had

     time in my schedule. I don't think I would have been directed by

     supervision to assist Mr Knight, nor do I feel that it was it felt I was any

     more qualified or experienced to deal with the matter than anyone else. It

     would have been simply that I was free to do it.

110. As support officer in the interview (sometimes called second officer), my

     role was to support the lead officer on the day, and particularly in the

     interview. I don't recall a specific remit for support officer, but they may be

     called upon to set up the interview equipment, perform introductions in the

     interview, cover certain points or subjects within an interview, monitor the

     tape recordings and timings, take notes if required, basically anything that

     the lead investigator instructed them to do. Different lead investigators

     asked different things of their support officer and I don't specifically recall

     anything Mr Knight asked of me.




                                 Page 27 of 45
                                                                                   WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITNO5050100




111. Prior to the interview with Ms Henderson, I do not recall being involved in

     the case at all. That said, generally the lead officer and support office

     would have a briefing of some kind beforehand in regard to an interview,

     and I would imagine that this happened, however I do not specifically

     recall it.

112. I do not recall was said in the interview at all however I do not dispute

     what is detailed about the interview in the Investigation Report

     (POL00047152) Witness statement of Christopher Knight (POL00055458)

     or Record of the Taped Interview Summary (POL0054407)

113. During the interview I don't recall what was shown to Ms Henderson,

     however I do not dispute the record of POL0054407 and Investigation

     POL0047152 both of which were written closer to the interview date and

     both of which detail items shown to her. That said, with POL0054407

     being only a summary of the interview I cannot say if what is listed on

     there is absolutely everything shown, or not.

114. In respect of Ms Henderson's allegations about the reliability of the

     Horizon system, to the best of my knowledge I was not aware of any

     issues brought up by her beyond what is report in the aforementioned

     documents. Also, again to the best of my knowledge I was not involved in

     any decision making in respect of Ms Henderson, nor did I have further

     involvement in this case.

115. In regard to the investigation of this case appears to be the same as other

     cases from around that time and taken forward based on what was

     accepted at the time. The way it appears to have been investigated and

     prosecuted does not differ from many others from that period. Based on


                                 Page 28 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5050100
                                                                                       WITN05050100




        the evidence at the time, false accounting charges were admitted with no

        evidence offered on other charges. Following the discovery that the

        Horizon system was not robust and accurate this case, as with others, has

        subsequently been overturned or quashed. I fully support this course of

        action and express regret at the treatment Ms Henderson and her family

        experienced from POL as a result of these events.

PROSECUTION OF ALISON HALL

   116. Similarly, to my comments in regard to the prosecution of Alison

        Henderson, from memory I have little recollection of the prosecution of

        Allison Hall. I reca►l travelling to a solicitors office in Cleckheaton with

        Christopher Knight in order to assist as support officer during an interview

        with a subpostmasters but little else.

   117. On reading the supporting documents provided by the inquiry, I can state

        that Mr Knight may have asked me, or I may have volunteered to attend

        as his support officer, I do not believe I was attached to the case through

        any particular knowledge or perceived expertise that could be specifically

        useful in the matter.

   118. I do not recall being involved in the case at a►l beyond my attendance as

        support officer in the interview. Normally the lead officer in the case

        makes the decision on who to interview, so I would surmise that Mr Knight

        made the decision to interview Ms Hall.

   119. Again, I do not particularly recall the interview, nor what was shown to Ms

        Hall during it however, I do not dispute the transcript of interview on 28

        September 2010 (POL00021252), Investigation Report (POL00091037)

        and List of Exhibits (POL00091065) which details such items.

                                    Page 29 of 45
                                                                                 WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITNO5050100




120. In respect of Ms Hall's allegations about the reliability of the Horizon

     system, to the best of my knowledge I was not aware of these at the time.

     Also, again to the best of my knowledge I was not involved in any decision

     making in respect of Ms Henderson, nor did I have further involvement in

     this case, beyond making the statement shown at page 13 of the Witness

     List (POL000911149) which I would imagine Mr Knight would have asked

     me to provide.

121. Considering paragraph 12 of Alison Hall's Statement (WITNO1450100) I

     would observe that I cannot recall being present at an interview with Ms

     Hall, Sue Muddeman and Mr Knight at Leeds Post Office headquarters

     and the investigation team would not normally attend meetings such as

     the one described. The interview Mr Knight and I undertook with Ms Hall

     was recorded and documented in POL00021252 at her solicitors office,

     and can only feel that Ms Hall may be mistaken in respect of the

     attendance of Mr Knight and I.

122. In regard to the investigation of this case appears to be the same as other

     cases from around that time and taken forward based on what was

     accepted at the time in regard to the Horizon system. The way it appears

     to have been investigated and prosecuted does not differ from many

     others from that period. Evidence relating to False accounting charges at

     the time was admitted, with no evidence offered on other charges of theft

     and the like.

123. Following the discovery that the Horizon system was not robust and

     accurate, convictions from this case, as with others, have rightly been

     quashed, and once again I fully support this course of action. As with Ms


                                 Page 30 of 45
                                                                                        WI TNO5050100
                                                                                     WITNO5050100




         Henderson and indeed all persons affected I express regret at the

         treatment Ms Hall and her family experienced from POL as a result of

         these events.

Prosecution of David Blakey

    124. Due to the length of time since these matters my recollection is limited.

         However, from memory and examination of the provided documents

         relating to this matter I can state:-

    125. The document Investigation report dated 25th May 2004 (POL00044818)

         describes the circumstances in which I first became involved in Mr

         Blakey's case. My role was that of officer in the case, or lead investigator

         in the case, and to the best of my knowledge I don't recall any

         involvement with the case prior to the phone call I received on the

         morning of 13 May 2004.

    126. 1 attended Riby Square post office that morning, as, based on what I'd

         been told, I suspected a criminal offence may have taken place and it was

         part of the remit of my job to investigate this matter.

    127. I do not specifically recall the content of any conversations with the

         auditors that morning beyond what is reported in POL00044818.

    128. I would have made the decision to interview David Blakey more than likely

         based on information I had received from the auditors, namely the

         anomalies in the accounting at the subpostoffice, and the brief statement

         Mr Blakey had provided to them that morning where he admits to knowing

         of the loses, and covering them up in the accounts. It appeared to me that

         a criminal offence had been committed and I had reasonable grounds to

         suspect Mr Blakey of committing it.

                                     Page 31 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5050100
                                                                                  WITNO5050100




129. Though I cannot specifically recall what documentation I considered

     before interviewing Mr Blakey it would appear from POL00044818 that I

     considered previous cash accounts, and the written statement which Mr

     Blakey had given to the auditors that morning.

130. I am content that the records of Mr Blakey's interviews on 13 May 2004

     (POL00044830 and POL00044831) detail what documents were shown to

     Mr Blakey in his interview. I have no recollection beyond this.

131. I was not aware of specific allegations made by Mr Blakey relating to the

     reliability of the Horizon system. During his interview Mr Blakey said that

     losses at Roby Square had been steadily climbing and he was unaware of

     a specific reason, but he had been covering up the losses in the office

     accounts that had been submitted to POL. As far as I recall , he did not

     directly call into question the reliability of the Horizon system at that time.

132. As documented in POL00044818 and the Summary of Key Points from an

     interview with Gillian Blakey (POL0044830) Along with Helen Dickinson,

     Investigation manager, I interviewed Gillian Blakey immediately after

     interviewing Mr Blakey. I cannot recall specifics of the interview, and do

     not recall anything further than that detailed in POL0044830, but I have no

     reason to question the details of the interview contained in those

     documents.

133. I do not recall interviewing Shirley Blakey however POL0044830 indicates

     that on 24 May 2004 Helen Dickinson and I spoke with her. I am content

     that what is reported reflects the content of the interview.

134. Similarly, I have vague recollections of conducting interviews with other

     Riby Square staff during the course of the investigation, however I cannot


                                 Page 32 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                                  WITN05050100




     recall specific details of what was discussed. These interviews are

     reported and summarised in POL0044830, and I have no reason to

     question the information contained within the report.

135. As detailed in POL0044830 I made enquiries in to Mr Blakey's finances in

     order to investigate a line of inquiry in respect of his recent financial

     position. I was investigating what I thought at the time to be a significant

     loss of money from POL and perhaps felt it reasonable to approach his

     bank for information.

136. I cannot reca►l if I made enquiries at Grimsby Police Station in regard to

     Mr Blakey case. Occasionally enquiries would be made with the police for

     all sorts of reasons, but without further information in respect of this case I

     would not know if the police in Grimsby were approached.

137. I am unable to say if ARQ logs were sought in this case. I do not

     remember making the request or not making the request. At the time, I do

     not think it was a matter of course to request them in cases such as this.

     Nor were we as investigators instructed to obtain them in pursuing

     prosecutions. At the time, and 2004 was shortly after the full roll out of

     Horizon, I and other investigators believed that Horizon was robust. This

     is what we had been told and continued to be told. The certainty of the

     message from POL in this regard may have coloured our judgement in

     matters surrounding Horizon.

138. I cannot recall any further involvement I had with Mr Blakey's case prior to

     the decision to charge him and was not involved at all in that decision.

139. Regarding disclosure, without really knowing it I was the disclosure officer

     in the case. Within POL investigations, if you were the officer in the case,


                                 Page 33 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                   WITN05050100




     you were also, disclosure officer, exhibits officer, report writer, witness

     liaison, and all the other roles combined to support an investigation. As

     such, when it came time to review evidence and produce disclosure

     schedules for a criminal prosecution it was down to each investigator to

     do this.

140. An issue with that I feel there was, was that there was no regular refresher

     training on the subject, often the line managers were equally as poorly

     equipped to deal with disclosure, and because as POL cases were rarely

     committed for trial, consideration and production of schedules was

     something that investigators rarely did. I can recall in my time at POL

     investigators with substantial service who had never assembled what was

     known as a `committal file' and therefore had never produced disclosure

     schedules.

141. To expand, obviously rules in respect of this have now changed, however

     in the past POL would charge a person for example with theft and they

     would appear at magistrates' court for a first hearing. Invariably, because

     of the amounts of money involved the magistrates would send the case to

     crown court to be dealt with there. At this point, ordinarily, all that an

     investigator had submitted by way of reporting was whatever was in the

     file that had initially submitted at the end of the investigation when it had

     been reported to the designated prosecution manager and Legal

     Services.

142. If the defendant pleaded not guilty and the matter was sent for trial it was

     only at this point that a full file, (which was known within POL investigation

     as a committal file') was assembled.


                                 Page 34 of 45
                                                                                    WI TNO5050100
                                                                               WITN05050100




143. Many of POL's cases attracted a guilty plea so committal files were not

     deemed necessary and not produced, and as such I feel that performance

     in respect of tasks involved in producing a committal file, such as

     disclosure, may have suffered.

144. Looking at the date of Mr Blakey's prosecution, I would not be surprised to

     learn that in regard to my time with POL this may have been the first time

     that I had put together a `committal file' and produced Disclosure

     Schedules.

145. i recall that my technique to deal with disclosure at the time was to assign

     each case I was working on a plastic box container that I would keep in a

     locked cupboard in my office. As files were paper based at that time, any

     relevant item from the case I would deposit in this container, if necessary

     having firstly printed it off from a computer. When instructed to assemble

     a `committal file' I would then simply go through the items in the box and

     list as I saw fit.

146. Though I cannot specifically recall undertaking the exercise for Mr

     Blakey's prosecution I believe I would have approached disclosure in this

     way and produced the Draft Schedule of Non-Sensitive Unused material

     (POL00044817) using this process.

147. This, along with other documents (witness list and copies of statements,

     exhibit list and copies of exhibits etc.) would then have been sent to legal

     services for review by the reviewing lawyer. Unfortunately, I don't know in

     this case who the reviewing lawyer was, Jarnail Singh looked to have held

     the case for legal services, but do not know if it was he who was actually

     the reviewing lawyer.


                                Page 35 of 45
                                                                                     WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITNO5050100




148. On reflection I feel my lack of training and or experience in disclosure is

     evident in document POL00044817, with the descriptions being

     particularly poor. Under those circumstances I am as confident as I can be

     that I fulfilled my remit in that all items that had been gathered as unused

     evidence in the case were considered and documented accordingly, and

     that what I produced in terms of schedules for review was accurate.

     However I feel that if I was to do the disclosure exercise in respect of this

     case again, or if a more experienced disclosure officer would have done

     the exercise at the time, it may have produced different results. Also, I do

     not recall that the reviewing lawyer ever questioned my disclosure

     schedules.

149. Via Jarnail Singh's memo to S&A casework dated 23 June 2004

     (POL00044835) I would have been notified of the prosecution decision in

     respect of Mr Blakey however, I had no input into the process other than

     perhaps to perform any of the tasks identified by Mr Singh on the

     document to support the prosecution, though I cannot specifically recall

     doing any of these. It was also my responsibility to lay the information at

     court in order to obtain summons, and I would have used the information

     from the document POL00044835 to assist in this.

150. In respect of the prosecution decision, at the time, I probably would have

     felt that it was a fair reflection of the evidence that had been presented in

     the investigation.

151. I do not recall any further involvement I had in this case. I would have

     probably served summons on Mr Blakey. I would have then attended

     court hearings as the officer in the case to support POL's local


                                Page 36 of 45
                                                                                  WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




     prosecution agent as it was common practise for POL investigators to do

     so at the time.

152. Reflecting on the investigation and prosecution of Mr Blakey knowing

     what I know now, I express regret at the treatment Mr Blakey and his

     family experienced as a result of these events but offer the following by

     way of explanation for my actions.

153. My role as an investigator was to gather evidence to investigate the loss_

     From the outset, after his confession firstly to auditors, and then within his

     interview, Mr Blakey admitted that he was fully aware that cash was

     missing from the post office and that it had been for some weeks.

     However instead of raising the alarm to POL he had falsified accounts to

     disguise the fact. I accept that he said he wanted to shield his wife from

     events, but I did not think this was reasonable course of action as the

     losses continued to mount up to the figure they stood at when the auditors

     arrived at Riby Square post office that morning.

154. Early in his interview, under caution, Mr Blakey had admitted that he was

     fully aware of the amount of cash shortage that the auditors had found

     that morning, he had covered these losses up, and in entering inflated

     figures into the account to make a balance, he had known his actions

     were dishonest. I feel that it may have been these admissions of

     dishonesty which led me to subsequently diminish and dismiss his claims

     that he was unaware of how the losses had occurred in the first place.

155. I accept that within his interview Mr Blakey repeatedly denied having any

     responsibility for the losses, however as an investigator in such

     circumstances I felt that it was reasonable for such an account to face


                                Page 37 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITN05050100




     challenge. As Mr Blakey offered no explanation to me that would allow

     focused scrutiny of a particular area of loss within the account, as the

     person who was admitting covering it up I felt it reasonable to explore

     possibilities that he had taken it. Mr Blakey had admitted means and

     opportunity in respect of the loss and I felt it reasonable and appropriate

     to explore a motive.

156. At this time, when I challenged Mr Blakey saying that I didn't believe his

     explanation, I note that he actually told me that he didn't know if he

     believed it himself. That said, he did continue to stress that his

     explanation, that the losses appeared out of nowhere, was the truth.

157. After the interview I felt that I took relevant and suitable steps to progress

     the case. I made appropriate inquiries with other people who had access

     to cash and stock and gathered further evidence from witnesses. Of

     course, all of this was within a narrative that I and others had at the time

     where it was unquestionably believed within POL that the Horizon system

     was not capable of producing an unexplained loss within a post office. It

     was normal at this time to obtain a statement to say as such, however I

     have not seen such a statement within documents disclosed to me at this

     time. Perhaps with Mr Blakey's case not going to trial this may not have

     been obtained.

158. On reflection I recognise that it must have been extremely distressing for

     Mr Blakey and his family to hear my dismissal of his now known to be

     truthful explanation, but at that time in my experience of investigating

     previous criminal losses for POL more often than not the person covering

     the loss up in the accounts was found to be the perpetrator of the loss.


                                 Page 38 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5050100
                                                                                 WITN05050100




        Furthermore, often the motive or motives for the person taking the cash

        were ones similar to the reasons that I put to Mr Blakey when challenging

        his account. Again, on reflection, perhaps this bias, albeit unconsciously,

        may have been in play as I investigated the incident.

GENERAL

   159. It was my honestly held belief during the time I was investigating within

        POL that Horizon was robust and would not erroneously produce

        spontaneous transactions that were not genuine. That was the over riding

        narrative that I was being told and accepted.

   160. In order to support our work, I (and other investigators I worked alongside)

        obtained Section 9 statements from people who were considered Horizon

        experts. In each case their evidence reported that the system was

        accurate. This was the bedrock of any POL investigation and I took those

        statements at face value when gathering evidence in my cases. However,

        as briefly mentioned in the preceding paragraph, this may have clouded,

        not only my judgment and objectivity, but also potentially that of other POL

        staff, lawyers, legal advocates, and jury members.

   161. I left POL around the first week of 2012 and at that time I do not believe I

        was aware of any successful challenge to Horizon data. I feel that if there

        had been one, it would have opened the door to numerous other

        challenges and POL's position in respect of demonstrating the criminal

        burden of proof to a court that the Horizon system had integrity would

        have rightly been made untenable. Unfortunately, this did not happen.

   162. I am unaware of what POL's investigation in to 'bug and errors' in the

        system was, or if it was deemed sufficient. From an investigators point of

                                   Page 39 of 45
                                                                                 WI TNO5050100
                                                                                WITN05050100




     view, when required I simply asked the question of those who should have

     known and was always told that the Horizon system was robust.

163. Throughout my time with POL, I was not privy to information which Fujitsu

     provided to POL about the operating status of Horizon beyond the content

     of statements as detailed in the preceding paragraphs.

164. If anyone within POL or Fujitsu knew that the integrity of the Horizon

     system was questionable I feel that this information should have been

     provided to the Investigation team without delay. The information

     obviously would have majorly impacted any investigation that was being

     carried out and completely undermined any criminal or civil proceedings

     POL had undertaken, since the roll out of the system.

165. From a personal viewpoint, on reflection I feel that there was an amount of

     complacency from POL and others in the investigation and prosecution of

     these matters. A similar situation appeared to be regularly played out as

     cases progressed through to conclusion.

166. Quite often, as has been evident in some of the cases commented on in

     my statement, false accounting was admitted at interview against a

     backdrop of the suspect stating they were not aware of the origin of the

     loss.

167. Charges were then brought for the admitted false accounting, with an

     associated theft charge for the amount of loss.

168. During prosecution, at an early-stage POL appeared keen to take a plea

     deal where the false accounting charges were admitted, with the theft

     charge not being taken forward. This meant that the evidence in respect

     of the theft charge was not tested in court. Often, when it was taken to


                                Page 40 of 45
                                                                                      WI TNO5050100
                                                                                  WITN05050100




     trial, the defendant was acquitted of theft, however within the same

     proceedings they were still convicted of false accounting as following an

     admission in interview, evidence of that offence was compelling.

169. Being convicted of any criminal charge would mean that a

     subpostmasters contract was terminated, and their contract said they

     were liable for any losses, so POL were able to dismiss the

     Subpostmaster and recoup their perceived loss without evidence of the

     robustness of the Horizon system ever being truly tested.

170. 1 feel that POL were content to secure a conviction of anything, as a

     means to an end to achieve this. I feel that complacency may have set in

     and negotiation within indictments was widely accepted.

171. Reflecting on my personal performance during this time I would say that in

     comparing the cases I investigated pre-Horizon and those post Horizon

     rollout I did not notice a significant increase in the audit shortage type

     cases.

172. Though I was not aware of the whole picture in regard to how many cases

     of a similar nature were being pursued by POL, I do not recall any

     significant increase in this type of investigation in the period after Horizon

     system implementation to that which I experienced before the system roll

     out. This may have affected my thinking in respect of my investigations,

     as if I had have noticed a sharp increase in cases after the

     implementation of Horizon it may have raised my suspicions that the

     Horizon system was not performing as it should have.

173. The thought that during my time with POL someone within the

     organisation may have had knowledge that the Horizon system was


                                Page 41 of 45
                                                                                       WI TNO5050100
                                                                                     WITNO5050100




           flawed and did not disclose this information as they should, does not sit

           well with me. Particularly knowing that investigations and prosecutions

           continued which they must have realised were unsafe as a consequence.

     174. I feel anger that under these circumstances, through my investigations I

           may have been used as an unwitting instrument of POL and Fujitsu to

           perpetuate the myth that Horizon was faultless and brought unnecessary

           distress and anguish to innocent people.




STATEMENT OF TRUTH


I believe the content of this statement to be true.


                                                             GRO
                              ---------------------------,




Signature of the witness:


Date of Signature: 08 October 2023




                                                              Page 42 of 45
                                                                     WI TN05050100
                                                                    WITNO5050100




         Index to First Witness statement of Paul Whitaker

No   URN                Document Description          Control

                                                      Number

1    POL00104900        Separation Project- Criminal POL-0080532

                        Investigations Policy for

                        Post Office Ltd

2    POL00105191        Activity Plan for POL         POL-0080816

                        separation project —

                        Criminal Investigations

                        Policy

4    POL00104747        Casework Management           POL-0080387

                        Document (version 1.0,

                        March 2000)

5    POL00104777        Casework Management           POL-0080417

                        Document (version 4.0,

                        October 2002)

6    POL00118101        Guide to the Preparation      VIS00012690

                        and Layout of investigation

                        Red Label Case Files

7    POL00118104        Identification Codes          VIS00012693

8    LCAS0000699        Marine Drive Post Office      VIS00010939

                        Summary of Events

9    POL00082391_004 Audit report Marine Drive        POL-
                                                      0078954_172
                        Post Office



                        Page 43 of 45
                                                                      WI TN05050100
                                                                     WITNO5050100




10   POL00082391_002 Letter from Cath Oglesby          POL-
                                                       0078954_170
                       confirming Mr Castleton's

                       suspension

11   LCAS0000609       Witness statement of Cath       VIS00010849

                       Oglesby

12   POL00047152       Investigation Report            POL-0043631

13   POL00055458       Witness statement of            POL-0051937

                       Christopher Knight

14   POL00054407       Record of the Taped             POL-0050886

                       Interview Summary

15   POL00021252       transcript of interview on 28   POL-0014444

                       September 2010

16   POL00091037       Investigation Report            POL-0090681

17   POL00091065       List of Exhibits                POL-0090709

18   POL00091149       Witness List                    POL-0090793

19   WITN01450100      Alison Hall's Statement         WITN01450100

20   POL00044818       Investigation report dated      POL-0041297

                       25th May 2004

21   POL00044830 and   Mr Blakey's interviews on       POL-0041309
                                                       and POL-
     POL00044831       13 May 2004                     0041310

22   POL00044829       Summary of Key Points           POL-0041308

                       from an interview with

                       Gillian Blakey

23   POL00044817       Draft Schedule of Non-          POL-0041296

                       Sensitive Unused material


                       Page 44 of 45
                                                            WI TNO5050100
                                                           WITN05050100




24   POL00044835   Jarnail Singh's memo to   POL-0041314

                   S&A casework dated 23

                   June 2004




                   Page 45 of 45
