WITN10810100
WITN10810100

Witness Name: Christopher Michael Jackson

Statement No.: WITN10810100

Dated: 19 December 2023

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER MICHAEL JACKSON

|, Christopher Michael Jackson, will say as follows":
A. SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF THIS WITNESS STATEMENT

1 | am a partner (member) in Burges Salmon LLP. | have been Post Office
Limited’s (“Post Office”) recognised legal representative (“RLR’”) for the

Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the “Inquiry”) since 1 September 2023.

‘The content of this witness statement generally reflects the position on 1 December 2023 when | filed my draft statement
as required, which the inquiry has reviewed. Intensive work has continued since 1 December 2023. In the final version of
this statement, | have referenced 2 letters sent to the Inquiry dated 15 December 2023 as they provide updates on relevant
points and can be briefly cross-referenced. Otherwise, | will provide relevant updates to the Inquiry in correspondence and

oral evidence as appropriate rather than amend content that the Inquiry has reviewed

Page 1 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

This witness statement is made to assist the Inquiry with the matters set

out in the Rule 9 requests addressed to me and dated:

(a) 31 October 2023 (the “October Request”); and

(b) 17 November 2023 (the "November Request’)

made further to the Inquiry Chair's directions dated 15 September 2023
(the “Directions”). | have below also referred to the October and November

Requests together as “the Requests’.

In overview:

(a) the October Request requires clarification and explanation of points
of engagement relating to the mechanics and practicalities of
disclosure that were set out in letters from my team to the Inquiry
dated 13 [WITN10810101] and 16 October 2023 [WITN10810102];

and

(b) | the November Request requires explanations of: (i) the events that
led to the Mimecast/Exchange issue and what is being done to
address the resulting problems and (ii) the structural (EDRM)
disclosure review that was summarised in my letter of 1 September
2023 to the Solicitor to the Inquiry [POL00126339] as | became
RLR.

Page 2 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

| have copied or paraphrased (where clearer to do so) the relevant
questions into the headings and sub-headings of the sections of this

statement that answer each question.

The explanations and clarifications required by the Requests are best
provided in the context of the overall position. Further, the position and
thinking on behalf of Post Office has developed since the mid-October
letters that are the subject of the October Request. For example, BSFf have
been working closely with KPMG LLP (“KPMG”) on how the issues of
repeating copies of documents can be best addressed to assist the Inquiry
in its review of material whilst still making available to the Inquiry near
duplicates and documents that make clear the different contexts in which
copies of documents appear and reappear, which are required by the

Inquiry.

| anticipate that it will be more helpful first to set out the wider position
before drilling down into the specifics. | am also conscious of the detail
required to respond fully and properly to the questions and issues covered
by the Requests?. | have therefore set out responses in the following

sections and sequence below:

2 Many of the communications between BSFf and Post Office (and other communications in connection with its Inquiry
participation) are subject to legal advice privilege. | have however aimed to give full, and | hope helpful, answers and
explanations on each of the points in a way that means that privilege does not get in the way. However, | do not have

authority to waive any legal professional privilege and nothing in my evidence is intended to do that.

Page 3 of 135
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Section B (from page 9): an overview of my professional
background and that of the BSFf team; the scope and timing of our
assistance to Post Office in the Inquiry and how that links to the co-

ordination and co-operation with other professional advisers.

Section C (from page 14): a short overview of factors relating to
disclosure (generally and Post Office specific) that are directly
relevant to the difficulties and problems that have occurred and to

the options to resolve them.

Section D (from page 23): the Mimecast/Exchange issue, the
sequence of events relating to it, and the proposed solution

(responding to paragraph 1 of the November Request).

Section E (from page 69): The structural (EDRM) review
(responding to paragraph 2 of the November Request): the reasons

for it; the work involved and remaining.

Section F (from at page 79): responding to paragraph 1 of the
October Request (relating to BSFfs letter to the Inquiry dated 16

October 2023 [WITN10810102)).

Section G (from page 90): responding to paragraphs 2-4 of the
October Request (relating to BSFfs letters to the Inquiry dated 13

[WITN10810101] and 16 October [WITN10810102]).

Where my knowledge and belief set out in this witness statement has been

materially informed by another person or by documents that | have

Page 4 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

reviewed, | acknowledge that person or those documents. Colleagues from
BSFf have assisted me in preparing this witness statement. | have in this
statement explained my understanding of technical or system issues.
Except where expressly stated, | do not have technical knowledge of
particular disclosure technologies so | would need to defer to others if it
would be useful also to drill down into any specific issue involving the detail

of any of the disclosure technologies.

Other external advisers also advise Post Office, including Herbert Smith
Freehills LLP (“HSF”), Peters & Peters Solicitors LLP (“P&P”) and KPMG
and they have provided factual and, in the case of KPMG, technical input

to me on disclosure issues.

The current situation is not one that anyone would wish to see continue.
Post Office has asked me to convey its apologies for the current situation
and to assure the Inquiry and other Core Participants that it is a Post Office
priority to get to a position where hearings (and planning and preparation
for hearings) can take place from a stable basis with the risks of further
emerging data source issues minimised and managed so far as is

practicable.

| made the following observations and commitments in my letter to the

Inquiry of 1 September 2023 [POL00126339]:

“We are mindful of the seriousness of the issues and events being

reviewed by the Inquiry and the acute human and other impacts that those

Page 5 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

have had upon the Postmasters and others affected. Both in terms of our
approach and our instructions from POL, that awareness informs and
underpins all aspects of our work for POL during the rest of the Inquiry and
to the inputs that the Inquiry will understandably demand of POL. That of

course applies to the points set out below.

Neither | nor other members of the BSFf team had any prior involvement
with any work for the Post Office nor the matters that gave rise to the
Inquiry’s Terms of Reference. As a team we therefore recognise that we
do not yet fully understand everything that has gone before, nor all of the
complexities. We will however continue to work intensively to get across
those issues and to engage frankly and constructively with the Inquiry and
with those representing the Postmaster Core Participants (“CP’s”) and

other CPs.

The issues being considered at the September hearing have, necessarily,
involved significant amounts of detailed explanation in witness statements,
disclosure statements and correspondence. The purpose of this letter is to
seek to stand back from that detail and to provide a frank overview of the
position based on our current understanding and our assessment since our
appointment. The work to build that understanding is ongoing; we are

seeking to take a structured and systematic approach to it.

As various of the witnesses for the September hearing have confirmed from
their own perspective, my understanding and direct observation is also that

POL’s instruction and wish is to provide all relevant evidence that the

Page 6 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Inquiry wishes to see, so that the full factual position can be examined and
become known. That is the attitude and instruction from the POL team with
whom we are working, the great majority of whom have also come fresh to

the issues that are being examined by the Inquiry.

| have been instructed by POL (and it would in any event be my intended
approach professionally) to flag to the Inquiry if ever there were to be an
attempt to withhold evidence that should be disclosed in relation to the
Terms of Reference and the events leading up to the Inquiry being set up.
| sense however that that is unlikely to arise; the issues faced are really

those of scale, complexity and practicability.

Proposed Engagement

My aim and request is that there can be continued (formal and minuted as
necessary) engagement with the Inquiry’s senior team on these critical
issues so that the Inquiry is updated on the work POL is undertaking. We
hope such an approach will best support the Chair to continue to plan for
the vital remaining stages of the Inquiry. Whilst we will provide updates in
correspondence, with issues of this complexity we consider that the ability
to have a discussion on points of concern may be beneficial for the Inquiry

and for POL in assisting it.

That is of course a matter for the Inquiry to consider but | reiterate that |,
and colleagues, are happy in that context to meet with you and your

colleagues regularly and as you would find helpful. | will also, as and if

Page 7 of 135
10

11

12

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

necessary, attend as RLR any future disclosure hearings to provide formal

updates.”

| re-affirm those comments and commitments. All the BSFf team’s efforts
for Post Office will, throughout, remain focused on giving the best
professional support practically achievable to assist the important work of

the Inquiry.

In the answers to the Requests, | have aimed to include proposed
solutions. | am conscious that emerging problems with, and frank updates
to the Inquiry on, Post Office’s disclosure have been deeply and
understandably frustrating to the Inquiry, to Postmasters and their families
(including, in particular, those who have been attending on matters of great
importance to them only then to see hearings cancelled at short notice) and
to those witnesses who have been affected. | understand fully the reasons
for those reactions and for the profound distrust in many quarters, which is
the starting point for any exchanges on disclosure given the underlying

earlier events relating to Horizon that the Inquiry is charged to investigate.

However, | confirm that all my experience acting for Post Office since May
2023 indicates to me that all the professional advisers working for Post

Office on the Inquiry (external and internal to Post Office’) are behaving

*| have summarised below the current numbers within the Post Office Inquiry team as well as those for BSFf. As with the

BSFf team, in practice most of the Post Office Inquiry team now in place started work during the course of 2023 and have

had no, or litle, involvement with the facts, actions and approaches that have given rise tothe Inquiry's Terms of Reference

Page 8 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

properly and professionally, working intensively and with significant
resource, to provide all requested evidence to the Inquiry. Were it ever to
be suggested otherwise that would be a matter of profound professional

concern.

OVERVIEW OF PROFESSIONAL BACKGROUND AND SCOPE OF BSFF

WORK

Qualifications and professional background

13

14

15

| am a solicitor and solicitor-advocate (civil). | have been in practice since
1988. | trained at Macfarlanes and qualified as a solicitor in 1990. | moved
to Burges Salmon in late 1991 and became a partner (then under the
Partnership Act 1980) in 1997. | have been a member (under the Limited

Liability Partnership Act 2000) of Burges Salmon LLP since 2004.

Since 1990 | have worked on, and since 1997 have been a partner leading
teams in, complex and/or large-scale matters for public and private sector
organisations, including at various times, commercial litigation disputes,
public inquiries and inquests, major procurement challenges, judicial
reviews, criminal prosecutions and matters relating to strategic safety

issues and economic and safety regulation.

Whilst the subject matter and sectors of those cases and projects has
varied significantly, the main underlying common thread has been complex
organisational or project failings or problems and the risk factors that led to

them. For example, | (or other partners in our immediate team) have been

Page 9 of 135
16

17

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

involved for an organisation involved in all major UK rail accidents,
including the resulting investigations and inquiries, since privatisation.
Procurement challenge matters have, since 2008, involved work in a range
of sectors including IT systems, education, nuclear, defence and transport
for public authorities and bidding entities. | have also been involved with

other public inquiries and inquests.

Those categories of work in public inquiries or litigation have often involved
complex, large-scale disclosure exercises for central government, public
corporations or other entities similar to Post Office or for private
organisations. However, the scale, challenges, complexities and problems
faced here in relation to the Inquiry are of a greatly different order of
magnitude and difficulty even to those in other very large-scale situations
and projects. | note that Gregg Rowan made similar observations at
paragraphs 36-41 of his statement [WITN09950100] for the 5 September

disclosure hearing.

The Chair confirmed my designation as RLR on 30 August 2023 and |
replaced Mr Rowan in that role with effect from 1 September 2023. HSF
continues to assist Post Office in relation to certain issues on the Inquiry
and related matters, including (with the material involvement and
assistance of P&P on criminal matters — see Mr Rowan’s witness statement
[WITN09950100] for further details of the firms’ respective roles) the

operational conduct of Inquiry Phase 4.

Page 10 of 135
18

BSFf

19

20

21

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

| have given further details below on the respective roles of the various

firms and the co-ordination between us.

Neither | nor, to the best of my knowledge or understanding, BS or Ff has
had any professional role or involvement assisting Post Office generally or
in relation to the Horizon IT system prior to being appointed 6 months ago
in May 2023. Neither BS nor Ff is or has been on any Post Office panel for

legal or other work.

Post Office has engaged BS from the Crown Commercial Service (CCS)
framework RM6179. It ran a competitive, regulated procurement process
commencing in February 2023 for services to support it in Phase 5 of the
Inquiry onwards, including preparatory work. BS was formally appointed for
that scope from 22 May 2023. Mobilisation and work had started shortly

before that date.

Ff is BS’s approved CCS Key Sub-Contractor relating specifically to public
inquiry and complex inquest work. However, in practice BSFf works closely
as a combined team, to deliver Inquiry-related services to Post Office.
Effectively operationally — as opposed to legally/contractually — it is an
integrated joint venture intended to provide greater depth of resource,

experience and combined skills than either of the firms could provide

Page 11 of 135
22

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

individually‘. Although Rule 6 of the Inquiries Rules 2006 requires the
identification of one RLR, the BSFf team is jointly led by me and Oliver

Carlyon, an Ff partner.

The nature of the disclosure exercise required by the Inquiry necessitates
a very significantly resourced legal team. The combined BSFf team
working wholly or predominantly on the Horizon Inquiry over recent months
is now over 170 professionals (including document reviewers and project
managers but not including business support colleagues such as those in
Finance and IT team). That team is very large relative to any with which |
have previously been involved, or am personally aware of, in other (even
very significant) inquiries or litigation. The BSFf team has continued to work
in parallel, and collaboration with, HSF, P&P and the Post Office team such
that the total number of professionals now working on these issues over

recent months has exceeded 350.

Scope of involvement and responsibility

23

BSFf mobilised to assist Post Office during May 2023. There had been a
senior team short introduction meeting with Post Office, HSF and Counsel

on 29 March 2023 and then transition briefing meetings with Post Office

“BS has been involved in public inquiries and major inquests for clients as core participants. Ff has separately had a long -

established practice advising public inquiries, as well as core participants in other inquiries. The collaboration was

established in 2022 to combine the resources and approaches of the two teams following the establishment of CCS legal

panel RM 6179. BSFf currently acts as legal adviser to several UK public inquiries. That work is however (with limited

overlaps) mainly carried out by colleagues not working on the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry

Page 12 of 135
24

25

26

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

and HSF following appointment during June, July and August. Mobilisation
and transition were considerable undertakings given the size and
complexity of the Inquiry and the fact that, by that stage, it had been
ongoing for approximately 3 years and the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference
relate to a period of over 20 years, covering events from the late 1990s to

the recent past.

BSFf assists Post Office on structural matters that might affect Post Office’s
support to the Inquiry (I provide more detail on that work below) and we
assisted Post Office for the 5 September 2023 disclosure hearing. August
was an intensive period for that reason, combined with the multiple areas

of work for Inquiry Phases 5-7.

Issues affecting different phases require BSFf, HSF and P&P to collaborate
together and with the Post Office Inquiry team and other teams within Post
Office. Where such issues have arisen to date, the collaboration has been,
and continues to be, regular, with a number of meetings each week, and is

constructive.

Outside direct involvement with the Inquiry, HSF and P&P also assist Post
Office in relation to matters with similar and related facts and issues, such
as Post Office’s Horizon Shortfall Scheme and Overturned Convictions
Scheme (in the case of HSF) and Criminal Cases Review Commission and
Appeal cases (in which P&P acts). BSFf does not assist Post Office on

those areas of work.

Page 13 of 135
27

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

From late July, BSFf has been working on detailed disclosure requirements
relating to Phase 5 under statutory notices served by the Inquiry, detailed
forward planning and preparation for Inquiry Phase 5 and work on Inquiry
Phases 6 and 7 issues. We have noted the very great intensity and

pressure of the work involved across all Inquiry Phases.

C. DISCLOSURE - OVERVIEW AND POST OFFICE

28

| summarised in paragraph 11 of my letter to the Inquiry of 1 September
2023 [POL00126339] my understanding of the causes of the scale and

complexity of Post Office disclosure:

“My understanding from what we have seen since May 2023 is that this is

down to a combination of factors including (but not exclusively):

(a) POL’s own long and complicated organisational history and internal
Structures over decades (and longer) including a demerger during the last

20+ years during which the Horizon problems and events have occurred.

(b) Multiple sites and the absence until recently of any ‘data universe’ map
of hard copy and electronic repositories (locations and systems) of
potentially relevant documents leading to emerging sources from both

‘known unknowns’ but also ‘unknown unknowns’.

(c) Multiple document systems (current and historic) and interactions

between different systems.

Page 14 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

(d) A complicated mix of hard copy, digital and e-media sources from
various different eras and without any central record. Some sources are

local, others central, or are a hybrid of both.

(e) The evolution (through the collation and adding of different source
repositories from different providers and at different times with different
methodologies) of the Relativity database operated by KPMG for POL. This
is also complicated by system constraints on all disclosure databases
including Relativity. Functionality and usability declines materially once
databases get above a certain size. | am not a technical e-disclosure expert
but my understanding is that the 60million documents currently held are
approximately 30 Terabytes of data in total and that a Relativity review
workspace database starts to have serious functionality problems at or

around 10Tb.

(f) The scale of data involved (as others have confirmed, now over 60
million documents with more inevitably to be found as the data mapping
continues and specific requests for Phases 5-7 are formulated and

targeted).

(g) As a result of different inputs from different sources and providers,
variability in data quality and therefore also functionalities (for example
email threading or use of CAL — computer assisted learning — or TAR —
Technology Assisted Review — that would ordinarily be available and are
commonly used in Relativity disclosure projects being either not available

or only partially available.

Page 15 of 135
29

30

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

(h) The need to respond swiftly to incoming evidence requests as the
Inquiry evolved, potentially led to a focus on responding to individual
requests, whilst balancing the factors brought into play in all large
disclosure exercises of scope vs time vs avoidance of irrelevant material

etc.

(i) Practical difficulties in the use of search terms on issues which —
necessarily — are not always easily defined — for example processes,
bugs/errors/defects and other terms used in a wide variety of contexts —

some highly relevant to the Inquiry and others not so.”

Subsequent work has strengthened that view. The scope of the Inquiry is
necessarily wide in time and range of issues. Historic data governance
problems, many of which were embedded within Post Office’s data
landscape over many years, have risen to the surface under the scrutiny

of the Inquiry and Post Office’s internal and external Inquiry teams.

These also link to wider dynamics in complex disclosure exercises. | am
conscious that the factors summarised in paragraph 31 below are well-
known to the Inquiry and to Core Participants. However, | have reprised
them briefly for context because of the perceptions that have arisen in the
context of the recent problems in Post Office’s disclosure and the
consequent regrettable disruption to hearings and to the individuals
involved in those hearings. The factors also feed into the proposals set out

in section E and F in terms of what will be required to get to a position of

Page 16 of 135
31

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

greater confidence, to the timings involved and to the levels of residual risk.

They are also relevant to the October Request (Sections G and H below).

Unfortunately, no large and/or complex modern disclosure exercise can in
practice be configured to produce every document within an organisation's
custody and control that responds to the applicable terms of reference.
Rather they can only be designed and run to produce the best achievable
evidential results available by reference to the constraints of time,
resource, knowledge, technology and complexity in the particular
situation’. Based on my experience and discussions | have had over many
years with professionals involved in disclosure exercises, the main reasons

for that include®:

(a) Before the mid to late 1990s, an organisation's records often mainly
comprised hard copy documents stored in identifiable, physical
locations. Digital technology resulted in massive proliferation of data
and repositories and very significant increases in the number of

documents, communications and other data created and retained.

(b) | Systems change organically and rapidly as technology evolves,

becomes out of date or redundant and is replaced, often without any

5 The Inquiry's Disclosure Protocol fairly reflects this reality in confirming that searches should be “ reasonable in all of the

circumstances” and “comprehensive, thorough and rigorous”

© See Post Office's letter to the Inquiry dated 10 September 2021 [WITN10810103] and HSF's letter to the Inquiry dated

15 October 2021 [WITN10810104]

Page 17 of 135
(c)

(d)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

central records or overarching system design. The ability to locate
responsive documents or repositories is also often inhibited by loss
of corporate memory/knowledge over time as people leave and by
restructurings (as happened in 2012 with the Royal Mail Group and

Post Office separation).

Additionally, document volumes are too vast for every document to
be reviewed manually. | understand from KPMG that, on some
analyses, over 80 million documents are now held on its Relativity
platform for the Inquiry — on a conservative estimate there are at
least 70 million documents — and that is only a portion of the
documents in Post Office’s data universe. As an _ indicative
calculation based on a relatively high review rate of 40 documents
per hour, a very large team of 100 reviewers each working full time
(8 hours per day, 200 days per year) would, in perfect circumstances
take nearly 11 years to complete a first level manual review of 70
million documents. The review rate would also be slower if, for

example, the issues to be coded needed to be complex.

Parameters — for example — search date ranges for specific
searches, custodians to be searched, search terms or other
techniques to be used, repositories required to be investigated are
therefore commonly (in litigation) discussed closely between the
parties and the subject of direction and/or guidance from the court

and (in inquiries or complex inquests) the subject of operational

Page 18 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

discussions and meetings involving the relevant core participant(s)

and inquiry team(s).

(e) Post Office's data universe is more diffuse and complex than that of
many other organisations that | have seen professionally but in
common with others comprises many “live” electronic data sources,
“dead” electronic data sources (some of this data is likely to have
been retained but not actively considered for some time and some
of this data is likely to have been deleted or lost as part of normal
cycles of change and data/document disposal’), eMedia® (such as
CDs or USB drives) and hard copy documents that may be in

archives, offices or elsewhere.

(fy Communication now often takes place across multiple platforms. A
meeting that might once have led to the preparation of formal
minutes, might now be recorded in an attendance note, personal
notes (which could be in many different formats) and “side-bar”
conversations by email or in a collaboration platform. Within the

more than 20-year period covered by the Inquiry’s terms of

7 This should not happen when litigation or an Inquiry is in contemplation ~ measures such as litigation holds should be

put into place.

* Electronic media (or eMedia) are devices containing data recorded via electrically based processes such as hard drives,
random access memory (RAM), read-only memory (ROM), disks (such floppy disks or CDs), flash memory, memory
devices (including USB devices), phones, mobile computing devices, networking devices, office equipment, and many

other types. See: Electronic Med!

ry | CSRC (nist.gov)

Page 19 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

reference there have been material cultural shifts in how individuals

work and the tools they work with.

The ability provided by technology to generate material by
interaction with multiple parties creates huge amounts of full
duplication and near duplication. For example, a single document
might be emailed to 20 people, amended by several but not all of
them and then reattached in different contexts and forwarded to
different groups of people. Replication over tens, hundreds or more
individuals over a long period in different contexts produces a
labyrinthine intermingling of documents and communications. The
same documents may also be saved to multiple data repositories
(e.g., emails to Mimecast, Exchange or local devices or documents
to SharePoint and OneDrive, each of which would be an exact or
near duplicate of each other). This is the family document and
duplication (or near-duplication) problem. A reviewer or review team
will see chains or families that are often many pages or many tens
of pages long that look very similar or identical but may or may not
be identical or the context of which has subtly (but potentially
substantively) changed. Reviewers can manually distinguish
between them only with intense effort and focus, which is
impracticable where timescales (relative to the volume of
documents for review — a mix of relevant and irrelevant documents)
are short, particularly as material necessarily falls to different

reviewers in those circumstances, and/or the applicable terms of

Page 20 of 135
(h)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

reference do not direct that focus. We have been working with
KPMG to find ways to reduce the impact for the Inquiry in its work
of the resulting conundrum and paragraphs 76 and 121 (and the
associated appendices) below summarise actions recently taken

and proposed as solutions.

The near duplicates and large families issues are aspects of
document review being a manual process that involves the
application of human judgement to code documents, for example,
as to whether they are responsive to the applicable terms of
reference, whether they are subject to legal professional privilege
and whether redactions should be applied and, if so, where they
should be applied. Between different reviewers there will be
divergent, reasonable value assessments. Those valid divergences
increase where the number and combinations of the issues being
coded are greater. All disclosure exercises will involve the review of
documents that are clearly and obviously within scope, but most will
also involve instances where multiple reviewers (or even the same
reviewer at different times, in part because that reviewer will acquire
greater experience with the dataset and issues) could look at the
same document and reasonably make different coding decisions.
The potential for genuine human error is also unavoidable. Both
divergent approaches and human error should be — and have been
— reduced by system design, quality checks and proper instruction

and supervision but they cannot be eliminated at any stage of a

Page 21 of 135
32

(i)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

review exercise. Technological methods, such as email threading,
TAR and CAL, can assist but, to date, have not been reliable
because of the variability of data quality as noted at paragraph 11(g)
of my letter to the Inquiry dated 1 September 2023 [POL00126339].
| have summarised at paragraphs 89 below the work that is ongoing

to try to improve that situation.

Where required search parameters (for example in a Section 21
Notice or Rule 9 Request) are broad, complex in combination and/or
concept based it is more difficult for reviewers to assess whether

documents respond and how they need to be coded.

Whilst the risks cannot be eliminated, BSFf have worked hard with Post

Office and KPMG to mitigate risks. For example:

(a)

(b)

(c)

recruiting appropriately skilled individuals into the teams at all levels;

close engagement with Post Office subject matter experts and

members of its Inquiry team;

extensive onboarding training and reviewer guidance (which is

updated on an ongoing basis in response to feedback,

® For example, the s21 (03) Notice dated 21 July 2023 is highly complex to scope, review and code because of the

combinations and nature of the issues and relationship of those issues to each other and to individuals over a long period

The s21 (08) Notice dated 8 October 2023 is an example of a request dealing with a specific area and period that is less

complex to scope, review and code. This is discussed in more detail in paragraphs 99 to 103 below,

Page 22 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

correspondence with the Inquiry and events, such as hearings,

within the Inquiry);

(d) — multiple tiers of review;

(e) establishing a tier one and tier two reviewer buddy system and

defined escalation routes;

(f) frequent (normally daily) thematic and issue discussions amongst
the disclosure team as a whole with additional such calls for specific

workstreams;

(9g) proactive monitoring of any signs of concern (e.g., lower coding
accuracy, declining level of reviewer engagement or review rate)

that leads to direct, tailored feedback;

(h) close ongoing engagement at operational and senior level with

KPMG as Post Office’s e-disclosure provider; and

(i) quality control checks based on samples of documents and targeted

searches.

My understanding based on confirmations from HSF (see, for example, Mr
Rowan’s 23 August witness statement [WITN09950100]) and P&P is that

they have taken similar steps in their review exercises for the Inquiry.

D. EXCHANGE/OFFICE 365 ISSUE AND PROPOSED SOLUTION

[NOVEMBER REQUEST PARAGRAPH 1]

33 Paragraph 1 of the November Request stated:

Page 23 of 135
34

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

“Microsoft Exchange 365

Please set out detail of the issue that has arisen in respect of Microsoft

Exchange 365. This should include the following:

a. When the issue was discovered, by whom and in what circumstances.

b. POL’s understanding of the cause of the issue and where you consider

responsibility for the issue lies.

c. How it is that the issue was not identified at the time that searches were
originally carried out over Mimecast and the checks that POL carried out

to ensure compliance with its obligations in that regard.

d. The way in which the issue is being resolved and the date on which such

an exercise is likely to be completed.

e. The steps that are being taken to remove documents that are duplicative
or duplicative in material respects. If and insofar as steps are not being

taken, please explain why.”

A footnote to sub-paragraph c. stated: “Please note that the Inquiry is not
expecting a detailed analysis of compliance with each and every Rule 9
request or Section 21 Notice. This question is directly aimed at the process
by which POL satisfied itself that its original use of Mimecast was

sufficiently comprehensive.”

Post Office has yet to conclude investigations into the issue that has arisen

in relation to data held on Microsoft Exchange Online (part of Microsoft 365

Page 24 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

services) (“Exchange”) and its impact. However, | set out below to the best

of my knowledge:

(a)

(b)

(c)

an explanation of the substance of the issue based on my current
understanding of Post Office’s email systems today and as they
have evolved since the 1990s as explained to BSFf by Post Office’s

IT team;

an explanation of how the issue was discovered, by whom and in
what circumstances, as well as communications with the Inquiry
from 18 August 2023 on it. Where events happened prior to
my/BSFfs first awareness that this was an issue requiring potential
investigation during mid-August 2023 onwards and/or involved work
that was ongoing in parallel with which we were not directly involved,
| base my understanding on documents provided by Post Office and
its other legal advisers and discussions that colleagues in the BSFf

team have had in order to investigate the sequence of events;

an explanation of how Post Office is undertaking investigation and
technical analysis to process Exchange data in a manner to reduce
the number of duplicates for review and ultimately produced to the
Inquiry (this is my understanding based on what has been explained

to BSFf by Post Office and KPMG); and

Page 25 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

(d) an explanation of the current working plan by Post Office (with

timescales where available) in respect of the different Inquiry

Phases.

35 In drafting this evidence in Sections D-G and the Appendices to my

statement, | have had the benefit of engaging with technical experts from

Post Office and KPMG and the support of several experienced colleagues

who have had further such engagement. | am not a technical expert.

The Issue: Current email data systems for storing emails sent and received:

email data repositories held by Post Office and the role of Exchange

36 Email is the primary operational communication channel for Post Office

both internally and externally and has been for much of the relevant period

that is the focus of the Inquiry. Therefore, email is rightly a key category of

electronic data. However, email is not a description of any specific data

repository. Today, when an email is sent to or from an address on the

postoffice.co.uk email domain, there are several potential repositories

where that email will or may be stored:

(a) First, and most recognisably, when an email is sent from or to an

email client’? such as Outlook (Post Office’s current email client) on

a user's device this is stored in a local email data file or mailfile on

© An email client is the software application that is used, for example, to access, manage and send emails, See

User Agent (MUA) - Glossary | CSRC (nist.gov

Page 26 of 135

(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

the device itself and email data on that local file can be viewed from

the email client even when the device is offline (“local mailfile’).

However, emails are not sent directly from or to an email client.
Rather, the email client (i.e. Outlook), connects with a cloud-based
mail server that sends out or receives the email. Post Office
currently uses Exchange as its mail server. There is a server-level
email data file or mailfile (‘Exchange mailfile’) that synchronises
with and replicates the local mailfile. Permanent deletions" of email
data by users at local client level will synchronise and replicate in
the server mailfile after 30 days unless a relevant litigation hold has
been applied (which would prevent permanent deletion from the
Exchange mailfile). By design and because of the application of the
litigation holds we are instructed Post Office have put in place,
Exchange mailfiles would be a more complete record of emails than
local mailfiles so there would be no benefit to harvesting a local

mailfile if an Exchange mailfile also exists.

In addition, Post Office utilises a further email gateway platform that
records a copy of emails transmitted within Post Office’s Exchange
server and through which emails between its Exchange server and
an external email domain must pass. The current platform used by

Post Office is Mimecast. Amongst other email services, Mimecast

* Le., where an email is deleted from a user’s inbox and then from that user's deleted items folder.

Page 27 of 135
(d)

(e)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

services include (in the simplest terms) a repository that keeps a

separate, immutable copy of:

(i) all external emails transmitted between the postoffice.co.uk

email domain and any other email domain; and

(ii) all internal emails sent between postoffice.co.uk email
addresses transmitted within the Exchange server itself but

are then uploaded to Mimecast.

This function (known as “journalling’) by Mimecast creates an
archive of email data as it flows into, out of and within Post Office
that is separately held on the Mimecast platform. Importantly,
Mimecast only journals live email traffic once Mimecast has been
activated — it does not journal email data that pre-dates its activation
and operation. Such legacy email data would have to be specifically
exported from existing sources and imported into Mimecast for
ingestion to be included in the Mimecast archive. Together, | refer
to the email data that Mimecast captures whilst active and any
legacy email that it has ingested in this statement as “Mimecast

data’.

Finally, it remains possible for a system administrator or some users
(with relevant permissions) to make a copy of their local mailfile at
any particular point as a static snapshot which could be separately

stored elsewhere either on a local device drive, a network drive or

Page 28 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

cloud-based storage such as SharePoint or OneDrive or indeed on
physical electronic storage media such as a USB stick, CD or other
physical storage media. However, today | understand that this
should normally be for temporary or exceptional purposes (e.g., IT
fault troubleshooting). In this statement, | refer to static email data

of this kind as “local archived email data”.

37 The current email system and its related email data repository as |

understand it can be illustrated as follows in this (simplified) diagram:

External email out External email in

Email Gateway Mimecast Mimecast data

Internal emails Post Office emails sent/received
journalled

Exchange

Email Server Exchange mailfile

Replication of Synchronised replication of user's
mailfiles mailfile

Outlook Local mailfile
Mailfile snapshot Mailfile snapshot Emails sent/received by user in his
archive retrieval Outlook mailbox
is f i cal archived email
Local Archives Personal/team drives or e-media ata

Irregular static snapshot copies of
local mailfles

38 Although it may appear from the above that local mailfiles, Exchange
mailfiles and Mimecast data are the same, this is not the case and they are

not designed to be. Conceptually:

Page 29 of 135
(a)

(b)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Email data on local mailfiles and Exchange mailfiles will reflect what
is in a user’s Outlook mailbox (including items held in their Deleted
Items folder and other folders). Absent the imposition of system level
litigation holds applied at server level, items that are permanently
deleted from a user's mailbox will not be retained on their local
mailfile or the Exchange mailfile. | am instructed by Post Office that
litigation holds were introduced by Post Office at various points for
various purposes and were put in place for certain parts of the
business in 2014, 2016 and 2020 in contemplation of various
litigation at the relevant times and ultimately Post Office-wide in
respect of Exchange mailfiles from March 2021. However, up until
these points, emails permanently deleted by users will not appear
within their corresponding local mailfiles or Exchange mailfiles (after
30 days in the case of the latter). By comparison, emails that are
journalled on Mimecast are immutable and retained until deleted by
the system. | understand from Post Office that there is no automatic
deletion process set in Mimecast and so the retention period for

Mimecast data is in practice indefinite (up to 100 years); and

Additionally, local mailfiles and Exchange mailfiles will hold data that
is not email data at all — most notably calendar and contacts data
but also notes and tasklists and system/server messages. They
would also contain draft emails and other emails that had not been

sent for any reason. By comparison, Mimecast only journals

Page 30 of 135
39

40

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

transmitted email data (albeit that will include transmitted calendar

appointments).

Consequently, for emails sent or received after the point at which a
journalling gateway platform such as Mimecast has been activated, the
most complete record of email data should be that data repository that is
held on Mimecast. For legacy email data pre-dating the activation of
Mimecast which has been ingested into Mimecast, the completeness or
otherwise of that aspect of Mimecast data will only be as good as the data

record exported to it and as processed for ingestion.

| understand from Post Office that Mimecast was activated in or around
late 2015. Allowing for transition time, there should therefore be a high
degree of confidence that any and all emails sent or received from early
2016 onwards are held on Mimecast. However, out of an abundance of
caution, Post Office is undertaking checks and | will update the Inquiry
further if those investigations indicate any systemic issues with Mimecast

journalling of emails transmitted from 2016.

The Issue: Legacy pre-2016 email data systems for storing emails sent and

received: email data repositories held by Post Office and role of Exchange

4

Prior to the introduction of Mimecast, however, the relevant history of Post
Office’s email systems and email data repositories is complicated given the
long period of time covered by the Inquiry’s terms of reference (see in

particular the background contained in Post Office’s First Interim

Page 31 of 135
42

43

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Disclosure Statement [POL00114170ds]). During that time, there have
also been generational changes and regular updates to IT systems,
applications, devices, software and suppliers. In addition, there has been
the separation of Post Office from Royal Mail Group from 2012 onwards
with resultant impacts on separation of IT architecture and data. The
quantity, scale and more than 20-year timespan of these changes mean
that individual instances of data loss should be expected, although they are

clearly unhelpful to the task of getting a complete evidence trail.

Given the period, restructurings, complexity of IT systems and staff
turnover, loss of institutional knowledge has been a key factor in the ability
of Post Office to reconstruct its understanding. The current understanding
of email systems over the entirety of the relevant period that the Inquiry is
investigating has been based on internal investigations at Post Office by
consulting subject matter experts and searching available (limited) records
but unfortunately cannot be complete. | set out in Appendix 1 Post Office’s
understanding of the summary position on pre-2016 email data as
explained to BSFf by Post Office accompanied by a diagram prepared by
Post Office to illustrate its current understanding of how its email systems

have evolved.

The reconstructed detail of Appendix 1 demonstrates the complexity of
Post Office’s legacy and current email systems and data repositories but
the practical working conclusions below can be made. Based on current

understanding of the position with technical investigations yet to complete:

Page 32 of 135
(a)

(b)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Post Office user emails sent_and received post-1 January 2016

should be captured on Mimecast. Post Office is undertaking
technical checks but there should logically be a high level of
confidence that Mimecast data captures post-2016 emails as fully
as possible. Any discrepancies ought to be exceptional. To be clear,
Post Office does also hold email data for this period as mailfiles
(local and Exchange) but they would be expected to be fully
duplicative of Mimecast data for this period for the reasons set out
above. Indeed, Exchange data for this period should hold fewer

emails than are held in Mimecast.

Post Office user emails sent and received between 2012 to 2016
exist on Mimecast. However, there cannot be said to be the same
high level of confidence that all emails from this period currently held
by Post Office across all its data repositories will be in Mimecast.
This is because pre-2016 emails ingested by Mimecast were
supplied by Royal Mail Group in late 2015 following the formal
separation of the organisations as part of the complex technical
project of separating IT systems and data. It was provided as a
subset of data from a separate email gateway journalling system,
ProofPoint, which was in use by both organisations before
Mimecast. Post Office does not have records on, or full visibility as
to how, ProofPoint was operated by Royal Mail Group and how the
ProofPoint legacy data disks were produced for Post Office by

ProofPoint on Royal Mail Group’s behalf. The intention of the

Page 33 of 135
(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

ProofPoint transfer, however, was, at its highest level, that any
emails in the ProofPoint system where the sender or recipient was
a postoffice.co.uk email address would be exported and ingested by
Mimecast. Post Office understands that a copy set of these disks
has been located within Post Office’s archives (although it would
require further forensic analysis to confirm if necessary). However,
as stated above, it is understood by Post Office that the entirety of
the ProofPoint legacy data on them has been ingested into

Mimecast so the disks themselves would be a duplicative source.

Mimecast:

(i) would (generally) not contain emails pre-dating 2012 as
ProofPoint and the email journalling at gateway level that
came with it were first introduced by Royal Mail Group in
2011/12 but would include such emails if part of an email

chain or as an attachment associated with a post-2012 email.

(ii) would not contain any 2012-2016 emails that may have been
deleted from the ProofPoint archive prior to production of the
ProofPoint legacy data disks. Post Office does not have
knowledge of how Royal Mail Group operated ProofPoint but
it has no current reason to believe that Royal Mail Group
applied deletion periods that would materially affect the

record during this period); and

Page 34 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

(iii) | would only contain email data associated with
postoffice.co.uk email addresses. Certain Post Office staff
may, depending on their function, historically have had
emails associated with other email domains such as
royalmail.com and those would not have been ingested into
Mimecast unless one of the other parties to such emails also
had a postoffice.co.uk email address (in which case, they

would be captured from the other party).

44 During this 2012-2016 period therefore:

(a)

(b)

There would possibly be an additional amount of email data that
may exist on Post Office mailfiles (local or Exchange) that would not
be on Mimecast. However, the extent of any difference for emails
sent and received by Post Office users during this period between
Exchange mailfiles and Mimecast depends on the content and
quality of the ProofPoint legacy data ingested into Mimecast in
respect of that individual. A technically complicated de-duplication
exercise between Exchange and Mimecast would need to be
designed and undertaken as logically there will be a very large
amount of duplication between those two datasets during this period

and the current position on that analysis is set out below.

There may also be email data in local archived email data sources
that would not be on Mimecast and/or Exchange. However, as

described above, these would not routinely have been created by

Page 35 of 135
45

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

users during this period and would not been encouraged or
permitted during this period so far as storing them on local drives or
physical storage devices and media goes with the introduction and
adoption of SharePoint, OneDrive and similar cloud-based storage
and/or network drives. SharePoint, OneDrive and similar cloud-
based storage as well as network drives are known data repositories
and searches for mailfiles can be and have been searched for to
provide email data where appropriate. So far as local archived email
data stored on physical devices and media go, if and when found,
Post Office has assessed the possibility that they may contain non-
duplicative responsive material. Such physical media devices and
storage include, for example, certain individual USB sticks and
laptop folders located for individual custodians likely to be of
relevance to the Inquiry and the back-up tapes which HSF has
investigated and reported regularly to the Inquiry on previously all of

which were assessed and, as necessary, harvested and reviewed.

Post Office user emails sent and received pre-2012 are not generally found

on Mimecast at all (except for limited users involved in piloting ProofPoint
before its implementation at Royal Mail Group) and save where part of an
email chain or as an attachment associated with a post-2012 email (see
the letter from Post Office to the Inquiry dated 10 September 2021
[WITN10810103]). Post Office understands therefore that there is

particular interest in email data from other sources during this period in

Page 36 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

respect of relevant custodians active at that time. Such email data may be

held by Post Office:

(a)

(b)

on mailfiles (local or Exchange) to the extent that they have been
retained and not permanently deleted or lost in data migrations
during upgrades or replacements or other IT issues. Given the time
that will have elapsed since 2012 until relevant litigation holds were
first applied at server level (variously from 2014 onwards), logically
it is not expected that there would be particularly material amounts
of email data dating before 2012 that still remain in user Exchange

data, however, that is still being investigated by Post Office; and/or

on local archived email data sources that may still exist and be found
by or provided to Post Office from time to time. Again, where those
old archives have been migrated over the years to current
SharePoint, OneDrive and similar cloud-based storage storage as
well as network drives, these are known data repositories and
searches for mailfiles can be and have been searched for to provide
email data where appropriate. And again, so far as local archived
email data stored on physical devices and media go, if and when
found, Post Office has assessed the possibility that they may
contain non-duplicative responsive material with a focus on pre-

2012 email data.

Page 37 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

The Issue: Summary and Responsibility for the Issue

46

Taking the explanations above in respect of email repositories, it currently

appears that where Post Office has not harvested Exchange mailfile data

that it holds then:

(a)

(b)

There should (logically as | understand the position) be a minimal
risk that Post Office has not harvested fully relevant email data it
holds for relevant individuals which were sent and received post

2016.

There is a limited but not immaterial risk that Post Office has not
harvested fully the email data it holds for relevant individuals which
were sent and received post-2012 up to 2016. This risk will vary by
individual (including their length of service and the extent to which
they have kept emails in their Outlook mailbox) and depending on
whether any data from this period has already been harvested from
identified local archived email data sources. There is likely to be
extensive duplication between any Mimecast data, Exchange
mailfiles and any local archived email data during this period.
Careful de-duplication (against all Mimecast data collected) will be
(and has already been) required to understand the extent of non-
duplicative material and reduce the amount of duplicative data for
review and that is ultimately produced to the Inquiry. De-duplication
will be complex (and | understand already has been in relation to

Inquiry Phase 4).

Page 38 of 135
(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

There is a risk that Post Office has not harvested fully the email data
it holds for relevant individuals for emails sent and received pre-
2012. This risk will vary by individual (including their length of
service and the extent to which they have kept emails in their
Outlook mailbox) and depending on whether any data from this
period has already been harvested from identified local archived
email data sources. De-duplication against existing email data
sources will also be required but where local archived email data
sources have not already been identified and harvested for
individuals, in principle harvesting any Exchange data from this
period would not be duplicative. However, as | have said above, it is
not anticipated that there would be material amounts of email data
still held on Exchange from prior to 2012, although that is still subject

to further investigations by Post Office.

47 In relation to responsibility for the issue:

(a)

(b)

In terms of the responsibility (duty) to address the issue, this rests
with Post Office. In terms of delivery, that, operationally, will need to

be by advisers by phase.

In terms of the cause and reason for the issue arising | have set out
above the underlying technical reasons for the difference between
Mimecast and Exchange and below the related factual sequence of
understanding as it developed over the period since 2017 (as |

currently understand them). These are events with which | was not

Page 39 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

involved and the sequence has been put together from the
documents. Save as specified in this statement, | have not spoken
to any of the individuals involved. It would not therefore be right for

me to comment further beyond the facts as | understand them.

When was the issue discovered, by whom and in what circumstances (and

what has previously been communicated to the Inquiry)?

48

49

| have covered in this section the period from 10 July 2023 to the discussion
of the issue with the Inquiry on 3 November 2023. | have also set out the
position before that date in responding to the request as to how it was that
the issue as not identified at the time that previous searches were carried

out.

There were 2 specific instances of which | am aware where a potentially

relevant email was identified as existing, but which could not be found in

Mimecast data collected and that triggered recent proactive investigation

of the issue:

(a) | Aseries of documents had been provided by Post Office on 19 May
2023 as part of a FOIA request in May 2023, but the full suite had
not been provided to the Inquiry in response to any prior Rule 9
request. Those documents were then produced on 30 May 2023 to
the Inquiry. These documents are referred to in the witness
statements of Ben Foat dated 21 June 2023 (prepared for the
disclosure hearing on 4 July 2023) [POL00118164ds] and Gregg

Rowan dated 23 August 2023 (prepared for the disclosure hearing

Page 40 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

on 5 September 2023; see paragraphs 53 and 54)
[WITN09950100]._ The FOIA request response produced
documents that were not found in any Mimecast data. | understand
from HSF that the documents were, however, identified by Andrew
Wise who, while searching through his Outlook email client, located
an email (with attachments) that could not be found in Mimecast.
That led to an initial query by HSF of Post Office on 10 July 2023 as
to how Andrew Wise had located the email in question which, over
time, developed into a query as to whether there was a repository

separate to Mimecast.

(b) | Separately, BSFf identified on 14 August 2023, during document
review in response to the s21(03) Notice (dated 21 July 2023), an
email chain comprising 1) an originating email with attachment and
2) a response to the originating email re-attaching the
attachment (produced to the Inquiry as [POL-BSFF-0136285] and
[POL-BSFF-0136286]). The email chain was from a collection of
email data from Mimecast searched as part of Post Office’s
response to the s21(03) notice. The BSFf reviewer sought to
identify the originating email but was unable to in the Mimecast data
extracted at the time. BSFf escalated this to KPMG on the same

day.

50 Enquiries and investigations took place during July and August, initially

between HSF and Post Office to establish whether these were exceptional

Page 41 of 135
51

WITN10810100
WITN10810100

anomalies, or whether there was a potentially greater issue. KPMG

became involved also from mid-August.

HSF wrote to the Inquiry in its letter dated 18 August 2023 [POL00124516],
informing it of the Andrew Wise email issue and investigations into whether

there were potential further repositories:

“The document referred to in paragraph 44(b) of Ben Foat's Second
Witness Statement (an email dated 31 August 2011 sent by Andrew Wise)

was not contained in the CCRC workspace:

- As explained in previous correspondence with the Inquiry
(including our letters dated 12 August 2022 and 30 June 2023), as
part of the Royal Mail Group/POL separation, there was a wholesale
change to the email servers that POL used. Most of the archived
email data pre-dating 2012 was retained by RMG and now no longer
exists. The earliest email available to be harvested from Andrew
Wise's mailbox is dated December 2011 (i.e., after the date of the

email referred to in paragraph 44(b)).

- POL are continuing to investigate where the document was saved

and whether further repositories may need to be harvested.

We note that the document referred to in paragraph 44(a) is dated 23 May
2011 and is an earlier email in the same chain as the email referred to in

paragraph 44(b). For the avoidance of doubt, this email was not collected

Page 42 of 135
52

53

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

from Andrew Wise's mailbox. It was recovered from the deleted items of

another custodian (Robert Daily ).”

Enquiries of and technical investigation by Post Office's IT team continued
during the remainder of August and during September in parallel (from
BSFf's perspective) with the intensive work taking place at that time, in
particular, in relation to the 5 September disclosure hearing, remediation in
relation to the three specific disclosure issues to which that hearing related

and the work on the response to Section 21 Notice (03).

On 6 October 2023, BSFf wrote to the Inquiry [WITN10810105] in

connection with s21 (03), including an update that:

“A review of possible additional data sources, which includes the collection
and review of instant messages and review of some hard copy documents
to consider if they are responsive to the Notice and/or Terms of Reference.
For example, as previously notified to the Inquiry in correspondence dated
18 August 2023, BSFf together with POL, HSF and KPMG are investigating
a Microsoft Exchange repository that may contain emails covering the
period before POL started using Mimecast (2016). From initial
investigations, it appears that these emails primarily span 2011 to 2016
although there are some outliers at either end. This repository is called a
"mailfile" and it may contain emails that are not held within Mimecast.
Whether or not the emails are 'new' requires complex technical knowledge
and work and there is not yet a clear answer as to the extent of duplication

between the Microsoft Exchange repository and Mimecast. That work is

Page 43 of 135
54

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

being progressed by POL as quickly as possible and POL will provide an

update to the Inquiry as soon as it is in a position to do so.”

On 16 October 2023, BSFf wrote to the Inquiry [WITN10810102] in relation
to a range of disclosure issues (this letter is a subject of the October
Request) and requested a meeting with the Inquiry to discuss several
issues including disclosure issues to best support the Inquiry. BSFf
proposed in an email the following agenda in relation to disclosure issues

(amongst other matters):

“Please find attached letter for your kind attention. As the Inquiry will be
aware, POL has requested a meeting with the Inquiry to discuss a number
of areas where it would be helpful to meet in person. The purpose of the

meeting is to:

1. To assist with the Inquiry’s visibility over work being conducted by POL;

2. To understand the Inquiry's direction so that POL can plan its work to

assist the Inquiry;

3. To sight the Inquiry on specific disclosure challenges faced by POL and
discussion about ways to best align with the Inquiry's timescales/critical

path.

We would propose the agenda for the meeting to be as follows and would

be grateful for the Inquiry's comment and input on the same:

1. Approach to disclosure:

Page 44 of 135
55

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

a. Harvesting and searches of additional repositories identified in

response to s.21 and structural review;

b. Mimecast vs Exchange server;

c. Third party material;

d. Inquiry's expectations of the document review process (search

terms, level of reviewers etc);

e. Prioritisation of disclosure by POL (subject to information

provided by the Inquiry);

f. Cut off date to apply to disclosure searches (noting CLI footnote

3)”

On 20 October, HSF wrote to the Inquiry [WITN10810106] with a further

update on disclosure issues and at paragraphs 54 to 59 explained that:

“Email repositories

54. Further to our letters dated 18 August, 4 September and 6 October
2023, with support from KPMG, POL has continued to investigate the
extent to which certain emails that are not available on Mimecast might be

held on other repositories and may need to be harvested.

55. We understand that this exercise has been time-consuming,
complicated and is ongoing. Whilst there continue to be significant
uncertainties, POL’s preliminary understanding continues to be that, in

addition to POL’s Mimecast archiving system, some custodian email data

Page 45 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

is also held in Exchange (or Office) 365, and that (where available)

custodian “mailfiles” can be harvested from Exchange 365.

56. The work undertaken so far by KPMG indicates that there are instances
where emails are not on the Mimecast archive and are available in
Exchange (and, inversely, that some emails available in the Mimecast
archive are not available in Exchange). As yet, POL has not been able to
identify why this occurs. POL is still in the process of investigating the issue
and its implications and will write to the Inquiry with a substantive update

when more is known.

57. In the meantime, POL has extracted Exchange 365 mailfiles where
available for certain custodians, including (on an urgent basis) certain
Phase 4 witnesses who are due to give evidence in the coming weeks and
potential Phase 5 witnesses. KPMG have been seeking to interrogate data
relating to some of these custodians and have tested deduplication
workflows in order to try to understand the extent of duplication / new

material.

58. Whilst this work is ongoing, we understand from KPMG that initial
sampling indicates that there is significant overlap between the data from
the two sources, but also that the mailfiles on Exchange 365 do contain
additional documents. Furthermore, md5# deduplication has had limited
effect in respect of this dataset. KPMG are still testing alternative solutions,
including custom deduplication, but based on the work conducted so far, it

appears likely that isolating potentially new and relevant documents from

Page 46 of 135
56

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

mailfiles on Exchange 365 will be a complicated and possibly manual
process which (for technical reasons) might nevertheless leave a volume

of duplicative material for review.

59. POL will keep the Inquiry updated on a regular basis as the

investigation of this data progresses.”

Further to BSFfs letter to the Inquiry dated 16 October 2023
[WITN10810102], a meeting was subsequently scheduled with the Inquiry
for 3 November 2023 and the Inquiry reverted with the agenda on 1
November 2023 [WITN10810107]. The Exchange issue was not
specifically included but anticipating that it would be discussed under
disclosure issues, | wrote to set out our (and my) understanding of the issue

as it then stood on 2 November [POL00165906].

Why was the issue not identified at the time searches were originally carried

out and what checks were carried out by Post Office?

57

58

| have summarised in this section my understanding of the position from

the exchanges that | have seen primarily relating to 2 periods:

(a) Relating to the period in 2017 when Post Office was involved in the

GLO proceedings.

(b) Relating to the Inquiry from February 2021 onwards.

As already noted above, Post Office will have been advised by a series of

external legal advisers throughout these periods. The Inquiry will recall

Page 47 of 135
59

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

that Post Office has given a limited waiver in respect of certain privileged
documents up to February 2020, which would not cover much of the
privileged material between Post Office and its legal advisers on this
aspect. However, | have sought below to set out the sequence without the

need to refer to privileged material.

The earliest relevant statement relating to Post Office’s consideration of its
own data repositories and resulting position (including on emails) is set out
in its Electronic Disclosure Questionnaire (GLO EDQ) dated 6 December
2017 for the GLO [POL00000657]. It was prepared and signed on Post
Office’s behalf by Womble Bond Dickinson LLP with input from Post Office.
Within that GLO EDQ, it was stated variously in response to Question 3 of

Part 1 that:

“Until c.2012, Post Office employees used Lotus Notes. Microsoft
Exchange was introduced on the separation of Royal Mail and Post Office
and when introduced, Post Office’s employees’ emails which were stored

in Lotus Notes were transferred into Microsoft Exchange.”

“A backup copy of the Lotus Notes database was taken as part of the
migration exercise and it may be possible, though not straight forward, to
identify and export data from this backup. Post Office does not believe it
would be necessary to access this copy due to the transfer of data into

Microsoft Exchange.

Page 48 of 135
(a)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

When Microsoft Exchange was introduced Post Office also introduced
email archiving — initially by Proofpoint and from February / March 2016

onwards by Mimecast.

The emails stored in Proofpoint were transferred into Mimecast. These
archives store all emails sent to or from a Post Office employee and emails
cannot be removed from the archive (unless special permissions are
granted to do so). It is understood that this archive will hold emails dating
back to 2012 including for Post Office employees who no longer work for

the business.

In response to Question 3 of Part 1 of the GLO EDQ also went on to note
that Skype Instant Messages “would be held in each Custodian’s

“Conversation Folder” in Microsoft Exchange. There is no archiving.”

In response to Question 13 of Part 1 of the GLO EDQ added that: “When
an employee ceases to be an employee of Post Office, their laptops are re-
distributed within the business. Their emails would remain stored in
Mimecast (as explained further in Question 3) and documents stored in
SharePoint” Appendix B further noted against “Lotus Notes and Microsoft

Exchange’ that:

“Microsoft Exchange is Post Office’s principal email software used by all

employees. Microsoft Exchange was introduced by Post Office in c.2012.

Prior to Microsoft Exchange, Post Office employees within Royal Mail used

Lotus Notes.

Page 49 of 135
60

WITN10810100
WITN10810100

Please see Question 3 for an explanation of archiving.

It is anticipated that an average user can be expected to send and receive
31,000 emails a year. Extracting the accounts of all the Key Custodians for
one year would therefore capture around 2,511,000 emails (plus

attachments).”

Based on Post Office’s current understanding of its email systems and
repositories (as summarised in this statement), unfortunately, it appears
that these descriptions in the GLO EDQ in hindsight were not accurate or

were over-simplified:

(a) — Although Exchange is mentioned in the context of emails and instant
messages, it is not identified as a separate server-level source of
email data. References to Exchange in the Appendix B to the GLO
EDQ appear to equate it to “email software used by all employees”

which would describe the Outlook email client;

(b) The statement that Post Office used Lotus Notes until 2012 is
understood to be incorrect, current understanding is that Post Office
stopped using the Lotus Notes email client and Lotus Domino
servers and started using the Microsoft Outlook email client and
Microsoft BPOS-D servers over the period from 2008 to 2010. For
completeness the statement is also incorrect as before Lotus Notes,

it is currently understood that Post Office used versions of MSMail;

Page 50 of 135
(c)

(d)

(e)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Consequently, the suggestion that Post Office introduced
ProofPoint email archiving at gateway level in 2012 at the same time
that it moved to Microsoft Exchange and Outlook also does not

match the currently understood timeline;

The assertion that all Lotus Notes data would have transferred to
Exchange in 2012 is also understood now to be incorrect since, as
well as the period of migration to Exchange occurring between
2008-2010, Post Office’s current understanding is that not all old
email archives would have been migrated. Only those files
associated with active users at the time would have been migrated
to Exchange at the time (if at all). It follows that the indication that
Lotus Notes archived data would be duplicative of Exchange is

therefore also not (always/fully) correct; and

Finally, although implied at most, any reading of the GLO EDQ, as
suggesting that Mimecast (and before it ProofPoint) is a complete

repository of:

(i) Outlook emails either in whole or in part from 2012 onwards;

or

(ii) Lotus Notes emails imported into Exchange or any other

emails pre-dating 2012.

would not be correct based on current understanding.

Page 51 of 135
61

62

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

The specific reasons for these issues in the GLO EDQ are not clear or
known to me at this time and it would require much more investigation
(likely going beyond documentary review) to pinpoint the specific cause or
causes of the issues with the GLO EDQ identified above. However, |
reiterate again the complexity around the technical and legacy issues in
this area, lack of institutional memory over the lengthy timeframe and that
Post Office has had to (re)build its knowledge and understanding in this
area. It appears however from the circumstances at that time that that has
resulted in a number of areas of lack of precision in use of terminology,
understanding and possibly communication between different disciplines

(in particular Legal and IT).

Following the GLO EDQ and having harvested Mimecast (incorporating
ProofPoint data), | understand from Post Office that gaps in pre-2012 email
correspondence were identified in custodian emails at various points and
local archived email data was searched for and where it was located it was
added to Relativity workspaces. Consequently, awareness increased
between Post Office and its advisers that email data repositories pre-2012
could be contrasted with email data repositories post-2012. Post Office
took steps to identify and provide such material from local archived email
data where relevant and, in particular, it found certain of the snapshot
repositories on SharePoint and OneDrive as well as local storage on laptop
devices. | understand from Post Office that Exchange data was not
identified as a separate data source for harvesting and was not harvested

for the purposes of the GLO.

Page 52 of 135
63

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

On 19 August 2020, P&P produced the Disclosure Management Document
(plus Annex) [POL0042261] [POL00039560] in the context of the criminal
convictions appeals and Post Conviction Disclosure Exercise (PCDE) (the
PCDE DMD) with inputs from Post Office. The data gathered for the GLO
formed a part of the proposed disclosure for that process and to that extent
at least there was a degree of reliance on the underlying methodologies
adopted previously in respect of that exercise. | understand however from
P&P that the PCDE DMD was also informed by P&P’s own enquiries of
Post Office’s IT team specifically regarding email data (particularly pre-
2012) as this had not been explored in any detail in the GLO. An
Addendum and an Annex were produced by P&P in the PCDE
[POL00142414] [WITN10810108] dated 13 January 2021 (references in
the documents to ‘13 January 2020’ are typographical errors). The 13
January Addendum referred to email review for the PCDE but specifically
in the context of Mimecast data, however, the 13 January Annex noted

against email repositories for Post Office:

(a) In respect of Post Office emails post-2012:

“Post-2012 email data (Mimecast)

NB. Although described in the DMD spreadsheet as “Post 2012 e-
mail data (Mimecast)”, in fact the Mimecast data dates from

December 2011 onwards.”

(b) In respect of Post Office emails pre-2012:

Page 53 of 135
64

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

“(i) During the RMG and POL separation, there was a change in the
email servers and software used by all employees (from Lotus Notes
to Microsoft Exchange). Only the email data of existing POL
employees (i.e. those employed at the time of separation and who
continued to be employed by POL thereafter) was transferred

across to POL’s new servers.

Electronic Filing Cabinet (EFC), which contains pre-2012 email data
and the Lotus Notes back up data that had been provided to WBD
as part of the GLO (not including legal/security), was uploaded to
the GLO dataroom and has been digitally searched by P&P for the
case-specific and GDR. Analysis of the results of the EFC searches
reveals very little relevant material related to the Legal/Security

teams. All relevant material has been extracted and reviewed.

In relation to e-mail data of existing employees for whom pre-2012
data seems to exist, P&P’s initial review has identified 7 priority
custodians and 15 non-priority custodians. The data for the priority
custodians has been located (December) and extracted for search

& review (currently ongoing).”

Further, on 19 December 2022, P&P produced a Second Addendum
[WITN10810109] updating on additional repositories located up to that
period including data sources such as the devices and storage tapes from
Chesterfield, which have been reviewed and formed part of previous

updates from HSF to the Inquiry.

Page 54 of 135
65

66

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

The PCDE DMD, Addenda and Annexes reflect Post Office’s developed
understanding at the time (as it stood) and since the GLO EDQ that
Mimecast in fact contained emails after 2012 but not before 2012. The
explanation captured in the 13 January Annex [WITN10810108] in
particular in respect of pre-2012 emails does unfortunately (in hindsight)
however continue to reflect some of the looser use of terminology adopted
in the GLO EDQ. In respect of the date that Post Office stopped using Lotus
Notes, it also continues to state incorrectly that it was 2012. Exchange
was, as previously, not itself identified to be a separate available data

repository for email data.

Subsequently, the Inquiry is aware of the contents of the four Interim
Disclosure Statements [POL00114170ds] [POL00114173ds]
[POL00114176ds] [POL00114177ds]._ The First Interim Disclosure
Statement dated 27 May 2022 [POL00114170ds] is of particular relevance
as it describes many of the challenges experienced by Post Office in its
disclosure that | have also touched on in this statement. As with each of
the Disclosure Statements, in the usual way, and necessarily, it was based
on the signatory’s understanding of the position as reported to them. In
respect of email repositories, that statement explains the current

understanding at the time that:

“19. Prior to 2012, | understand that POL’s provider of email servers and
software was Lotus Notes. Following the Separation, POL began to use

Microsoft Exchange instead of Lotus Notes. At the same time, POL began

Page 55 of 135
67

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

to use an email archiving system called Proofpoint. Since the beginning of
2016 POL has used Mimecast as its email archiving system. The emails
that had previously been stored in Proofpoint were transferred into

Mimecast.

20, | understand that there are a number of limitations to the email data

that POL possesses, including:

a. Only those who were identified as being current POL employees at the
time of the Separation (i.e. those employed by POL and who continued to
be employed by POL thereafter) were transferred across to POL.
Accordingly, POL does not hold copies of email data in respect of those

employees who left the business prior to or at the time of the Separation.

b. At the time of the Proofpoint/Mimecast migration, only emails sent to or
from a postoffice.co.uk email account were migrated, despite POL
employees having access to and being able to use royalmail.com email
accounts. The consequence of this is that POL did not receive emails solely
between royalmail.com email accounts, even if those emails involved POL
employees. Furthermore, the migration from Proofpoint to Mimecast will

not have captured any deleted email data.”

| note that the understanding of the position recounted in the First Interim
Disclosure Statement [POL00114170ds] is a further evolution of Post
Office’s understanding of Mimecast and its limitations. Again, this reflects

how Post Office was continuing to build its understanding of these systems

Page 56 of 135
68

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

throughout. However, once again, in hindsight it is unfortunate that the
chronology for Post Office moving from Lotus Notes to Exchange and
coinciding with email archiving with ProofPoint no longer accords with the
understanding of Post Office as | have set out in this statement. The matter
of pre-2012 emails is not specifically addressed in the First Interim
Disclosure Statement save to note that legacy “E-filing Cabinets” as part of
Lotus Notes had formed part of GLO repository searches. However, | note
that data repositories where local archived email data (such as old Lotus
Notes .nsf files) are known now to be found were referenced in that
statement as known repositories of data such as SharePoint and other
team drives, file servers, the NAS Drive and laptops. However, Exchange

data is not itself identified as a separate data repository for emails.

For completeness:

(a) | Whilst the Second Interim Disclosure Statement dated 18 October
2022 [POL00114173ds] deals primarily with what it calls “hard copy
documents” it can be seen (e.g., from paragraph 17) that this
includes references to physical data storage devices and eMedia
such as CDs and tapes which are a potential repository for local

archived email data;

(b) | Whilst the Third Interim Disclosure Statement dated 30 November
2022 [POL00114176ds] deals primarily and further with “hard copy

documents” again this includes eMedia such as floppy disks (e.g.,

Page 57 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

paragraphs 44 and 66). Section G specifically addressed a question

from the Inquiry in relation to emails post-2000:

“Question No. 2(d) of Inquiry's 10 November Letter

The Inquiry assumes that, like many businesses, POL may have
relied more heavily on paper-based communication in the period
1995-2000 (letters, faxes, etc), with an increased reliance on
electronic communication (emails, etc) thereafter. Would you please
address this assumption and, if it applies in relation to POL and its
predecessors, explain if this issue was considered by POL as part
of the broader ‘approach adopted to ensure reasonable steps taken
to search potentially relevant hard copy locations (Q1/Q2 2022 to
present)’ (Second Interim Disclosure Statement, section F)? If the
issue was considered, please explain how it was incorporated into

the approach.

For the reasons explained above, it is not the case that POL actively
made this assumption. POL is not in a position to confirm definitively
that it would have relied more heavily on paper-based
communications in the period 1995 — 2000, with an increased
reliance on electronic communications thereafter. | understand from
acurrent POL employee who worked in the security team in the mid-
1990s that there was a considerable amount of paper-based
communication but also that electronic communications (i.e. email)

were in use around that time and floppy disks were also used to

Page 58 of 135
69

(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

transfer material. For context, | understand that HSF has conducted
searches for email data held in POL's Relativity databases in the
period from 1995 to 2000 (including across the entire GLO and
Inquiry databases, as well as the mailbox data of 124 custodians
harvested for the purposes of responding to requests received from

the Inquiry) and has only identified 63 native emails from this period.

As noted above, POL undertook (and continues to undertake)
searches for material responsive to the Inquiry's requests with
regard to its electronic databases (which, as noted at paragraph 31
above, already contained material which had been harvested from
hard copy document repositories for the purposes of the GLO and
the PCDE) and, where it was considered unlikely that responsive
documents may be contained on those electronic databases, its

hard copy document repositories”

Whilst the Fourth Interim Disclosure Statement dated 12 January
2023 [POL00114177ds] deals primarily and further with “hard copy
documents” again this includes eMedia such as CDs (e.g., rows 2

and 3 of the attached table).

Taking the Interim Disclosure Statements overall, they present further

detail and insight into Post Office’s data universe and understanding, in

particular, around Mimecast. However, with hindsight, it remained the case

then and up until very recently that it reflected Post Office’s understanding

at the time that Lotus Notes was used up to 2012 coinciding with the

Page 59 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

introduction of ProofPoint and email archiving. The statements also do not
identify Exchange data as a separate available repository of email data (in
conjunction with other known and_ identified repositories such as
SharePoint, OneDrive, network drives and physical storage devices and
media). Whilst work undertaken for the GLO, PCDE and prior disclosure
exercises will have been taken into account and built upon, we understand
that Post Office did also conduct extensive review activity with its advisers

to support the development of the Interim Disclosure Statements.

How is the issue is being resolved and when is it likely to be completed?

70

There are a variety of factors concerning Exchange of which we are aware

that affect how it is interrogated:

(a) Exchange is not a complete record of all emails sent/received.

(b) Exchange holds significant volumes of data. This reflects working
practices with electronic data. For example, the Exchange data
items for custodians named in respect of 1 request made for Inquiry
Phase 5 (including some who are still employed by Post Office) are,
in many cases, in the low millions each (equating to 1-2TB of data
each). Further, analysis of that data by KPMG needs to be
performed on KPMG’s systems. This is because Exchange has
limited analysis functionality, whereas KPMG has access to
systems with more precise analysis functionality so KPMG can

manage that analysis (KPMG do not have direct access to Post

Page 60 of 135
71

72

WITN10810100
WITN10810100

Office’s systems for information security reasons). Consequently,
the time taken for analysis reflects machine time required for
identification and migration of potentially large volumes of data from
Post Office’s systems to KPMG and for analysis on KPMG’s

systems (assuming there are no issues with the data transfer).

HSF and P&P are instructed with respect to Phase 4 (see paragraph 17
above for further details). My understanding of their plans is derived from
discussions with individuals from those firms and is set out in the following
paragraphs. | understand that their approaches are to an extent driven by
the fact of upcoming witness hearings and the need to take urgent efforts
to check whether additional documents need to be disclosed to the Inquiry

(and witnesses) for each such hearing.

For HSF (the information in this paragraph has been provided to me by

HSF):

(a) HSF is assisting Post Office with disclosure of emails harvested
from Exchange and | understand HSF have undertaken the
following review exercises on an expedited basis because of

anticipated hearing dates in November and December 2023:

(i) In relation to Catherine Oglesby, approximately 31,887
documents were collected from Exchange via party /
participant-based searches using a combination of known

email addresses and wildcard terms. Following application of

Page 61 of 135
)

(iii)

(iv)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

keywords, approximately 7,469 documents were reviewed
(on a full family basis) and on 10 November 2023 32

documents were produced to the Inquiry.

In relation to Gareth Jenkins, approximately 8,744
documents were collected from Exchange via party /
participant-based searches using a combination of known
email addresses and wildcard terms. All 8,744 documents
were reviewed in full and, on 10 November 2023, 3,045
documents (comprised of 2,134 parent emails and 911
attachments) were produced to the Inquiry together. Noting
the breadth of Question 2 of Request No. 30 (which seeks all
emails between POL employees and Mr Jenkins), on 17
November 2023, an index was provided to the Inquiry which
identified documents that might be of greater interest than
others in the production (subject, of course, to the Inquiry's

own views).

P&P has had primary carriage of reviews of Exchange
documents relating to Paul Whitaker. However, HSF assisted
with the review of approximately 3,245 documents located
via search terms for the Castleton case study — on 16

November 2023, 2 documents were produced to the Inquiry.

In relation to Elaine Cottam, attempts were made to locate

emails via a combination of address book searches and party

Page 62 of 135
(b)

(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

/ participant-based searches using a combination of known
email addresses and wildcard terms — no potentially relevant

emails were found.

In addition, steps have been taken to harvest and deduplicate
Exchange documents relating to Andrew Winn and Andy Dunks,
who Post Office understands may be scheduled to give evidence in

January 2024.

Whilst the workstreams detailed above are those which were put in
place to deal with (at the time) forthcoming witnesses, HSF have
been giving thought to how Post Office might deal with the issues
arising from the discovery of the data contained on Exchange which
affects the civil elements of phase 4 of the Inquiry more broadly.

Post Office will update the Inquiry further.

73 For P&P, (the information in this paragraph has been provided to me by

P&P):

(a)

P&P has been and is assisting Post Office to search for, review and
produce material from Exchange relating to witnesses giving
evidence in respect of the criminal case studies (“CCS”) Module of
Inquiry Phase 4. POL, P&P and KPMG have been working to
search, review and produce material on a witness-by-witness basis,

bearing in mind the Inquiry’s hearings schedule, to ensure that as

Page 63 of 135
(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

many of the scheduled Inquiry Phase 4 hearings as possible can go

ahead as planned.

In summary:

(i)

(ii)

(ii)

(iv)

What documents P&P reviewed and whether P&P used
search terms was dependent upon the number of documents
returned. Post Office has updated and will continue to update

the Inquiry in correspondence.

Data in respect of the witnesses who have remained
scheduled to give evidence up to and including Friday 8

December 2023 has been produced to the Inquiry.

Data relating to the witnesses scheduled to give evidence in
the week beginning 11 December 2023 has been identified.
It will then be reviewed and produced as soon as possible

before their respective hearings.

P&P is proceeding on the basis that the Inquiry will call
Graham Ward (in addition to other witnesses) in January
2024 and Post Office and KPMG will harvest data for review

accordingly.

P&P’s initial view is that any retrospective remediation work with

respect to the criminal case aspects of Phase 4 should broadly

reflect the approach taken in remediation exercises previously

Page 64 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

undertaken by P&P relating to (a) policies and procedures and (b)

training, experience and qualifications.

(d) | The approach is under consideration and anticipated to identify what
(if any) remediation work is required for the following: CCS
witnesses; Rule 9 Requests 6 and 14; and the workstreams relating
to policies, procedures, training, experience and qualifications. This
will be informed by Post Office’s understanding of whether/to what
extent the Inquiry wishes to further examine these issues, the
number of potentially relevant custodians and anticipated timing and
likelihood of finding relevant documents. Post Office will update the
Inquiry separately also in correspondence in this regard. The
approach will also be informed by the Post Office’s ongoing PCDE.
As part of the PCDE, Exchange data in respect of all potential future
appellants will be interrogated and any material that is identified as
being responsive to any criminal related Rule 9 or Section 21 Notice,
CLI 49 or the Inquiry’s terms of reference and Completed List of

Issues, will be produced to the Inquiry.

(e) Post Office will update the Inquiry separately also in

correspondence in this regard.

74 We (BSFf) have considered — from our (still building and therefore far from

complete) knowledge — potential impacts on Inquiry Phases 2 and 3:

Page 65 of 135
(a)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Phase 2 concerns “Horizon IT System: procurement, design, pilot,
roll out and modifications’. This relates to events before 2012. As
explained above, Exchange is understood to hold data not available
in Mimecast or other Post Office systems potentially from before
2012 (introduction of Proofpoint) and 2016 (introduction of
Mimecast), depending on the email custodian. The working
conclusion is that further investigative steps about potential impact
on Inquiry Phase 2 of the Exchange issue would logically not be
productive, taking into account, amongst other things, the low
likelihood that individuals would have been communicating by email
in the period up to 2016 about procurement and roll out processes
that completed more than a decade earlier and retained those
emails in their Exchange emails. Post Office will conduct further
work to validate that working conclusion but | expect that (at most)
there will be immaterial numbers of non-duplicative documents on
Exchange that are likely to have material probative value to Inquiry
Phase 2. Post Office would however welcome engagement with the
Inquiry on this working conclusion based on the analysis in this
statement of the Exchange issue and the ongoing validation work |

refer to in this paragraph.

Inquiry Phase 3 concerns “Operation: training, assistance,
resolution of disputes, knowledge and rectification of errors in the
system’. Relevant issues and documents may appear before or

during the 2012-2016 period. BSFfs current analysis is that

Page 66 of 135
75

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

(building on the explanation above regarding Inquiry Phase 2) the
approach should be to consider for each witness who gave evidence
for Inquiry Phase 3, the dates of their employment at Post Office to
identify whether/to what extent they may have sent or received
emails up to 2016. For those identified, a proposed prioritisation for
search and review of data for those individuals (for example by likely

relevance) would then be shared with the Inquiry for comment.

Regarding Inquiry Phase 5, BSFf have searched email data with respect

to related Inquiry requests. 1 Inquiry request to date (s21 (03)) has

identified named custodians and consequently required the specific

collection, search and review of Post Office specific custodian email data.

As explained in correspondence to the Inquiry, for the custodians identified

in that request | understand that:

(a)

(b)

Post Office has undertaken Address Book searches for each
custodian named. For all custodians for whom we have been told
by Post Office that Exchange data is available, pre-2016 data has
been migrated to KPMG, searched using the applicable search
terms and reviewed. Documents responsive to the relevant request

were produced to the Inquiry on 30 November 2023.

POL has undertaken, and is undertaking, participant-based
searches for each of those named custodians. For those whose
responsive data was of a manageable size, the data was migrated

to KPMG, searched using the applicable search terms and pre-2016

Page 67 of 135
(c)

(d)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

data is currently being reviewed. For those custodians whose
responsive data was so voluminous that it was not feasible to
transfer to KPMG, Post Office is seeking to re-run the searches with
a cut-off date of 2016 to reduce the amount of data to transfer. Once
that has been transferred, it will be searched and reviewed. We will
update the Inquiry as soon as possible regarding anticipated

timeframes for that review and production.

For avoidance of any doubt, | understand that each of the above
(searches and review based on Address Book and participant-
based searches) have applied global de-duplication using what |
understand is the standard forensic processing MDS Hash approach

only.

Post Office is considering further (but is not currently using wildcard
searches of Exchange data in respect of the request referred to
above (or Inquiry Phase 5 requests to date because of the issues
below). We understand that Post Office is continuing to investigate
the nature, scope and output of wildcard search functionality, (with
KPMG) what overlap it has with Address Book and participant based
searches (and with data held in Mimecast), and that HSF and P&P
have identified that the approach returns false positives (in the
sense that emails to/from/cc/bcc are not always of the custodians

searched for).

Page 68 of 135
(e)

(f)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

In relation to additional custodians in relation to Inquiry Phase 5, the
primary immediate further work would relate (under s21 (03)) to
other custodians who might have referred to any of the specific
individuals in relation to specific issues. We will write separately to
the Inquiry on that issue as it is not readily possible to set out the
potential thinking without setting out the nature and content of s21

(03).

In addition, BSFf are considering whether previous Rule 9 requests
made of Post Office and directed to HSF may be relevant to Phase
5 and, where that is the case, whether and to what extent the search
strategy involved searching for emails the completeness of which
may be affected by the Exchange/Mimecast issue. AS with each of
the issues above, work on the best approach, options on which
direction from the Inquiry will need to be sought, and resulting
timescales is ongoing. Post Office anticipates writing to the Inquiry

to keep it updated ahead of the disclosure hearing on 12 January.

How is Post Office investigating technical analysis to process Exchange

data to reduce the number of duplicates?

76

E.

Details of this process and analysis are in Appendix 2.

STRUCTURAL (EDRM) REVIEW [NOVEMBER REQUEST

PARAGRAPH 2]

77

Paragraph 1 of the November Request stated:

Page 69 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

“Please set out the detail of the structural review. This should include the

following:

a. In simple terms, what the review involves and the phases/issues which

are likely to be affected.

b. When the work on the review commenced, including the reasons for it

not being undertaken at an earlier stage.

c. What work remains and the date on which such an exercise is likely to

be completed.”

What the review involves and the phases likely to be affected

78

| summarised the reasons for and the approach to Post Office’s structural
review in my letter to the Inquiry dated 1 September 2023 (my first letter as
RLR) [POL00126339] | have set out below the relevant paragraphs (| have

not included the footnotes from the letter):

“...In the light of these factors [see paragraph 11 of that letter], and the
opportunity afforded to us to assess the position during the course of a
transitional hand-over period, the structural review to which Diane Wills
refers in her statement, is being taken forward by revisiting the EDRM
(Electronic Discovery Reference Model) stages. The Inquiry will be aware
EDRM is the generally recognised global methodology for complex
disclosure exercises. It involves looking separately at each of the key
stages of identification; preservation; collection; processing; review;

analysis and production. In practice that involves a system review of all

Page 70 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

sources of data and systems (electronic and hard copy), how they are
being captured and processed. It will also involve looking at the viability (or
not) and time involved (if viable) of restructuring the Relativity databases.

That structural review is underway.

We are conscious that there has, for example been very intensive work
ongoing on hard copy data repositories and that the Inquiry has received
updates from HSF on this on 22 August and on 31 August. The same
confirmatory exercise is being carried out in relation to digital repositories

and also the interactions between different systems.

This is to check, to the best level achievable, all of the relevant elements
that make up POL’s disclosure in the light of the factors summarised at
paragraph 11 above: sources of data; types of data; those that have been
successfully captured and those that remain to be captured for potential
relevance to the remaining Phases of the Inquiry, how it is currently held
and accessed in Relativity and whether this can be improved. Each of the
implementation processes and actions (all of the stages in the chain of
what is being done by whom) will be looked at to seek to reduce risks and

make any achievable improvements.

This is being done mindful of the reality that the focus of attention and
review to date evidentially has been on Phases 2-4. We do not have
anything like the same level of knowledge and detail on those phases and
related work as do HSF and therefore defer to them on that issue. However,

from our understanding and involvement since our instruction our sense is

Page 71 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

that detailed and thorough searches and data collation have occurred in
relation to those Phases. The focus in the review is therefore on Phases 5-

7.

The relevance of the review to POL’s support for the work of the

Inquiry

The work on the review will of course continue in parallel with our work in
responding to the live requests from the Inquiry and we do not anticipate it
impacting negatively on that. However, the issues set out at paragraph 11
above add an additional layer of complexity to that work. In terms of timing
we anticipate that the review itself will take a number of weeks. If structural
changes to the Relativity database are viable and bring material benefits,
the scale of data and resulting processing time is likely to take 12-15
weeks. However, that structural work (if actioned) would be done in parallel
with continuing review work in the existing system and should not affect

that continuing work.

The review work is required to be able to enable POL to comply with current
requests of the Inquiry in relation to Phase 5 and future such requests. In
particular, POL wishes to establish that all ascertainable data sources have
been identified and collected to the full level reasonably achievable so that
the review pool contains the source data potentially relevant to the specific
request/requirement. The review work on the existing pool will continue

whilst that is done in parallel.

Page 72 of 135
79

80

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

The aim of the work will also be — as with any complex disclosure exercise
— to inform the necessary interactions and balancing between different
factors including resource, efficiency, and depth of review achievable
relative to different timescales. Those factors obviously involve
unavoidable choices in any review exercise — for example on depth
achievable vs time available. The aim will remain that the support from POL
to the Inquiry can be effective and efficient. However, the reality is that it
will not be possible to mitigate all of the factors set out at paragraph 11
above. Many are historic matters inherent in a disclosure exercise of this

nature...”

That remains an accurate summary. In overview the structural review

involves:

(a) the testing and validation of past assumptions for the Post Office’s

disclosure exercise;

(b) the assurance of disclosure-related work conducted to date against

objective standards; and

(c) where a need is identified, the completion of reasonably achievable

remediation work.

The Electronic Discovery Reference Model (EDRM)’? breaks a disclosure

exercise down into the stages of identification, preservation, collection,

| understand the EDRM was developed almost 20 years ago and has been updated and improved on an ongoing basis

ever since by lawyers and other professionals active in eDisclosure across common law jurisdictions. | understand EDR M

Page 73 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

processing, review, analysis, production and presentation. While the
framework moves from the left-hand side (i.e., identifying potential sources
of information and determining their scope, breadth and depth, location,
availability and known limitations) to the right-hand side (presenting
material before the appropriate forum (e.g., a court or public inquiry), it is
not strictly a linear process; each stage interacts with the others, so

approaches are updated as knowledge increases of the specifics.

81 If stages on the left-hand side have not been conducted effectively,
problems are particularly likely to arise and they are likely to compound
through the EDRM stages. Putting it simplistically the quality of review is
obviously heavily dependent not only on how the review is done but the
quality and completeness of the review pool on which it is based. However,
for the reasons that | summarise at paragraph 31 above that is - in any
complex exercise — easier to state than to implement. The focus of the
current structural review is on the left-hand side of the EDRM (i.e.,

identification, preservation, collection and processing).

82 The review is not directed at a single (or multiple) specific Inquiry Phase or

issue. The main activities are:

(a) An exercise to identify the full extent of Post Office’s electronic data

universe to validate assessments of all data sources as to whether

to be the global standard disclosure framework (although it is expressed to be for electronic disclosure, the framework

works ~ and is used ~ also for hard copy documents).

Page 74 of 135
(b)

(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

they are reasonably likely to contain data that might be relevant to
the Inquiry’s terms of reference and whether that any such data has
been preserved and, as appropriate, collected and processed for

review.

A consolidation of Relativity workspaces to reduce time and
operational complexity when responding to requests from the
Inquiry and to ensure that newly processed data has more coherent
metadata, which will enable more effective use of other Relativity

functionality (such as email threading and textual near-duplication).

An exercise to validate custodian data mapping to facilitate an
assessment of whether further identification work is required and
whether any additional preservation or collection actions need to be
taken (e.g., in relation to potentially materially relevant data in the
possession of third-party professional adviser or individual

custodians).

When did the work commence and why was it not undertaken at an earlier

stage?

83

The specific structural review to which | referred in my letter to the Inquiry

dated 1 September 2023 [POL00126339] being conducted by BSFf started

following our instruction in May. We had anticipated the use of the EDRM

structures for disclosure work in our tender submission and discussions on

Page 75 of 135
84

85

86

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

it with Post Office therefore started during June and July during

mobilisation.

It would not however be a fair inference to view the structural review as an
indication that investigative work to identify, preserve and collect sources
had not previously been conducted for the purposes of Post Office’s
disclosure exercise. My understanding is that extensive elements of
investigation work have been done by Post Office and by various advisers
over several years (including during the GLO proceedings). The Inquiry
receives, for example, detailed updates from HSF on the work that it is

carrying out.

| understand and, since the instruction of BSFf, have seen that detailed
efforts were undertaken to review factors relating to disclosure. However,
a comprehensive understanding of Post Office’s data universe has not yet
been achieved and it is, and has been, developing as institutional

knowledge is reconstructed.

Complexity has also been due in part to the fact that it builds on several
previous waves of overlapping disclosure processes in the past including
for the GLO, Criminal Appeal proceedings, malicious prosecution
proceedings as well as for the Inquiry. My understanding is that this has
meant that Post Office’s main data repositories have been identified and
harvested from time to time, for multiple purposes, from multiple sources
and into multiple Relativity workspaces. Post Office had, prior to our

instruction, instructed and actively participated in more wholesale structural

Page 76 of 135
87

88

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

disclosure activity intended to develop its Inquiry-related disclosure,
recognising that its data repositories and its knowledge of those
repositories had built up over a series of layers and years. Much of that
work has involved taking fresh reviews of Post Office’s data universe and

identification of electronic and hard copy data.

For example, Post Office had already conducted (commencing in around
December 2022) a hardcopy audit procedure (which BSFf has not advised
on or been involved with) of 228 Post Office site locations. | understand
that an enhanced self-certification process was supplemented by an on-
site search conducted by a team from Innovo Law, comprising 2 solicitors
with public inquiry experience and a former police officer who has

previously led investigative work on public inquiries.

As part of the work, Post Office from around May 2022 onwards has been
building up internal knowledge of its current and legacy IT architecture.
These processes are ongoing. Post Office started in June 2023 the
exercise to identify the full extent of Post Office’s electronic data universe.
That work was initially progressed by the same team from Innovo Law and
a group of Post Office subject matter experts coordinated by Post Office’s
Chief Data Architect. It is continuing now as a collaborative project with
advisory inputs from senior BSFf lawyers, feedback from BSFf's front line
disclosure teams and a wider range of Post Office SMEs, who combine
seniority, relevant technical expertise and residual long-term institutional

knowledge. That first stage work of identifying Post Office’s potentially

Page 77 of 135
89

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

relevant data universe is expected to complete within the next few weeks

and feed into the structural review.

| also initially raised with KPMG in July 2023 the possibility of consolidating
or rationalising the multitude of Relativity workspaces to facilitate better de-
duplication, email threading and analytics at workspace level and to
facilitate faster electronic searches and review. Post Office have taken that
project forward and we are liaising with KPMG to develop and scope a
methodology to improve delivery of disclosure to the Inquiry. Careis being
taken not to impact work in responding to Inquiry requirements and also to
try to avoid adding rather than reducing complexity. Post Office has already
approved the concept in principle providing that cost-effective options are
technically feasible within a timeframe that allows Post Office to best assist

the Inquiry.

What Work Remains and on what date is it likely to be completed

90

| have summarised the main ongoing activities of the structural review at
paragraph 82 above. Appendix 3 contains further detail about those
activities, the current position on each and the known future work. |
anticipate that unfortunately some elements of the work would require
some further months to complete and some of the timescales are not
predictable with certainty. However, | have included Post Office’s current

best estimates of duration. For example, the examination of the 5 servers

Page 78 of 135
91

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

and 12 back-up tapes located at Chesterfield’? is not easy to predict due
to technical complexities. The timescales are driven primarily by technical
work required and the delivery of that before any resulting legal work can

be scoped and carried out.

New potential data sources are being identified that require further
investigation. There is a resulting balance of the need to inform the Inquiry
on new issues on disclosure which may impact its work without undue
delay. However, equally the Inquiry will not wish to be troubled on items
that turn out to be not relevant. For example, the recent Post Office
FileShare correspondence from BSFf to the Inquiry dated 10 and 17
November 2023 [WITN10810110] [WITN1081011 1]. If helpful to do so we
will continue to outline potential repositories but not trouble the Inquiry with

detail until after investigations have progressed meaningfully.

F. RESPONSE TO PARAGRAPH 1 OF THE OCTOBER REQUEST

92

| have set out responses below on points arising from BSFf's letters to the
Inquiry dated 16 [WITN10810102] and 13 October 2023 [WITN10810101].
For the reasons mentioned at paragraphs 31(d) and 54 above, the aim of
the letter of 16 October and the covering email and draft agenda
[WITN10810112] was to summarise Post Office’s understanding and

current approaches for engagement with the Inquiry and to seek a meeting

"3 6 servers are being examined but 1 has been confirmed, | understand, not to contain stored data. 13 back-up tapes

are being examined, but 1 has been confirmed, | understand, to be a cleaning tape that would not contain stored data

Page 79 of 135
93

94

95

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

so that any points of concern for the Inquiry on the approaches and related
timing impacts could be discussed, addressed and any practicable

changes incorporated.

BSFf's letter to the Inquiry dated 13 October 2023 [WITN10810101] replied
to the Inquiry’s letter to BSFf dated 9 October 2023 [WITN10810113] in
relation to BSFfs letter to the Inquiry dated 11 September 2023
[WITN10810114]. BSFfs letter of 13 October aimed to provide the

clarifications sought and sought discussion on any points or concerns:

“We hope that this letter assists to clarify matters raised in the Inquiry's
letter of 9 September 2023. We would welcome a call with the Inquiry
following receipt of this letter to discuss the points and any ongoing
concerns, particularly around the Inquiry's concerns on duplicates. We can
make ourselves available at any time next week on Wednesday 18th or

Thursday 19th October 2023.”

A meeting was subsequently arranged for 3 November 2023. The October
Request was issued on 31 October 2023. The points set out below have
not to date been the subject of discussion with the Inquiry. | have therefore

summarised the position below.

The context and practicalities of disclosure exercises generally
summarised at paragraphs 31 to 32 above was the background for
paragraphs 6 and 7 of BSFf's letter to the Inquiry dated 16 October 2023

[WITN10810102]. The letter was seeking to be direct about different

Page 80 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

dynamics involved between the remediation exercise for the Three Issues

(as defined by the Inquiry) as against ongoing disclosure.

96 The remediation exercise for the Three Issues was of course to be
completed with the very full levels of rigour that resulted from the discovery
of the problems with item level de-duplication, specific search terms and

family documents.

97 | also confirm in relation to disclosure work going forward that:

(a) | KPMG has been instructed and is proceeding on the basis that
global/family level de-duplication should be used. Item level de-
duplication will not be applied without specific agreement. KPMG
has confirmed that no review involving a request by the Inquiry since
the concerns with the Three Issues arose has involved the use of
item level de-duplication in a manner that would exclude documents

from review".

Item level de-duplication has not been used to exclude documents from review. HSF and P&P have, | understand from
HSF, on occasion, instructed KPMG to use item level duplicate analysis to identify documents within a draft production set
that: (i) are exactly duplicative of documents that had been produced to the Inquiry previously; and (ii) which are either
standalone documents or documents attached to parent documents that had been reviewed and assessed as providing
neither additional relevant content nor context. HSF has stated, by way of example, this was explained in HSF's letters to

the Inquiry dated 14 [WITN10810115] and 25 August 2023 [WITN 10810116]

Page 81 of 135
98

99

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

(b) KPMG has confirmed that no item level de-duplication has been
applied to any review exercise or production carried out by the BSFf

team.

(c) Search terms are being examined, tested and refined rigorously.

(d) Post Office and BSFf (including the senior BSFf individuals
responsible for operational and strategy decisions regarding Post
Office's Inquiry disclosure exercise) considered all of the
correspondence, evidence and Directions relating to the Three
Issues and used it to inform and develop our approach for each

EDRM stage of Post Office’s Inquiry disclosure exercise.

Search strategies are necessarily specific to each request. To date there
have been two main notices that have led to review and productions that
BSFf has dealt with (leaving aside those recently served and currently in
progress): these are s21 (03) and s21 (08). For reasons of Inquiry
confidentiality | will not go into the detail of these in this witness statement
because of its likely circulation. However, the difference between them is
useful to illustrate the different types of approach that are necessarily

applied to different situations.

$21 (03) involved multiple individuals and multiple issues extending over a
long period. The Inquiry specifically requested that the issues were
interpreted broadly and that Post Office took an abundance of caution

approach (both of which were done). It also involved, in capturing those

Page 82 of 135
100

101

102

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

issues many phrases or search terms common in everyday language,
many of which were also in use in operational contexts within Post Office
over the more than 20-year period covered by the Inquiry’s terms of

reference.

In contrast, $21 (08) involved the identification, collation and provision of a
specific and defined cohort of material to the Inquiry. For example, where
it was possible to identify one example of a document requested then
information in that document led to searches being conducted for
documents with similar or the same wording and formatting. The learning
from further documents identified then helped to identify further lines of
enquiry. The enquiries became more focused and granular until all

reasonable searches and lines of enquiry had been exhausted.

Different — although both rigorous — search strategies in relation to families
(both designed to address and head off the potential issues which had

arisen as part of the Three Issues) were adopted therefore in each case.

In dealing with the review for s21 (08), because the review pool was much
narrower and because this was not an exercise involving multiple emails
with large families and very large amounts of duplication, every related
document was reviewed. Where any document was relevant, the
surrounding related documents were produced. In terms of scale, this
exercise led to 199 documents produced. This review exercise, although
narrower in scope, still required a large team working full time (or nearly

full time) for a material period.

Page 83 of 135
103

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

In contrast, because of the nature of it, s21 (03) had a potential review pool
in the low millions if broad search parameters were used and over 500,000
documents in the review pool when the parameters were refined and
iterated. In terms of approaches to family documents, for this specific
notice, BSFf therefore had to devise a methodology that sought to avoid
the problems that had arisen within the Three Issues (minimising to the
extent practicable the risks of not picking up relevant documents within
families) whilst being able to respond with relevant evidence within
manageable timescales and reducing the — already material — risk of
adding to duplication or marginal relevance issues in the production set for
the Inquiry. | have responded below on de-duplication including recent

work with KPMG on that to try to assist.

Review of Family Documents

104

To address the family documents and duplication factors, the instruction
given to Tier 1 reviewers on review of family documents on s21 (03), and
by default for all disclosure workstreams unless a particular workstream
requires a different approach is that below. This is instructed in the detailed

formal guidance and also training given to reviewers:

“Reviewing family documents

18. The Inquiry has stressed the importance that potentially relevant
documents are reviewed in their family context, rather than in isolation. The

documents that you will review in batches will not be in full families, so you

Page 84 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

will need to click the Family Group icon at the bottom right corner of the

screen when viewing a document, to view the "child documents".

19. _ Where you code a document in your batch as relevant to the section
21 you then MUST code all documents in the family group of that
document. You may need to review the family documents in order to

determine the relevance of the parent document.

20. If you code a document as Not Relevant, do you not need to view
and code the family documents UNLESS there is anything in that document
to suggest the child documents are relevant, for example the title of an

attachment suggests possible relevancy ("GLO talking points" etc.).

21. It is important to remember when you code a document as Not
Relevant, you not only exclude that document from further review but ALL
child documents, unless they are Search Term Responsive (and will
therefore be reviewed at Tier 1). Therefore it is important you are certain
of relevancy before coding a document as Not Relevant. Always err on the

side of caution and code as Relevant when you are uncertain.

22. The Inquiry has stated that a parent email to a relevant document
will most likely be relevant. Please err on the side of caution and code all
parent emails to relevant documents as relevant, unless they meet the
Specific criteria for exclusion at paragraph 4 of the Notice (see page 14 for
guidance). If you are unsure if a document meets the criteria for exclusion,

mark it as relevant.”

Page 85 of 135
105

106

107

108

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

The guidance to reviewers, including the above concerning approach to
family documents, was produced and then updated in light of the

correspondence, evidence and Directions concerning the Three Issues.

As an example, where a reviewer marks parent document (A) as irrelevant,
its family documents (B) and (C) would not be reviewed at that stage.
However, if (B) and/or (C) are themselves responsive to search terms
applied to identify documents potentially relevant to the Notice/Request
then they will be included in a batch of documents and will be reviewed

separately.

An alternative approach would be one that looked to review every family
member of every document that had initial ‘search term hit’ even if that
document and its parent had been reviewed and found to be nonrelevant.
Conservatively, because of the nature of families in digital communications,
that might well increase the number of documents that had to be reviewed
by a factor of three or four times or more. In a small review that has little
impact (so was the approach adopted in relation to s21 (08)). However, in
an exercise involving several hundred thousand documents, the impact on

timings and responsiveness would be very material.

It was understandable that such an approach needed to be taken during
the remediation of the Three Issues, following the issues with item level de-
duplication in relation to the remediation of prior requests. However, with
complex requests involving large review pools, targeted risk mitigation

search strategies in place and global/family level de-duplication having

Page 86 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

been applied to the review pool, applying it would create material

difficulties. If the result was also a relevance rate of around 1.5% to 2.0%

(extrapolating from the relevance rate found during the remediation

exercise), the level of additional time/delay in production and cost would

be very significant relative to the level of gain. The risk of adding documents

of marginal or no relevance and, therefore, adding to the problem of

duplication for the inquiry in productions might well also be increased.

Reconsideration of Previous Searches

109 In relation to reconsideration of previous searches:

(a)

(b)

The Three Issues remediation exercise has, | understand from
discussions with HSF, P&P and Post Office, sought to redress the
impact of the Three Issues in relation to affected Rule 9 requests
(as has been reported to the Inquiry in regular correspondence sent

between July and November 2023).

BSFf and Post Office will of course be alive to and will consider new
information that arises, which may impact upon POL's response to
a previous request. For Inquiry Phases 5-7 Post Office and BSFf
are, and will continue, to look at the best practicable search strategy
for each request and will put in place quality control and risk
mitigation measures as appropriate. These will be, and are, all kept
under review. Such an approach will ensure that Post Office meets

each of the Inquiry's requests as far as reasonable in all of the

Page 87 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

circumstances noting the constraints that | have highlighted in
Section C above and the measures that are being taken to try to

address some of those constraints.

(c) In addition, where documents of interest likely to be of relevance to
the Inquiry’s terms of reference and therefore to the Inquiry are
identified by Tier 1 or Tier 2 reviewers, even if they are not
immediately responsive to the particular request, these are
escalated and produced to the Inquiry. This happened recently, for
example, in relation to a body of additional material identified during

the s21 (08) review.

Use of Search Terms vs. Enquiry Based Searches

110

111

In terms of the use of search terms alongside other search techniques, this
very much depends upon the specific requirement in particular section 21
notice or rule 9 request. When a request is relatively narrow and can be
targeted for example at a particular period, relatively limited set of
custodians or category of documents, it may well be practical and
necessary to review within those parameters all documents identified.
Where the request requires production of broader categories of documents
covering multiple topics then search terms have to be used to identify a

review pool of documents that is realistically capable of review.

For the reasons set out in my letter to the Inquiry dated 1 September 2023

[POL00126339], use of technology/Al techniques alongside other search

Page 88 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

approaches has not to date been viable. For such techniques to be
possible the data and the underlying metadata must be consistent or have
at least a large degree of consistency, and the eDisclosure provider must
have sufficient understanding of history and management of the whole
dataset. That is not the case with the data in the existing Relativity
database. This is largely because of the variable quality of the data
accumulated over time and the diffuse nature of the total Relativity
database, which has been built up incrementally and from different
sources, in respect of some of which KPMG has had limited (if any) visibility
over collection, processing and management. The consolidation proposal
(discussed above in Section E), once implemented, involves improving the
quality of the data as well as rationalising the various databases. Therefore,
it may be possible in the future to use some of these techniques in parallel
with other search methodologies. We would only however wish to do that
after discussion of the approaches with the Inquiry. Also, | am mindful that
the timescales and the critical path for the Inquiry hearings might in practice
mean that this potential additional capability will only come in at a relatively
late stage, and therefore may have to be targeted at specific issues (in

discussion with the Inquiry) in a way that best assists.

Potential Engagement with the Inquiry

112 In all these areas above, | am conscious that they involve professional
value judgements as to the best approaches. We will continue to set out in

response to each request received how we have approached the particular

Page 89 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

review and the reasons we have approached the particular review in that
way. | reiterate however that Post Office would welcome discussion if this
would assist the Inquiry following the point of receipt of a particular request
(or even in draft confidentially in advance in scoping it) to best adapt the

way in which it can respond practically to the Inquiry’s recommendations.

G. RESPONSE TO PARAGRAPHS 2-4 OF THE OCTOBER REQUEST

113 We fully appreciate the real problems that duplicates and near duplicates
present for the Inquiry (and, for completeness, for Post Office and its

advisers) in conducting the review.

114  Atthe core of the problem is a need to reconcile two competing priorities:

(a) the requirement not to exclude documents that:

(i) appear ostensibly the same but may have one or more

differences, some of which may prove to be important; or

(ii) are in fact exact duplicates but appear in different contexts
and that context itself may be significant to an understanding
of, for example, whether an individual was not aware of a

particular circumstance or set of facts.

and

(b) the difficulties of volume and repetition (with resulting duplication of
effort and time) caused by production of identical or very similar

repeating documents or sets of documents.

Page 90 of 135
115

116

117

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

That conundrum is compounded in large exercises which cover long
periods, multiple issues and multiple individuals who will be interacting and
communicating in different ways and in different combinations. The issue
is therefore not an inability to identify duplicates at a specific time. Rather
the issues in BSFfs letter to the Inquiry dated 13 October 2023
[WITN10810101] related to ways the priorities discussed in paragraph 114
might be addressed operationally in a way that meets the Inquiry’s

requirements.

This problem is compounded by material variances in the quality of the
data held in the Post Office Relativity database. As | note above, the
reasons include different data having come from different sources and
different applications using different processes at different times and in
held in different workspaces within Relativity. The variability can result
from, for example, the same document or similar documents being held in
different formats (images or text or other) or because different applications
create different metadata. To the disclosure systems therefore they are
different documents even if all the content is identical. What is meant
therefore by identification of duplicates is not straightforward. In any
disclosure context strictly only an identical MD5 Hash (or #) test can be
immediately identified as a full duplicate. | have set out some further

context below.

There are several technological methods to de-duplicate, but each has

limitations and potential downsides:

Page 91 of 135
(a)

(b)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

MD5 Hash - This is an industry standard de-duplication process
discussed in detail at the 5 September 2023 disclosure hearing. It
uses a highly sensitive (and therefore precise) algorithm to de-
duplicate documents, but, consequently, even tiny changes to
metadata between two documents (such as might arise if they were
processed onto Relativity using different software or different
processing criteria) would result in it treating those documents as
different. It is therefore safe to operate in the sense that it would take
a highly precautionary approach and only exclude absolute
duplicates. As a result, however, it will admit into review and
production documents with tiny (including probably many

inconsequential) differences.

Textual Near Duplicate (TND) identification - This is another
industry standard process to identify duplicates, that can be highly
useful, but must be used with care. While setting a 100% minimum
similarity percentage parameter would group exact textual
duplicates, differences in the metadata might be of importance and
mean that it would not be appropriate to use this method to de-
duplicate. Further, any lower setting, even 99%, could lead to
unpredictable results. For example, the 1% difference between two
documents could indicate a likely irrelevant divergence, such as
different renderings of the same URL (for example, hyperlinked text
that says “Click here” may render in one email as the text “Click

here" and in another as the hyperlinked URL). It could, however,

Page 92 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

indicate an important difference that significantly changes the
substance of the text (for example, the difference between: “X must
do that” and “X must not do that”). The TND process is agnostic as
to the cause of the distinction. It also has compatibility issues with
certain document types or where optical character recognition’® is
inaccurate (OCR has technical limitations, particularly with
handwritten documents or documents with manuscript comments).
| also understand that Relativity identifies a principal document
against which others in the TND group are compared to generate
the percentage difference. However, Relativity identifies the
principal document as the one with the greatest amount of text on
the assumption that would be the most complete document. That
may not be the case, and consequently the document(s) of most

interest may be assigned percentage similarities lower than 100%.

(c) Custom processing hash — | understand this to be very similar to
MD5 Hash, with corresponding advantages and disadvantages.
This is not an industry-standard approach and must be used with
care. While it can be a useful tool, it relies on having a strong
understanding of the data set, which is not always available.
Essentially, this involves designing a particular combination or set

of parameters tailored to produce a particular result based upon the

5 OCR is the electronic or mechanical conversion of images of typed, handwritten or printed text into machine -encoded

text. It is the process that makes the text in, for example, a PDF searchable.

Page 93 of 135
118

119

120

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

particular fields which will be most effective when applied to the

specific document population involved.

For these reasons great care is needed when considering using any of the
techniques other than full MD5 Hash de-duplication to exclude documents
from either a review pool or from a production set. To do so would
introduce material risk of excluding something with minor but potentially
significant differences. That would also not, as we understand them, meet
the inquiry’s current requirements for the reasons at paragraph 114(a)

above.

However, TND and/or Custom hash techniques can more readily be used
to prioritise work following production. With this in mind, BSFf has been
working closely with KPMG recently as set out in paragraph 2.16 of BSFfs
letter to the Inquiry dated 13 October 2023 [WITN10810101]. BSFf wrote
to the Inquiry on 24 November [WITN10810117] regarding an additional
load file in relation to s21 (03) and to set out suggestions as to how TND
and other specified coding fields could be deployed by BSFf and/or the
Inquiry (if the Inquiry would find it helpful) to separate out near duplicates,
or other categories for lower priority review and to target high priority

documents or areas.

The issue is compounded by the various scenarios in which documents
may exist, relate to each other and have been produced. These scenarios
impact the volume of data to be searched, that is produced, and the

nuances which any de-duplication process must take into account.

Page 94 of 135
121

122

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

| also attach at Appendix 4 a further technical schedule that we have
prepared with KPMG that summarises these and further options. Those
options in Part A are those that the Inquiry might consider using on the
material which has been provided to it by BSFf on behalf of Post Office.
Those in Part B are further options which BSFf and KPMG could run
against the full dataset, using additional levels of Custom hash technique
(with the consent and involvement of the Inquiry and its eDisclosure
providers) to further refine and de-duplicate for the purposes of
prioritisation. By using these techniques, we are hopeful that the Inquiry’s
document reviewers, solicitors and counsel team would be able to de-
prioritise a large quantity of near duplicates in their work, whilst having the
ability subsequently to circle back round, as required, to look at those
documents as needed in context or if there are minor variants that prove to

be potentially evidentially significant.

By way of illustration, we have identified that emails that are the same in
substance and metadata may be identified by Relativity as non-duplicates
due to the inclusion or content of disclaimer wording at the bottom of the
email chain. For example, emails are identified where one contains a
disclaimer and another, which appears to be a duplicate, does not. In
addition, we have identified that in emails sent to 2 or more recipients, the
disclaimer that appears in the email received by each recipient is updated
to refer to them meaning they have different disclaimers and each copy of

the same received email has a different MD5 Hash value.

Page 95 of 135
123

124

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

We welcome the opportunity to assist further also in operational
discussions with the Inquiry and/or its eDisclosure providers'® if helpful. To
support this, BSFf has provided an update by letter dated 15 December
2023 on its proposed approach to seek to assist the Inquiry in relation to
duplicates and near-duplicates during review of documents by BSFf on
behalf of POL and after production of those documents [WITN10810118].
In addition, BSFf has provided an additional loadfile containing metadata
fields, which hopefully will assist the Inquiry (see the letters dated 24
November 2023 [WITN10810117] and 15 December 2023

[WITN10810119)).

In relation to paragraph 2 of the October Request, the factors and concerns
that led to the proposal to disclose by way of list previous documents that
were responsive to the search terms used, were specific to s21 (03) in

summary these were:

(a) | The volumes involved and resulting delay and impact on timings of

response.

(b) | The duplication of review activity — and resulting cost— between the

Inquiry and Post Office/its external reviewers. The material

'® We anticipate that the Inquiry has already been considering HSF and BSFf productions for Inquiry Phase 5, and

potentially Inquiry Phases 6 and 7, cross-referring to documents produced. We are concerned to ensure that any de -

duplication effort has minimal impact on any cross-references the Inquiry has already made. We are concerned to

ensure that any de-duplication does not inadvertently de-duplicate the specific copies of documents on which the

Inquiry's preparations rely.

Page 96 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

comprises documents which had all been provided evidentially to
the Inquiry by Post Office, as relevant to the Inquiry’s terms of
reference in response to previous rule 9 and section 21 obligations
and therefore available to the Inquiry. As at 31 October 2023 |
understand that 151,580 documents had been disclosed pursuant
to 47 Rule 9 requests and 11 Section 21 Notices (other than s21

(03) and s21 (08).

(c) To seek to reconcile those factors with the Inquiry’s request, we
therefore provided a list of prior disclosed documents responsive to

the search terms used for s21(03).

Please explain whether any significant changes have been made in respect
of the resourcing of POL’s Disclosure exercise since the last disclosure
hearing held 5 September 2023 (i.e., numbers of reviewers, hours worked

etc.)

125 The resourcing of POL’s disclosure exercise has materially increased since
5 September 2023 (and in fact prior to that as BSFf mobilised and built up
its own disclosure team as documents became steadily available for review
and as they received individual CU clearances). This is because the
disclosure teams deployed by HSF and P&P have remained intensively
busy in connection with remediation (relating to the Three Issues), Inquiry
Phase 4 work and the further disclosure activities reported on an ongoing

basis to the Inquiry. 4 law firms (BSFf obviously being an integrated team

Page 97 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

drawn from 2 firms) each now have large disclosure teams deployed and

working intensively.

126 In terms of the relative sizes of the different teams, these are broadly similar
between HSF and BSFf. Indicatively, the teams for each have been since

6 September 2023 (these are not full time equivalent — FTE — numbers‘):

(a) HSF: 171 total colleagues involved across all activities (lawyers,
other professionals and colleagues) of whom 68 were trainees,

paralegals or other first-tier reviewers)

(b) P&P 45 total colleagues involved across all activities (lawyers, other
professionals and colleagues) of whom 17 were trainees, paralegals

or other first-tier reviewers).

(c) BSFf: 175 total colleagues involved across all activities (lawyers,
other professionals and colleagues) of whom 80 were trainees,

paralegals or other first-tier reviewers).

127 It is not possible to identify the number of lawyers on disclosure activities
specifically. Whilst trainees, paralegals and other first-tier reviewers will be

focused wholly or primarily on disclosure, more senior team members,

‘7 Each of HSF and BSFf had similar numbers of colleagues — in the low tens ~ within these total numbers who were each

involved during the period to a relatively low level of activity (under 20 hours)

Page 98 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

certainly within the BSFf team, with some specialist exceptions, are mostly

involved in a mix of disclosure and other work.

128 In terms of work on disclosure activities the number of disclosure-related
hours worked per week (on average) during the period has been at

approximately the same level for BSFf relative to HSF/P&P combined.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Christopher Michael Jackson

Date: 19 December 2023

Page 99 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

APPENDIX 1: POST OFFICE EMAIL SYSTEMS TO 2016

For ease of reference, where | refer to “Royal Mail Group” in this appendix

| refer to Royal Mail Group Limited and/or its relevant predecessor at

relevant times as applicable.

A diagram reproduced at the end of this appendix, which was provided to

BSFf by Post Office, illustrates the evolution of Post Office's email systems

and data repositories. However, in terms of the key events in the evolution

of Post Office’s email data repositories, BSFfs understanding from Post

Office is as follows:

(a)

(b)

Until the early 2000s, it is understood that Royal Mail Group used
early versions of Microsoft Mail or MSMail. Post Office has very little
information relating to this period in relation to email data including
as to quantity although email would be expected to have been used
on a relatively limited basis. In any event, it does not believe that it
has and it has not encountered any email archives from this period.
Post Office is therefore not aware of any email data repositories

from this period.

From the early 2000s, Royal Mail Group started using IBM Lotus
Notes as its email client combined with a Lotus Domino Server. It
also additionally utilised a Sendmail Gateway. There was no
journalling functionality at gateway level. We understand from Post

Office that due to mailbox memory sizes at the time, it was not

Page 100 of 135
(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

uncommon for users to create local archived email data to keep
older emails. However, due to migration programmes since and
passage of time, few of these snapshot repositories would still exist
and Post Office is not aware of any structured repository of Lotus
Notes data archives. Some of these however still exist (either in
native .nsf Lotus Notes format or that have been converted since to
-pst files), can be found on Post Office’s SharePoint/OneDrive
network and have been previously searched for and located email
data has been processed onto Relativity. Where these old archives
have been stored on physical storage devices or media instead, as
and when located by or provided to Post Office, the possibility that
they may contain non-duplicative email data is assessed and data
harvested as required (e.g., the hard drives and back-up tapes
located by Post Office at Chesterfield, which have been the subject

of previous updates to the Inquiry by HSF).

In_and_around 2008-10, Royal Mail Group reverted from IBM to
Microsoft. It changed its email client from Lotus Notes to Outlook,
its email server from Domino to Exchange (hosted on Microsoft
Business Productivity Online Suite Dedicated or “BPOS-D”) and its
email gateway from Sendmail to IronPort (albeit there was still no
journalling functionality at gateway level). During this migration
process, efforts were made to convert Lotus Notes data repositories
(.nsf files) to Microsoft data repositories (.pst files) at server mailfile

level and for local archived email data. As with any such conversion

Page 101 of 135
(d)

(e)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

process at this scale, it is understood that there will have been
individual instances of legacy data loss, but Post Office has no

information as to material events of data loss.

After migration from IBM to Microsoft, it remained possible for locally
archived snapshots of email data to be created by users and others
and stored on drives or physical devices and media. However, from
this period with the adoption of cloud-based storage and
applications such as SharePoint, the practice by email users of
creating local archived email data on physical devices or media
became increasingly discouraged until no longer permitted in
practice. When any such physical devices or media are located by
or provided to Post Office, the possibility that they may contain non-

duplicative email data is assessed and data harvested as required.

In_and_ around 2011/12, Royal Mail Group changed its email
gateway provider from IronPort to ProofPoint. For the first time,
ProofPoint introduced email journalling at gateway level in a manner
broadly equivalent to that described for Mimecast at paragraph
36(c)-(d) above in the main body of my witness statement.
However, given the historical restructuring context and length of

time that has passed, Post Office does not have information as to:

(i) exactly when ProofPoint may have been activated by Royal
Mail Group in 2012 (but understands that it would not have

been a uniform date for all individual users in any event) and

Page 102 of 135
(f)

(9)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

data captured for some users will go back to 2011 if they were

pilot users; and

(ii) retention periods and other settings that were applied to
ProofPoint by Royal Mail Group during its mobilisation and
operation. Although Post Office has no reason to believe that
Royal Mail Group would have applied deletion settings to
ProofPoint that would materially affect the journalling of data

between 2011/12 and 2016.

Additionally, it is understood by Post Office (but not known
conclusively) that Royal Mail Group did not export a legacy email
data file from Exchange pre-dating ProofPoint into that system. In
other words, it is understood that ProofPoint did not ingest pre-2012
email data from Royal Mail Group’s Exchange mailfiles into its

archive.

From 2012 to in or around 2016, there were a number of key

changes to Post Office email systems coinciding with the period in

which Post Office demerged from Royal Mail Group:

(i) Post Office adopted Microsoft 365 as its productivity platform
(from Microsoft BPOS-D) and user Exchange mailfiles were

migrated across at server level;

Page 103 of 135
(h)

)

(iii)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Post Office updated its Outlook email client and local mailfiles
were restored from the Exchange mailfiles that had migrated

across to the new version of Exchange; and

Post Office adopted Mimecast as its email gateway in or
around late 2015. The operation of Mimecast once activated
is described above at paragraphs 36(c)-(d) of the main body
of my witness statement. However, as explained above, the
Mimecast data will include any legacy mailfile data exported

to it, processed and ingested into Mimecast.

Post Office has confirmed that the legacy mailfile data ingested by

Mimecast at its activation came from Royal Mail Group’s ProofPoint

email gateway system in or around late 2015 to allow for continuity

of the immutable journalled email record at server level. As

ProofPoint itself was only activated by Royal Mail Group in or around

2011/12, the Mimecast data would therefore broadly not be

expected to contain email data pre-dating 2012. Moreover, Post

Office understands from investigations that:

(i)

it was Royal Mail Group that instructed ProofPoint to create
the ProofPoint legacy email dataset and it was provided to
Post Office on a number of disks (“ProofPoint legacy

data”); and

Page 104 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

(ii) Post Office does not have records of how Royal Mail Group
specifically created the ProofPoint legacy data. However, it
does understand that only email data in relation to
postoffice.co.uk email addresses were included. This meant,
for example, that where a user who had access to multiple
email addresses including royalmail.com email addresses,
these other emails would not have been exported across to
or ingested into the Mimecast data. These non-
postoffice.co.uk emails could however remain in their
Outlook mailboxes and Exchange mailfile, However, given
that formal separation between Royal Mail Group and Post
Office occurred in 2012, this particular issue of multiple email
addresses likely has only limited impact and only for very

longstanding Post Office staff.

Throughout the entirety of the period above, there will in addition have been
multiple upgrades and replacements of IT equipment, software, operating
systems, physical devices and media, back-up and support systems and
more as well as IT issues or system or application failures. Any and all of
these events entail the risk of email data loss and doubtless individual
instances of data loss did occur during such events. However, Post Office

is not aware of any specific events of material email data loss.

Page 105 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

DRAFT SUBJECT TO LEGAL ADVICE PRIVILEGE ~ NOT FOR FORWARDING BEYOND ADDRESSEES IN WHOLE OR PART OTHER THAN AS SPECIFICALLY AGREED

129 Figure — Post Office email flows and systems from early 2000s to date:

External Organisation Mail Gateway

lronPort Gateway Mimecast

tots Domino | | Mer

tocal Mattie

Cent Windows 8/108

SS | Se

Local Archives

a a LU
Page 106 of 135

WITN10810100

WITN10810100
APPENDIX 2: POTENTIAL DE-DUPLICATION OPTIONS
Introduction
1 KPMG was instructed to assist Post Office and BSFf with an exercise to

analyse whether documents identified within Exchange were duplicate, or
duplicative in material respects, with documents that already existed in the

Relativity database (for instance, as sourced from Mimecast).

2 The Exchange data for 13 custodians was included in the initial scope of
this analysis. This data was extracted by POL Cyber for the date range 1

January 1995 to 1 January 2016.
Approach

3 Since email data had been collected from a variety of different sources over
time, KPMG’s analysis was conducted across four of the main Relativity

workspaces:

(a) BSFf Processing Workspace (3.6 TB): the main workspace being
used as a data repository for BSFf's responses to Phases 5-7 of the

Inquiry.

(b) POHIT Processing Workspace (19.4 TB): the main workspace being

used as a data repository for HSF’s responses to Phases 1-4 of the

Inquiry.

Page 107 of 135
(c)

(d)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

GLO Workspace (5.7 TB): the legacy workspace used as a data
repository for Womble Bond Dickinson's work related to the Group

Litigation Order.

CCRC Processing Workspace (1.1 TB): the workspace used for any
new data received by KPMG for P&P’s work related to the Criminal

Cases Review Commission and the Inquiry.

KPMG considered four different forms of duplicate document analysis

when comparing the Exchange data for the 13 custodians with data that

already existed in the four Relativity workspaces listed above:

(a)

(b)

(c)

Relativity Processing Duplicate Hash. Similar to a MD5Hash value,
this is a unique and forensically accurate digital fingerprint of a
document created by Relativity using a SHA256 hash during

processing.

Manual Custom Hash. This is a bespoke approach which KPMG
uses based on a concatenation of metadata fields: Message ID,
Unified Title, and Sort Date/ Time (hours and minutes without the

second value).

Message ID. A comparative analysis was also conducted using just
the Message ID metadata field, where this was available. Manual
Custom Hash is a sub-set of this Message ID analysis because

Manual Custom Hash relies on Message ID and other fields.

Page 108 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

(d) | Textual Near Duplicate (TND). This analyses the textual content of
the documents to determine a percentage similarity across
documents (e.g., 90-100%) and group similar documents together

based on textual content.

5 The following table provides a summary of the duplicate analyses
conducted by KPMG across the four workspaces, with an explanation for

the reasons where it was not possible or desirable:

Workspace | Relativity Message ID Textual Near

Processing Duplicate
Duplicate analysis

Hash

BSFF Yes: Step 1 Yes: Step 3

Yes: Step 2

Processing
POHIT Yes: Step5 No Yes: Step 6 Yes: Step 7
Processing (Given the

size of the

workspace,

Message ID

was selected
as a priority

for analysis)

Page 109 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

Yes*: Step 8 Notpossible Notpossible Yes: Step9

(* Relativity (MessageID (Message ID

Processing not available) not available)

Hash not
available,
MDS5Hash
used
instead)
CCRC Yes: Step 10 Yes:Step11  Yes:Step12 No
Processing (Given the
low results
from other
analyses —
see below -
decision
taken not to
Prioritise
TND)
Findings from KPMG 12-step analysis
6 The number of parent emails for the 13 custodians over the relevant time

period extracted from Exchange was 391,775. KPMG’s analysis was

Page 110 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

performed at the parent level to maintain family context and align how

Relativity applies its deduplication logic.

Step 1

7 This data was initially processed into the BSFf Processing Workspace in
Relativity and deduplicated using global deduplication at parent level using

the Relativity Processing Duplicate Hash.

8 This deduplication reduced the overall number of Exchange parent emails
to 363,841.

Step 2

9 The balance of 363,841 Exchange parent emails was compared to emails

that already existed in the BSFf Processing Workspace using the Manual
Custom Hash. The analysis was able to match an additional 137,339
Exchange emails and brought the overall population to circa 226,502

documents.

Step 3

10 KPMG then conducted an analysis using just the Message ID in the BSFf

Processing Workspace. This matched a further 2,787 Exchange emails.

Step 4

11 The remaining Exchange emails of 223,715 were then analysed for textual
similarity with other emails in the BSFf Processing Workspace. Only an

additional 29 emails were able to be matched at 100% textual similarity.

Page 111 of 135
Step 5

12

Step 6

13

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

For step 5, KPMG widened out the analysis to cover the POHIT Processing
Workspace. The analysis of the Relativity Processing Duplicate Hash was
able to match a further 1,044 Exchange emails, reducing the remaining

balance to 222,642.

KPMG conducted an analysis using just the Message ID in the POHIT
Processing Workspace. This matched a further 20,772 Exchange emails.
Given the very large size of the POHIT Processing Workspace (19.4 TB),
Message ID was selected as a priority for analysis; this required less
manual data extraction than the Custom Hash and was expected (based
on the findings from steps 2 and 3 above) to generate very similar numbers
of matches. Also, the time period for POHIT Processing Workspace
matching was limited to 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2015 to reduce
machine time for the analysis whilst still covering over 90% of the emails

from Exchange in this date range.

Step 7

14

The remaining Exchange emails of 201,870 were then analysed for textual
similarity with other emails in the POHIT Processing Workspace, also in
the date range 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2015. Only an additional
482 emails were able to be matched at 100% textual similarity, leaving

201,388 unmatched Exchange emails.

Page 112 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Step 8

15

KPMG’s analysis was extended to cover GLO, also using the date range 1
January 2010 to 31 December 2015. In the absence of Relativity
Processing Duplicate Hash, the MD5Hash of the remaining Exchange
emails was compared to emails that already existed in the GLO

Workspace. Zero matches were found.

Step 9

16

The Exchange emails of 201,388 were then analysed for textual similarity
with other emails in the GLO Workspace, also using the date range 1
January 2010 to 31 December 2015. Zero matches were found at 100%

textual similarity.

Step 10

17

Finally, KPMG widened out the analysis to cover the fourth main
workspace, the CCRC Processing Workspace. The analysis of the
Relativity Processing Duplicate Hash was able to match only 1 Exchange

email.

Steps 11 and 12

18

Zero matches were found for Manual Custom Hash but an analysis using
just the Message ID in the CCRC Processing Workspace matched a further

39 Exchange emails.

Page 113 of 135
19

wi

The residual balance of Exchange parent emails was therefore 201,348
after the 12 stage deduplication analysis process. A total of 190,427 of the
Exchange emails were matched using the techniques above, which

represents 49% of the starting Exchange population.

BSFf Sampling

20

21

22

23

In order to perform a level of quality control over the main KPMG
deduplication matching techniques set out above, KPMG created six
sample sets for BSFf to review, which were designed to cover the four
techniques across the workspaces with the largest identification of

duplicate, or materially duplicative, documents:

Sample 1: BSFF Processing — Manual Custom Hash (Step 2): This
consisted of a comparison of 100 Exchange and 100 Mimecast documents

in the BSFF Processing Workspace.

Sample 2: BSFF Processing - Message ID (Step 3): Sample 2 consisted of
a comparison of 100 Exchange and 100 Mimecast documents in the BSFF
Processing Workspace that have the same message ID and did not match

on Manual Custom Hash.

Sample 3: POHIT Processing - Message ID (Step 6): Sample 3 consisted
of a comparison of 100 Exchange documents and 100 Mimecast
documents in the POHIT Processing Workspace that matched the same

Message ID.

Page 114 of 135

WITN10810100
ITN10810100
24

25

26

27

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Sample 4: POHIT Processing - Processing Duplicate Hash (Step 5):
Sample 4 consisted of a comparison of 100 Exchange documents and 100
Mimecast documents in the POHIT Processing Workspace that matched

based on the Processing Duplicate Hash.

Sample 5: POHIT Processing - TND (Step 7): Sample 5 consisted of a
comparison of 100 Exchange documents and 100 Mimecast documents in

the POHIT Processing Workspace that matched as 100% TND duplicates.

Sample 6: GLO — TND (Step 9): There were zero matches found at 100%
textual similarity in GLO. Sample 6 therefore consisted of a comparison of
100 Exchange documents and 100 emails in the GLO Workspace that

matched with a 95-99% textual similarity.

Sample 7 is also TND: comparing Exchange with emails in the GLO
Workspace. The sample has selected the GLO document at 100% and the

Exchange doc as 95-99%.

Findings from BSFf sampling

28

BSFf are finalising their work with the samples. BSFf reviewed an
Exchange document against the potential equivalent Mimecast document
using the Relativity document compare function. Preliminary views are that
sample methods 1-5 identify documents in Exchange which have no
apparent differences with the potential equivalent in Mimecast or have
differences identified by the Relativity compare function which appear to

be differences in how email addresses, URLs, images or email headers

Page 115 of 135
29

WITN10810100
WITN10810100

are rendered (albeit in such a way that any relevant text remains visible).
Post Office Cyber and KPMG will consider the observations for relevance
(if any) to their work. Post Office will write to the Inquiry should it consider
that any of the duplication analysis methods are suitable for Post Office’s

data.

The names of the relevant custodians are not given here to avoid going

into specific details of s21(03)

Page 116 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Category

Electronically stored

excluding eMedia

APPENDIX 3:

information

(ESI)

CURRENT EDRM STRUCTURAL REVIEW ACTIVITIES

Activity Description

Anticipated Completion Date of

Current Activity

Identification of the extent of Post Office’s | Identification work is currently anticipated
live data universe to complete before the next disclosure
hearing. Preservation, collection and
processing work is possible beyond that.
Activities relating to the | Work to understand the issue is now

Mimecast/Exchange issue

largely complete insofar as is practicably
achievable. Further work is required to
check/validate preservation steps taken to
date. Collection and processing work has

commenced, but the full scope of work

Page 117 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

remains to be established. Further details
are contained in the body of my witness

statement.

Validation of historic preservation activity

across other ESI! data sources

Post Office is hopeful that this work will be
completed within the next 2 months but
will update the Inquiry once a more certain
timeframe can be established or if that

changes.

Review of ESI received in the past from
third parties to establish whether further

collection of ESI is required

Post Office hopes that this work will be
completed within the next 2 months but
will update the Inquiry once a more certain
timeframe can be established or if that

changes.

Page 118 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

ESI stored on eMedia

Investigation of the 5 servers and 12 back-

up tapes located at Chesterfield

Imaging of the servers and back up tapes
is significantly progressed and work is
under way to understand the data stored
on them. This will necessarily be an
iterative process, but Post Office
anticipates writing to the Inquiry before the
next disclosure hearing with a substantive

update.

Confirmation of understanding relating to
the NAS Drive data (further to BSFf's letter

to the Inquiry dated 17 November 2023)

Post Office hopes that this work will be
completed before the next disclosure
hearing but will update the Inquiry if that

changes.

Page 119 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Validation of historical assumptions about

the likely probative value of eMedia

Post Office hopes that this work will be
completed within the next 2 months but
will update the Inquiry once a more certain
timeframe can be established or if that

changes.

Review of custodian disclosure
questionnaires to establish whether

further collection of eMedia is required

Post Office hopes that this work will be
completed within the next 2 months but
will update the Inquiry once a more certain
timeframe can be established or if that

changes.

Hard copy documents

Post Office enhanced self-certification
process supplemented by an on-site

search by Innovo Law

BSFf is not involved in this work but
understands from Post Office that it is

likely to complete within the next few

Page 120 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

weeks and before the next disclosure

hearing.

Post Office reindexing of hard copy

documents stored in Oasis archives

BSFf is not involved in this work but
understands from Post Office that it is
likely to complete within the next few
weeks and before the next disclosure

hearing.

Review of custodian disclosure

questionnaires to establish whether
further collection of hard copy documents

is required

Post Office hopes that this work will be
completed within the next 2 months but
will update the Inquiry once a more certain
timeframe can be established or if that

changes.

Page 121 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

APPENDIX 4: De-duplication

This appendix refers to productions of documents made by or on behalf of
Post Office as the “Productions”, regardless of whether they were made
by BSFf, HSF or P&P (although some of the options below are easier
across just BSFf productions and more difficult across BSFf, HSF and P&P

productions collectively).

This appendix explains processes that the Inquiry, aided by its eDislosure
provider and information rights management team, might wish to consider
to assist it in identifying potential exact or near duplicates of documents
produced by Post Office to the Inquiry. Doing so might help the Inquiry
prioritise documents for review and analysis (e.g., where near or exact

duplicates appear in different families).

This appendix is based on information provided to BSFf by KPMG. |
understand from KPMG that one process may be used on its own or in
combination with other processes specified here or that the Inquiry
identifies. | have sought to note below where a process and/or data might
be limited in its use to a production by BSFf and such advantages and
disadvantages known to KPMG and/or BSFf. Should the Inquiry require

further technical information, | would need to defer to KPMG.

While KPMG has provided this information for the purposes of assisting me
in preparing this statement and, ultimately, of assisting the Inquiry, KPMG

has asked me to make clear that neither KPMG nor BSFf know how the

Page 122 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

Inquiry is managing the documents produced by or on behalf of Post Office.

This appendix is not legal or technical advice to the Inquiry.

5 This appendix is separated into two sections:

(a) options using the existing data available in the Productions; and

(b) additional options available using data from the original documents.

6 A result of applying one or more options is that the Inquiry might have
questions about why specific documents were provided as duplicates or
apparent duplicates and/or in a_ specific format (e.g. image,
placeholder). BSFf and Post Office will endeavour to answer any such
questions the Inquiry might have (including following such engagement

with HSF, KPMG or P&P as is required).

7 | understand from KPMG that, if the Inquiry and its eDisclosure provider
adopt the textual near duplicate analyses (TND) discussed below it would
be necessary to re-run that process or combination of processes each time
Post Office produces additional documents if the Inquiry wishes to ensure
that the near/exact duplication analysis is fully up to date (as the TND score

may change as additional documents are added to the TND data set).

Part A: Options using the existing data available in the Productions

8 | understand the following steps may be used on their own or in
combination with each other (not necessarily in this order). These options

are available to the Inquiry presently (and its disclosure provider) with the

Page 123 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

data produced to it by Post Office. KPMG is available to assist with any
questions if needed or take the steps below and provide the necessary
information to the Inquiry’s disclosure provider. We anticipate that the
Inquiry may have its own view on which, if any, of the following it is

comfortable with being used and in what order.:

(a) MD5 Hash

(b) — TND analysis

(c) Manual custom#

MD5 Hash: Identify forensic duplicates using the MD5 Hash field:

(a) | Summary: use the MD5# field provided in the Productions to identify

duplicative documents within the document population.

(b) Advantage(s):

(i) The MD5 Hash field provides a unique and forensically
accurate digital fingerprint of a document. Deduplication
using MD5# therefore gives the highest level of confidence in
identifying exact documents. This # field is representative of
the document in its native format and allows for comparison
of exact duplicate versions of documents disclosed in
different formats, such as a redacted version of a document

versus a native version of a document.

Page 124 of 135
(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

(ii) Identifies exact duplicate documents amongst the

Productions where they appear in different family groups.

Disadvantage(s) / Points to note: Documents that appear the same

to a reviewer but have small textual differences will have different
MD5 Hash values. and will therefore not be identified as duplicates.
Further, identical documents that are processed using different
eDisclosure software applications may also have differences in their

MD5 Hash values.

10 TND analysis: perform TND analysis using the extracted text field:

(a)

(b)

Summary: This process analyses the textual content of all
documents and is used to determine a percentage similarity across
documents (e.g., 90-100%) and group similar documents together
based on textual content. In addition, the Inquiry may find it useful if
its eDisclosure provider builds an analytics index using extracted
data in all Productions so that the Inquiry can run TND across all

BSFf Productions.

Advantage(s): the Extracted text of documents is included for all
Productions and TND analysis is available in most review platforms,
for example, Relativity which is used by the Inquiry’s eDisclosure
provider Anexsys. At 100% TND, documents can be identified
where the textual content of 2 or more documents is the same (even

though the metadata may not be).

Page 125 of 135
11

(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

Disadvantage(s):

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

TND is not a forensically accurate way to identify exact
duplicate documents. There may be small textual
differences between duplicate documents because of how
those documents were processed by different disclosure
processing software having no substantive impact on the

document but making them appear as textually different.

| should point out that TND below 100% should be used with
particular caution because small textual differences may also
be substantive (for example, a different draft adds only the

word “not” to a relevant sentence).

TND may not be effective for placeholder and/or redacted

documents.

TND analysis may also group similar placeholder documents
together, even though the underlying originals will be

different.

Create a manual custom hash:

(a)

Summary: using a concatenation of fields such as Email From,

Email To, Email CC, Email BCC, Unified Title and Sort Date/Time,

it might be possible to identify similar emails. | understand some of

these fields might need to be cleaned, for example, removing

seconds from the Sort Date/Time because emails may have a time

Page 126 of 135
12

(b)

(c)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

sent/received recorded fractionally differently in Post Office source

systems for the sender and recipient.

Advantage(s): The fields listed are available in the Productions
provided to the Inquiry and can be concatenated together to
approximate how similar documents (whether a parent email or
attachment) can be grouped together to identify potential duplicates

that share the same fields.

Disadvantage(s): the resultant manual custom hash has a lower
degree of accuracy compared to methods listed above. The
method's accuracy will depend on the data quality and consistency

of the produced documents’ metadata.

The deduplication methods identified above would be at a document

level.

Part B: Additional options available using data from the original documents

(i.e., with additional assistance from the Post Office)

13

The following steps may be used on their own or in combination with each

other (not necessarily in this order). | understand “original documents” to

mean the documents as collected and processed by KPMG and which may

be different to the format in which they are produced (e.g. with redactions

and consequently reduced extracted text). These are steps which would

require KPMG’s assistance. | anticipate that the Inquiry may have views on

which, if either, of the methods are used and, if both, the order.

Page 127 of 135
14

(a)

(b)

WITN10810100

WITN10810100

develop custom hash for analysis; and/or

perform TND analysis using the extracted text field from the original

data.

Develop Custom has for document analysis:

(a)

(b)

(c)

Summary: KPMG have developed an approximate custom hash
value for top level emails using the Message ID (this was not
provided in the Production loadfiles), Unified Title and Sort
Date/Time. BSFf are testing samples of documents to confirm the
effectiveness of this method (based on the Exchange vs. Mimecast
data) and will update the Inquiry separately once the testing is

complete.

Advantage(s): KPMG can identify the Message ID in the BSFf and,
subject to additional time, for HSF review Relativity workspaces that
accommodated the original production(s) and can generate loadfiles
that can be shared with the Inquiry as additional data to generate
the custom hash themselves or KPMG can calculate the hash and
provide that to the Inquiry. The custom hash will be static per
document, thus once provided to the Inquiry with respect to a Bates

numbered document, this information will not change.

Disadvantage(s): The custom hash method is not a 100%
forensically accurate technique and is subject to potential

inaccuracy compared to MD5 Hash analysis. If the Inquiry wishes to

Page 128 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100

adopt this method, all future Productions sent to the Inquiry will
include the Message ID field (or include the custom hash). Further,
KPMG will need to produce a custom hash for all productions to

date.

15 Perform TND analysis using the extracted text field from the original data:

(a)

(b)

(c)

Summary: This process analyses the textual content of original
documents that were produced to the Inquiry to determine a
percentage similarity and group similar documents together based
on textual content. KPMG have provided this data as part of the

Additional Loadfile for BSFf Productions.

Advantage(s): The TND Analysis can be shared with the Inquiry
such that they have access to the same information as KPMG. The
Percentage Similarity e.g., between 90% - 100% similarity allows
flexibility on the documents to consider as duplicates (or very

similar).

Disadvantage(s): The TND analysis needs to be updated for any
newly produced documents will require TND to be run again and the
resultant analysis per document could potentially be different. Thus
the analysis shared with the Inquiry would need to be updated each
time. Further, it is likely to take significant time to conduct this across
all productions because it would require all productions to be

consolidated into one workspace for TND analysis to be conducted.

Page 129 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100
Index to First Witness Statement of Christopher Michael Jackson
No. URN Document Description Control
Number
4 | WITN10810101 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810101
dated 13 October 2023
2 | WITN10810102 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810102
dated 16 October 2023
3 POL00126339 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry POL00126339
dated 1 September 2023
4 | WITNO9950100 Witness Statement of Gregg WITN09950100
Rowan dated 23 August 2023
5 | POL00114170ds | First Interim Disclosure Statement | POL-0113558
dated 27 May 2022
6 | WITN10810103 Letter from Post Office to the WITN10810103
Inquiry dated 10 September 2021
7 | POLO0118164ds | Witness Statement of Ben Foat | POL00118164ds

dated 21 June 2023

Page 130 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100
8 | WITN10810104 Letter from HSF to the Inquiry WITN10810104
dated 15 October
9 POL00298235 Email dated 14 August 2013 POL-BSFF-
3.37pm 0136285
10 | POL00298236 Letter to Post Office dated 2 POL-BSFF-
August 2013 0136286
11 | POLO0124516 Letter from HSF to the Inquiry POL00124516
dated 18 August 2023
12 | WITN10810105 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810105
dated 6 October 2023
13 | WITN10810106 Letter from HSF to the Inquiry WITN10810106
dated 20 October 2023
14 | WITN10810107 | Email from Inquiry to BSFf dated | WITN10810109
1 November 2023 9.27am
15 | POLO0165906 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry POL00165906
dated 2 November 2023

Page 131 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

16 | POLO0000657 GLO EDQ (WBD) dated 6 VIS00001671
December 2017
17 POL00142261 P&P DMD dated 19 August 2020 POL-0143530
18 | POLO0039560 P&P DMD (Annex 1) dated 19 POL-0036042
August 2020
19 POL00142414 | P&P Addendum dated 13 January | POL-0143646
2021 (erroneously marked 2020)
20 | WITN10810108 | P&P Addendum Annex dated 13 | WITN10810108
January 2021
21 | WITN10810109 | P&P Second Addendum dated 19 | WITN10810109
December 2022
22 | POLO0114173ds Second Interim Disclosure POL-0113561
Statement dated 18 October 2022
23 | POLO0114176ds Third Interim Disclosure POL-0113564

Statement dated 30 November

2022

Page 132 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

24 | POLO0114177ds Fourth Interim Disclosure POL-0113565
Statement dated 12 January 2023
25 | WITN10810110 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810110
dated 10 November 2023
26 | WITN10810111 Letter from BSFF to the Inquiry | WITN10810111
dated 17 November 2023
27 | WITN10810112 Email from POL to the Inquiry WITN10810112
dated 16 October 2023
28 | WITN10810113 Letter from the Inquiry to BSFf WITN10810113
dated 09 October 2023
29 | WITN10810114 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810114
dated 11 September 2023
30 | WITN10810115 Letter from HSF to the Inquiry WITN10810115
dated 14 August 2023
31 | WITN10810116 Letter from HSF to the Inquiry WITN10810116

dated 25 August 2023

Page 133 of 135
WITN10810100

WITN10810100
32 | WITN10810117 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810117
dated 24 November 2023
33 | WITN10810118 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810118
dated 15 December 2023
34 | WITN10810119 Letter from BSFf to the Inquiry WITN10810119
dated 15 December 2023

Page 134 of 135
WITN10810100
WITN10810100

Witness Name: Christopher Michael Jackson

Statement No.: WITN10810100

Dated: 19 December 2023

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

EXHIBIT TO THE FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER

MICHAEL JACKSON

Page 135 of 135
