WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

Witness Name: John Peberdy MBE
Statement No.: WITNO380_01
Exhibits: WITN0380_01/1

Dated: 14" October 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF JOHN PEBERDY

|, JOHN PEBERDY MBE, will say as follows.

BACKGROUND

1.

| retired from being a Sub postmaster (SPMR) in 2008 and am now 80 years
of age. Therefore, my memory of the events surrounding all matters relating to
Horizon are not as clear as they might be considering it started over 25 years
ago. | was at one time a committee member and subsequently Chairman of
the National Federation of Sub postmasters’ (NFSP) Negotiating Committee
(NC) and also National President of the NFSP in 1998.

in that role | chaired a committee which negotiated with Post Office Counters
Ltd (POCL) concerning all aspects of SPMRs’ pay and conditions of their
contractual relationship with POCL. The role also necessitated from time-to-

time meetings with Government ministers and departments.

Page 1 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

3. As Chairman | was involved in many discussions with both POCL and
Government officials over operation and payment to SPMRS for the Horizon

system prior to it being rolled out to the network of Sub Post Offices.

PROCUREMENT

4. The NFSP were obviously very keen to have an automated payment system
to enable the Benefits Agency (BA) Pension and Allowances to be paid over
Post Office Counters as the BA were looking for other methods of payment
which did not necessarily involve Post Offices. Also, it was urgent as a
company called Pay Point was threatening POCL’s bill payment business as
they had an automated platform which was being rolled to non-Post Office
retail outlets.

5. The NFSP did not have any direct involvement in the procurement of Horizon.

6. | believe that ICL was selected to run the Horizon project because of its
previous experience of large IT systems and had been involved with the

National Lottery and also ran a similar project in Southern Ireland.
PILOT

7. During the pilot there were 10 Sub Post Offices who trialled the original
Horizon system as far as | can remember POCL did not share any results with
the NFSP.

8. The only feedback the NFSP were able to obtain during the pilot was from
those SPMRs in the trial who were NFSP members (I seem to recollect that
they were not all members). This feedback came via their local NFSP branch

or Executive Officers.

Page 2 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

9. Many of the trial SPMR’s said that the system was slow and frequently
needed to be rebooted and the balancing system at the end of week was very

complicated and slow. There were also printer problems.
DEVELOPMENT & DELAY

10: There was an enforced delay to the rollout of the system in 1997 which
seemed to be because of a compatibility issue between the BA and Pathway
computer systems. Also, at this time the NFSP were very concerned about
the pay SPMR’s would receive for the transactions. Whether POCL could
afford to pay SPMRs sufficiently for transactions done over the platform.
Payment was a constant discussion between the NC and POCL, as it also
seemed that the BA did not want to pay to use the whole network.

11. During the delay to the rollout the NFSP were constantly gaining feedback via
its Branch, Regions, and National officers all of which we needed to help
payment negotiations.

12. This feedback initially was about training issues, counter space and security.

43.At the same time POCL had an intention to reduce the size of the network of
Sub Post Offices and the NFSP were suspicious that this was delaying
POCL’s negotiations with the BA.

14. There was a delay in 1998 which was partially caused by the BA still not sure
whether they wanted to pull out of the programme. The BA saw PO network
as an expensive alternative to payment of benefits into bank accounts.

15.Also, ICL were having concerns that the Pathway system was so expensive
that it would not recover its cost and make any profit during the contract

period of | believe 8 years.

Page 3 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

16.Horizons technical difficulties at this time as far as SPMRs were concerned
seemed mainly to relate to being very slow and the system going down and
having to be rebooted which took a considerable amount of time. Also, the
balancing system at the end of the week was very complicated.

17.1 was not aware of any concerns about Horizons ability to handle cash
transactions but in the NC minutes NFSP00000480 a concern was raised
about the ability of Horizon to handle the weekly cash account which was the
weekly balancing system | have referred to previously in this statement
WITNO380 01/1, NFSP00000480

18. During the whole of the trial period the NFSP used its root, branch, regions
and national structure to obtain any feedback. Most of the concerns raised
were about network crashing, the slow speed of handling transactions,
leading to queues and customer dissatisfaction. The time taken to reboot the

system and concerns over counter space and payment issues.

CANCELLATION OF THE BENEFITS PAYMENT CARD

19.During early 1999 there were major cost implications facing the Horizon
project. These were not helped by the fact that the BA/ DSS and to some part
the Treasury wanted to pull out of the Horizon scheme because they wanted
to pursue the payment of benefits by Automated Credit Transfer (ACT) into
bank accounts, which they saw as a much cheaper alternative.

20.However, without counter automation, in the form of Horizon, the Post Office
Counter Network was almost certain to have to shrink to an unacceptable
level in the sight of the general public. So, the Government realised that the
political fallout which would result from the large-scale closure of Post Office
branches due to lack of viability would be damaging to its image. This resulted

Page 4 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

in the DTI and the Prime Minister's office wanting to make sure the payment
of benefits through Post Offices remained an option.

21. At this time the NFSPs position was one of an absolute need for Horizon to
keep benefits payments being able to be made over Post Office Counters and
provide the platform for full automation of the Post Office Network.

22. The biggest and only factor which in any way influenced the NFSPs position
in relation to adoption of Horizon was quite simply the survival of our
members Post Office businesses. In short it was seen as their lifeline.

23.The cancellation of the benefits payment card was a blow to all SPMRs when
it was suddenly cancelled. This was to enable the BA to achieve its desire to
make the payment of Pension and Allowances direct into recipient's bank
accounts.

24. The Federation were now getting more and more complaints about a whole
raft of Horizon operational issues. Mainly the difficulty and extreme slowness
of balancing, the system shutting down unexpectedly and the linked printers
failing to work. Then the time taken to reboot the system was far too long.

25. Horizon set up a Help Desk to assist SPMR’s and enable them to report any
problems. The NFSP suggested that an error log was established to gauge
the severity of these problems. Any problems reported to the Federation were
taken up with POCL either by telephone or at face-to-face meetings which
were not minuted. We were always told that Horizon was working on them.

26. POCL were in a position where they needed to accept Horizon to save its
network and justify the amount it and others had spent so far. They were
under pressure from the NFSP to have some sort of automated platform to

deliver benefits payments and compete with other organisation who were

Page 5 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

trying to do traditional Post Office work. The NFSP were also wanting to
protect their members incomes and the financial investment they had in their

businesses.
HORIZON WORKING GROUP

27.1 was a member of the Horizon Working Group (HWG) form in June 1999
tepresenting the NFSP. The purpose of the HWG was to oversee all
negotiations between POCL and ICL, review the contract between the two
and the arrangements between the BA and POCL. Also, to oversee the
further development of the platform, its rollout and transition from the previous
benefit payments order book method to the automated payment system of
benefits and allowances. To put forward any ideas and contacts to enhance
and strengthen and maximise the commercial use of Horizon thereby securing
the future viability of the Post office Network.

28. During meetings of the HWG concerns were raised about the freezing of the
Horizon Screens and the capability of the system to handle the large volume
of transactions which could take place. A concern was also expressed about
the inconsistence of barcodes on BA documents leading to manual entries
having to be made.

29. The acceptance of the system into the Post Office Network was subject to
several delays and both POCL and the NFSP expressed concerns about the
Screen Freezes, operation of the Helpdesk and amount and level of training
being given to SPMR’s. However, we were assured that POCL had finally
accepted the system on 24th September 1999 on the basis that the necessary

remedial action had been completed or was in hand.

Page 6 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO03800100

30. Towards the end of 1999 there still remained questions about the suitability of
the Horizon system in its present form to handle the potentially large volumes
of transactions and its interface with the banking systems.

31. During the time of the HWG the Government was conscious that the impact of
any delay to the rollout was jeopardising the ability of Post Offices to compete
for business with banks etc. The effect this would have on the size of the PO

network and subsequent political pressure which might ensue.
PERFORMANCE AND INNOVATION UNIT

32.1 was not involved in relation to the Performance and Innovation Unit (PIU).
except that the HWG of which | was a member made a written submission to
them outlining the work the HWG had done.

33.1 understood that the PIU was to maximise the use of Post Offices in an
attempt to replace the gap in income which was to be suffered in 2003 when
BA work would start to fall away. Also, to try and determine the size of the

Post Office Network in the future.

ROLL OUT

34. Roll out of the Horizon system from January 2000 got off to a bad footing with
the NFSP as we received no confirmation that it was finally happening after
being paused in late 1999 to attempt to remedy issues with training, balancing
errors, getting through to the Helpline for assistance, cash account errors and
the length of time taken to produce the Cash account balance report. Also, we

were being informed by SPMR’s that they frequently experienced a “System

Page 7 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO3800100

Busy” message, and the long wait to get through to the Helpdesks to report or
get assistance with the problem.

35. These problems were continuously reported to POCL managers, the
Helpdesk managers and the POCL executive by the NFSP in face-to-face
meetings which unfortunately were not minuted. However, we were assured
that POCL were putting extra resources into the Helpdesks and retraining the
operators. With reference to the speed issues POCL said they were

addressing them with ICL.

ROBUSTNESS

36. Early in 2006 NFSP members were starting to ask questions as to how
robust the system was due to various inconsistencies. Mainly screen freezes
and the length of time taken to do different transactions especially banking.
Postmasters were worried that they were losing business as customers did
not like queuing and were going to other outlets and ATMs for their money.

37. These concerns were flagged up to POCL in face-to-face meetings between
the NFSP and representatives of POCL at Branch, Region and National levels
which again were not minuted | also seem to recollect these were raised at

the highest level in face-to-face meetings with Paula Vennels.

GENERAL COMMENTS
38. Looking back, | feel that the NFSP scrutinised the decision of POCL to
accept and rollout the Horizon IT system as far as was possible with the
limited information which was made available to us.

39. The NFSP communicated as much information as we received to update our

members on any known Horizon issues via our monthly publication “The Sub

Page 8 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO3800100

Postmaster” which went to all SPMRs. To our Branch Secretaries via regular

circulars and attendance at Branch meetings by NFSP executive members.
40.We had to remember that all SUPMR’s were not members of the NFSP and

many were very loyal to POCL and did not want to be seen as “tale tales”.

So whilst the NFSP tried to obtain as much feedback as possible from trail

offices prior to the national rollout of Horizon it was not always as forthcoming

as we might have hoped.

41. | have tried to set out my recollections of what happened surrounding the
whole Horizon system as fully as possible but as it is now some 26 years ago
that some of them relate to and with the best will in the world one’s memory
does become a little stretched especially at 80 years of age.

42. However, | hope this helps the Inquiry into what it has turned out to be a
devastating and life changing experience for far too many SPMRs whom
many sunk their life savings into businesses which were dearly loved and
appreciated by the general public.

43.1 truly hope that the Post Office, ICL and the Government departments have

learned a big lesson from this miscarriage of justice.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:

Dated: 115° octoeat G22.
Page 9 of 10
WITNO3800100
WITNO3800100

Index to First Witness Statement of John Peberdy

No.

Exhibit number Pocument

escription

ontrot
Number

URN

WITNO380_01/1

INFSP report of a
eeting of the

Negotiating
committee on
4/08/1998

VIS00008938

INFSP00000480

Page 10 of 10
