WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

Witness Name: Stuart Sweetman

Statement No.: WITNO399-1

Exhibits: None

Dated: 21 September 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF STUART SWEETMAN

|, Mr Stuart Sweetman, will say as follows:

1. This statement responds the Rule 9 Request 1 dated 1 June 2022 concerning
Government knowledge of technical issues with Horizon prior to roll-out.

2. | have been asked to set out a brief statement of my professional background. |
qualified as a Chartered Accountant with Touche Ross in 1973. Joined the Post
Office in 1982 having been the audit manager responsible for the external audit of
the Post Office (before the separation of the then Mails businesses (Letters and
Parcels), Girobank and Telecommunications). Various roles until 14 May 1996
when | was appointed Managing Director, Post Office Counters. Ceased to be
Director on 13 November 2001. Retired from Royal Mail in 2002. No subsequent
full-time employment.

3. | have no access to papers or records concerning Horizon and so my responses

to the questions asked by the Inquiry will be from recollections of events up to 25

Page 1of 11
WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

years ago and | am 74 years old. | have reviewed the 4 document bundles that
have been made available to me.

. | have been asked to set out the background to my involvement in the Horizon
project. | recall that my first involvement with Horizon started on the day of my
appointment as Managing Director, Post Office Counters. | was required to sign an
agreement/contract concerning Horizon that had been prepared by the
management team lead by my predecessor Richard Dykes (who became
Managing Director, Royal Mail). | cannot recall the scope of this
agreement/contract. | recall that ICL/Fujitsu had been selected as the chosen
contractor to supply a system to automate our network of post offices and the
payment of state benefits. From then on, as Managing Director, | had overall
responsibility for Horizon as a project — through normal project management
processes. My personal involvement will have consisted of agreeing project
objectives, receiving reports on project progress, reporting to my line manager-
John Roberts, Chief Executive Officer of the Royal Mail Group, and reporting to the
Board of the Royal Mail Group. | dealt with issues that required meetings with my
opposite numbers in the Benefits Agency (Peter Matthison?), ICL/Fujitsu (| cannot
recall their initial MD’s name but he was replaced by Mr.Cristou), DTI (David
Sibbick?) and occasionally the Treasury.

. | have been asked to explain the objectives of the Post Office in procuring an
automated payment system. | recall that the business strategic objectives of Post
Office Counters in procuring an automated payment system included a) providing
a modern computer platform to transact all customer and client business through

all post offices (replacing a largely manual records-based system) b) tie in the

Page 2 of 11
WITN03990100
WITNO3990100

Benefits Agency to using the post office network to pay benefits (they represented
about 30% of Post Office Counters client income).

. | have been asked to explain my understanding, at the time, for procuring the
automated payment system under the Private Finance Initiative. The PFl route was
in line with the then Government policy of involving the private sector in large and
expensive projects. This shifts the finance off-balance sheet for the public sector
and rewards the private sector for taking on the risks involved in large and complex
projects.

. | have been asked to explain my understanding, at the time, of the risks identified
in ICL Pathway’s proposed technical solution _| have no recollection of the risks
identified in ICL Pathway’s technical solution.

. | have been asked to explain my understanding, at the time, of the reason(s) for
selecting ICL Pathway as the chosen provider of the automated payment system.
| was not directly involved in the selection of ICL Pathway as supplier — this had
been done prior to my appointment as MD. | recall they had a prototype system
developed and they were a UK company.

. | have been asked to explain my understanding, at the time, of the risks identified
in the development and delivery of the Horizon system. | cannot recall the details
of the technical risk list but the general risk list must have included -scale (roll-out
to c.20000 post offices, c.40000 staff and sub postmasters), technical complexity
— both within Post Office Counters and our Clients (principally the Benefits
Agency), financial stability of ICL, political support (DTI and DSS differing
agenda’s). | recall the project had a detailed risk list that was constantly monitored

(timescales, work streams and financial).

Page 3 of 11
WITN03990100
WITNO3990100

10.1 have been asked to describe the problems faced by the Horizon project between
Autumn 1996 — Spring 1997. | do not recall the problems faced by the Horizon
project between Autumn 1996 and Spring 1997.

11.1 have been asked to describe and explain the reason(s) for the “no-fault” replan of
the Horizon project in or around February 1997. | do not recall the reason(s) for the
‘no-fault’ replan of the Horizon project in or around February 1997.

12. | have been asked what | understood to have been the technical issues with
Horizon at this time. | have no recollection of the technical issues with Horizon
around February 1997.

13.1 have been asked to describe the problems faced by the Horizon project between
April and December 1997. | do not recall the problems faced by the Horizon project
between April and December 1997.

14.1 have been asked to explain the reason(s) why an independent review of the
Horizon project was commissioned in or around July 1997. | do not recall the
reason(s) why an independent review of the Horizon project was commissioned in
or around July 1997.

15.| have been asked to explain the reason(s) for issuing to ICL Pathway a legal notice
of breach of contract in November 1997. | do not recall the reason(s) for issuing
ICL Pathway a legal notice of breach of contract in November 1997.

16.| have been asked to explain what | understood about technical issues with Horizon
at this time. | do not recall the technical issues with Horizon at this time.

17.| have been asked to describe the feedback obtained from end users of the Horizon
system at this time. | do not recall the feedback obtained from end users of the

Horizon system at this time.

Page 4of 11
WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

18.| have been asked to describe the problems faced by the Horizon project between
January and May 1998. | do not recall the problems faced by the Horizon project
between January and May 1998.

19.1 have been asked whether there was agreement between the Post Office and the
Benefits Agency about the future of the Horizon project at this time? If not, what
were their respective positions as you recall them? | recall that there were tensions
between the Post Office and the Benefits Agency over the future of the Horizon
project. They were principally at the strategic level where Post Office Counters had
doubts over the Benefits Agency commitment to a payment card solution and
therefore preserving the viability of the national network of post offices. Financially
approximately 30% of the income of Post Office Counters came from the Benefits
Agency. If this was at risk then the ability to preserve a national network of post
offices serving every community in the UK was in doubt. Without an automated
front office further important client's business would be at risk. It emerged that the
Benefits Agency preferred route was to make benefit payments direct into bank
accounts.

20.| have been asked about | understand at this time about the technical integrity and
robustness of Horizon. | do not recall the technical integrity and robustness issues
of Horizon project at this time.

2

=

.| have been asked to describe the problems faced by the Horizon project between
June and December 1998. | do not recall the problems faced by the Horizon project
between June and December 1998.

22. | have been asked whether there was agreement between the Post Office and the

Benefits Agency about the future of the Horizon project at this time? If not, what

were their respective positions as you recall them. Concerning the state of

Page 5 of 11
WITN03990100
WITNO3990100

agreement between Post Office Counters and the Benefits Agency, at this time,
please refer to my answer in paragraph 19 above.

23.| have been asked what | understood at this time about the technical integrity and
robustness of Horizon? | do not recall the problems with the technical integrity and
robustness issues of Horizon project at this time.

24.1 have been asked to describe ICL Pathway’s proposed changes to the
acceptance criteria for the Horizon System in November and December 1998. |
do not recall the proposed changes to the acceptance criteria for the Horizon
System between November and December 1998.

25.| have been asked how the Post Office responded to these proposed changes. |
do not recall the Post Office response to these proposed changes.

26.| have been asked to describe the problems faced by the Horizon project between
January and May 1999. | do not recall the problems faced by the Horizon project
between January and May 1999.

27.| have been asked whether there was agreement between the Post Office and the
Benefits Agency about the future of the Horizon project at this time? If not, what
were their respective positions as | recalled them. Concerning the state of
agreement between Post Office Counters and the Benefits Agency, at this time,
please refer to paragraph 19 above.

28.| have been asked what | understood at this time about the technical integrity and
robustness of Horizon? | do not recall the problems with the technical integrity and
robustness issues of Horizon project at this time.

29.| have been asked whether there was agreement between the Post Office and the
Benefits Agency, at this time, about: i. the scope and adequacy of software testing;

and ii. the grant of release authorisation for live trial of the Horizon system? If not,

Page 6 of 11
WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

what were their respective positions as you recall them? | do not recall the degree
of agreement between Post Office Counters and the Benefits Agency in respect of
the scope and adequacy of software testing and the release authorisation for live
trial.

30. | have been asked what effect did the inter-departmental negotiations over the
future of the Horizon project have upon the adequacy of the preparations made by
the Post Office for the implementation and roll out of the Horizon system. | do not
recall the effect of inter-departmental negotiations on the adequacy of the
preparations made by Post Office Counters for the implementation and roll out of
the Horizon system. | do recall that there were meetings called by HM Treasury at
Second Permanent Secretary level to find a financial solution and to advise
Ministers — but | do not recall the outcome of these meetings.

3

=

.| have been asked to what extent did the negotiations over the future of the Horizon
project focus upon: i. the financial consequences of terminating the project; ii. wider
concerns about foreign investment in the UK economy; iii. issues concerning the
technical integrity and robustness of the system. | do not recall any detail of the
extent that negotiations over the future of the Horizon project focussed on i)
financial consequences of termination, ii) foreign investment in the UK economy
and iii) technical integrity and robustness of the system. | do recall spending a lot
of personal time on the financial and strategic consequences of terminating or
replanning Horizon. Its continuation was at the heart of the future of Post Office
Counters as a viable business offering services to existing and future clients and

serving every community in the country.

Page 7 of 11
WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

32.| have been asked what was my understanding of the terms on which the Benefits
Agency withdrew from the Horizon project. | do not recall any details of the terms
on which the Benefits Agency withdrew from the Horizon project.

33.1 have been asked what were the financial consequences for the Post Office of the
cancellation of the Benefits Payment Card. The financial consequences for the
Post Office of the cancellation of the benefits Payment Card were very significant.
| recall that a financial write-off of c:£500m had to be taken. With the forecast loss
of income from the Benefits Agency the strategic future of the Counters business
had to be totally reassessed and replanned. This review resulted in, amongst other
initiatives, the ‘Universal Bank’ proposals where the network of post offices would
provide services to the customers of clearing banks and potentially a Post Office
branded payment system.

34.| have been asked how (if at all) did the cancellation of the Benefits Payment Card
affect the adequacy of the preparations made by the Post Office for the
implementation and roll out of the Horizon system. | do not recall the extent that
the cancellation of the Benefits Payment Card affected the adequacy of the
implementation and roll out of Horizon — but it would have been significant.

35.1 have been asked to describe the terms on which the Post Office concluded a fixed
payment contract with ICL Pathway for automation of the network and how the
contract was funded. | do not recall the terms on which the Post Office concluded
a fixed payment contract with ICL Pathway. Nor do | recall how the contract was
funded.

36.1 have been asked to describe the nature of my involvement in the Horizon Working
Group, what its purpose was and whether it considered issues relating to the

technical integrity and robustness of Horizon? If so, was it effective in doing so. |

Page 8 of 11
WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

do not recall any details of my involvement with the Horizon Working Group nor its
purpose. Again, | have no recollection on whether the Group considered the
technical integrity and robustness of Horizon nor whether it was effective in doing
this.

37. | have been asked - a. Please describe the nature of your involvement in the
acceptance of the Horizon system. b. Please describe the conditions for
acceptance of the system under the codified agreement with ICL. c. How (if at all)
did these conditions differ from those agreed under the May 1996 contract? d. Did
you consider the conditions under the codified agreement with ICL to be
appropriate? Please explain the reasons for your answer. e. How and why were
those conditions later amended? f. What were the reason(s) for the delay in the
acceptance of the Horizon system? g. How (if at all) were the issues which
prevented the acceptance of the Horizon system resolved? h. What did you
understand about the technical integrity and robustness of Horizon at the point at
which the system was accepted by the Post Office? i. Were you satisfied that the
system was robust? If so, please explain why. In answer to these questions a. to i.
| have no recollection of the issues raised.

38.1 have been asked to a. describe the issues which were identified during the initial
roll out of the Horizon system between September — December 1999. b. What
action was taken to resolve these issues? c. Do you consider that the action which
was taken was appropriate. | cannot describe the issues identified during the initial
roll out of the Horizon system between September — December 1999. Nor can |
describe the action taken to resolve the issues or the appropriateness of the

actions.

Page 9 of 11
WITNO3990100
WITNO3990100

39.1 have been asked to a. describe the nature of your involvement in the Error
Reconciliation and Accounting (“ERA”) Project. b. For what reason(s) was the ERA
Project established? - 8 - c. Was the ERA Project in fact implemented? If not,
please explain why. | cannot recall my involvement in the ERA project nor the
reasons why the ERA project was established. | do not recall whether the
recommendations of the ERA project were implemented.

40. | have been asked a. What steps were taken to obtain input or feedback from
subpostmasters during the pilot, testing and roll out of the Horizon system? b. What
concerns were raised by subpostmasters? c. What action was taken to address
these concerns? Subpostmasters would have provided feedback during the pilot
testing and rollout of Horizon but | cannot recall what concerns they expressed and
what steps were taken to address these concerns. | recall having regular one to
one meetings with Colin Baker, General Secretary of the NFSP — these meetings
would have discussed significant business issues, such as Horizon — but | cannot
recall any detail.

4

a

.| have been asked, in looking back, do | consider that the Post Office effectively
scrutinised the technical integrity and robustness of Horizon prior to its acceptance
and roll out? Whilst | cannot recall any of the detail | would certainly have sought
and would have been given assurance by the Post Office Counters project team
as to the suitability of the Horizon for acceptance and roll out. Clearly the disturbing
faults that have emerged over the subsequent years indicate that these should
have been identified and corrected. | have no personal knowledge of the nature of
these faults that have generated the reported cash losses by certain
subpostmasters, nor when they were first discovered nor what efforts were taken

to correct the problems.

Page 10 of 11
WITN03990100
WITNO3990100

42.| have been asked on reflection, do you consider that known faults in the Horizon
system were appropriately discussed and communicated both within the Post
Office and to the end users of the Horizon system? If these errors were known
about within Post Office Counters or ICL Pathway and their impact on certain
subpostmasters understood, then | cannot consider that that they were
appropriately discussed and communicated both within the Post Office and to end
users.

43. | have not found it easy to keep on writing ‘| do not recall...’ | know this is not
helpful to the Chair. My personal integrity standards tell me that | would not
knowingly have taken on business risks that would have given rise to the problems
that have emerged. The extent of my knowledge of the problems you are
investigating only comes from recent press coverage and Radio and TV
programmes. | really have no memory of the details required by your questions. |
am sure you will have obtained many papers in evidence from the Post Office and
other parties that show details of my involvement, how complete these are, | do not

know.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true

Dated: 21 September 2022

Signed:

Page 11 of 11
