WITNO7950100
WITNO7950100

Witness Name: Kimberley Brett a ~ ;
Statement No: witno7960100 GRO ,

Dated: 14/04/2023

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF KIMBERLEY BRETT

|, Kimberley Brett will say as follows:

1. | worked for the Post Office for 18 years, counter clerk for 11 years, acting
branch manager for 9 months, HFSO for 2 years and service support

advisor for 4 years.

2. | received training on using the Horizon system as it would be used on the
counter and also training on migrating onto Horizon from an offices final
manual balance. My training at NBSC comprised of learning how to use

the knowledge base in use there and keeping up with new products.

3. | dealt with queries from postmasters and counter clerks that the tier 4

advisors were unable to deal with, these calls mostly dealt with queries on

how to do specific transactions on Horizon or help with the weekly balance.

| was also the liaison between the new products team in London and the
service support advisors, dealing with any queries other advisors had. |

believe as a whole we had the experience to deal with all calls received as
WITNO7950100
WITNO7950100

advisors who were unsure would always ask for advice from colleagues who

had more knowledge/experience.

4. While working as an HFSO | would attend an office around 4pm to migrate

them onto Horizon, completing required paperwork while the postmaster

completed a full balance. Then | would attend for 2 full days to advise on

transactions in real time, stepping in if there were any issues. When
attending on a Wednesday would talk them though their 1st weekly balance
on the system ensuring all steps were followed. As a whole | believe
postmasters had adequate training on using Horizon though there were |
some | coached who took longer to pick it up, but any issues were passed

onto the management team so they could receive further support

5.1 believe with my post office experience and specific Horizon training | was

able to give more than adequate advice and assistance to postmasters.

6.From what | remember the only specific issues there were with the system
was when cash was received from the remittance unit the barcodes on
the some of the bags didn't scan properly and when there was a live

connection with the banks and DVLA we had some connection issues.
WITNO7950100
WITNO7950100

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

