                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




                                                          Witness Name: Alice Perkins

                                                   Statement Number: WITNO0740100

                                                                 Dated: 26 March 2024



                      THE POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




              FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF MS ALICE PERKINS




I, Alice Perkins CB, will say as follows:



(A)    INTRODUCTION



1     I was employed as Chair of the Board of The Post Office Ltd ("The Post Office")

      between September 2011 and July 2015.



2     This witness statement is made in order to assist the Post Office Horizon IT

      Inquiry (the "Inquiry"), further to the Rule 9 Request dated 21 September 2023.



3     I want to extend my deepest sympathy to all those affected by the wrongful

      actions of the Post Office, and say how profoundly sorry I am that during the

      period when I chaired the Board, we did not get to the truth about the integrity of

      the Horizon system. I genuinely tried to listen, understand and address the
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    concerns that were being raised about the Horizon system. However, reflecting

    on the position in 2023, I appreciate that my efforts to do so did not achieve what

    I had hoped for.

4   It is now indisputable that the failures by the Post Office, and the Royal Mail

    Group ("RMG") prior to the separation of the two companies, were considerable,

    and devastating in their impact on the lives of many affected sub-postmasters

    and their families. I have reflected deeply over what occurred, and asked myself

    if there was more that the Board could have done during the period in which I

    was Chair to prevent further miscarriages of justice and to rectify those that had

    occurred. I am setting out my reflections as fully as possible in this statement.



5   Those whose lives have been affected deserve the opportunity to hear from me

    about actions and decisions that I took as Chair of the Board between 2011 and

    2015. I am keen to help the Inquiry establish what happened in the 4 years I was

    at the Post Office. I will attend the Inquiry to give oral evidence and answer

    questions; I will also clarify any aspect of this statement which may be unclear. I

    appreciate the gravity of this situation.



6   I was truly shocked when, for the first time in 2019, upon reading Fraser J's

    judgment in Bates & others v The Post Office', I found that the assurances that

    Fujitsu had repeatedly given to the Post Office, and that Post Office executives

    had given to me — including that the Horizon system was robust, and that it was




       [2019] EWHC 3408 (QB); Judgment (No.6) "Horizon Issues"


                                         2
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     not possible for thousands of pounds to "disappear" from their accounts - were

     untrue.



7    During my tenure as Chair of the Board, I received repeated assurances on these

     issues from a wide range of senior executives in the Post Office, some of whom

     had been there for many years. I believed these assurances at the time, and

     continued to believe in them up until the point of Fraser J's judgment.



8    I was dismayed to learn that these assurances were not well-founded, and that

     the Horizon system's issues had led to the wrongful convictions of sub-

     postmasters. I was also shocked to learn that key pieces of information about the

     integrity of the Horizon system, and the safety of prosecutions, were never

     brought to the Board's attention.



9    I have addressed the questions put to me by the Inquiry to the very best of my

     ability and my memory. The events in question occurred between 8 and 12 years

     ago and it has, on occasion, been challenging for me to recall certain events and

     information, though I have been assisted by reviewing contemporaneous

     documents. When I am unable to recall something, I have clearly indicated this.



10   I can assist the Inquiry with an answer to most of the questions that have been

     put to me. However, there are some questions asked of me where, quite

     appropriately, owing to the nature of my role as Chair of the Board I did not see

     certain operational information and I am therefore more limited in my ability to




                                         3
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




      assist the Inquiry. Where I am more limited in my ability to answer a question, or

      cannot answer a question, I have indicated this too.



11    I am going first to deal with the Inquiry's `Background' questions, in which I will

      also set out the context to my role. I will then turn, in some detail, to the more

      specific questions asked by the Inquiry in relation to its matters of interest, which

      I hope is of assistance.



(B)    BACKGROUND



Career and qualifications



12    I have been asked to set out a summary of my career and qualifications up until

      joining the Post Office. I graduated from the University of Oxford with a degree

      in Modern History in 1971 and immediately joined the civil service.



13    The first half of my civil service career was spent in the Department of Health

      and Social Security, and after that Department was split in 1988, in the

      Department of Social Security. I spent most of my time on social security issues,

      advising Ministers on the policy issues, and being directly involved in the

      operations of the Department.



14    In 1993, I joined the Treasury as a Director of Public Spending where I had

      responsibility, among other things, for the budgets for Defence, the Intelligence

      Agencies, the Foreign Office and Aid. In 1998, I returned to the Department of


                                           4
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     Health as a Director General with responsibility for the operation of the

     Department on behalf of the Permanent Secretary. In 2001 I joined the Cabinet

     Office and worked for two Cabinet Secretaries as the civil service's Group HR

     Director. Between 1997 and 2001, I served as a non-executive director on the

     Board of Littlewoods.



15   I left the civil service in 2005 to pursue a non-executive career. I joined the Board

     of TNS (TaylorNelsonSofres), the global market information company in 2005,

     where I was also Chair of the Remuneration Committee. Donald Brydon, who

     was later Chair of the Royal Mail Group, became the Chair of TNS a few months

     after I joined the board. I left in 2008 when it was taken over by WPP. In early

     2006, I joined the Board of BAA (the airports operator) until its takeover later that

     year.



16   During that period, I also trained and started practising as an executive coach in

     the coaching practice of the JCA Group. My clients were, in the main, CEOs and

     people on their top teams from large, complex organisations in the private and

     public sectors. While I was at JCA, Donald Brydon asked me to meet with Dave

     Smith, who was at that time the MD of the Post Office Division and Paula Vennells

     who was working for him, to give them some input on how to effectively manage

     relationships with government. It would have been at these meetings, that I would

     have first met Paula Vennells.



17   Later, I went on to carry out Board reviews for private sector companies, including

     some in the FTSE 100 and 250, and governing bodies of other large complex



                                          5
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     organisations in the public sector including the university world. I was one of four

     external members of the Oxford University Council (the University's governing

     body) between 2006 and 2014, and a member of the Said Business School's

     Business Advisory Forum. In 2014, I joined the BBC's Executive Board as one of

     six non-executive Directors.



18   As I will come onto later in this statement, I believe I was recruited as Chair of

     the Post Office Board in large part because of my experience within Government

     alongside my Board experience in the private sector, as the Post Office was to

     remain wholly owned by the Government and it was envisaged that it would grow

     its business delivering government services to the public.



19   I had no direct experience of managing large IT systems during my civil service

     career — my focus was on policy, finance (at a strategic level), operations and

     people management.



20   I had no experience of managing an organisation involved in the prosecution of

     criminal offences prior to joining the Post Office. The Department of Social

     Security did prosecute people for benefit fraud while I was there, but I was never

     involved in this part of its function.



My professional career since leaving the Post Office



21   I have been asked to provide an overview of my career since leaving the Post

     Office Board. I left the Post Office in July 2015. At that time, I was a non-executive


                                              6
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     member on the BBC's Executive Board and remained on that Board until my

     three-year term expired in 2017, and new governance arrangements were

     introduced. I also continued my work as an executive coach, and on Board

     governance, initially at the JCA Group, and after 2018 when JCA had been

     acquired by Heidrick and Struggles, as a sole trader.



22   I am 74 years of age, I will be 75 in May 2024. I am mostly retired but I am still

     doing some work as an executive coach.



Chair of the Post Office Board



23   I was appointed as the non-executive Chair of the Post Office Board in July 2011,

     with a commitment to work two days per week on its business.



24   I have exhibited to this witness statement my letter of appointment signed with

     Donald Brydon, who was then Chairman of RMG, dated 21 July 2011

     (WITN00740101). This stated under "Powers and Duties", "You shall exercise

     such powers and perform such duties as are appropriate to your role as Non-

     executive director and Chairman." Under "Priorities" it stated:



      "As we have discussed, the key tasks of the role will be to create the new Board

      of Post Office Ltd and lead it through the transition from being a subsidiary

      Board to becoming the Board of a sister company to Royal Mail Group and then

      into direct Government ownership or whatever model the Government

      ultimately views as appropriate for Post Office Ltd."
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




      "At the same time as this transition taking place, Post Office Ltd is obliged to

      deliver the plan that it has agreed earlier this year with the Government for the

      future size and profitability of the Company. You will lead the Board in its role of

      supporting the strategy and its execution, developing future strategy and

      holding to account executive management through normal governance

      mechanisms."



25   This was the role which I understood I was there to fulfil during my time as Chair

     of the Post Office Board (2011 — 2015). These key tasks, and particularly guiding

     the Post Office through its transitional period, were large, complex endeavours,

     not least when I was contracted to assist the Post Office for only two days per

     week.



26   When I started work there in September 2011, the Post Office was still a

     subsidiary of RMG and formally accountable to the Royal Mail Board. I took over

     the role of the Chair of the embryonic Post Office Board after its September 2011

     meeting.



27   My main focus in the early months was to understand the Post Office's business;

     to get to know its key executives; to build relations with its key stakeholders and

     business partners; to build the new Board; to provide oversight for the

     negotiations between the Post Office and RMG over the terms of their separation;

     to understand and drive forward the Post Office's plans to grow its business and




                                         8
                                                                                          WI TN00740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




     transform its network; and to contribute to the Government's thinking about its

     intention to mutualise the Post Office.



28   I think that this point — about my focus in the early months — is also well illustrated

     by a letter that Sir Vince Cable (then Secretary of State for Business, Innovation

     and Skills) sent to me on 11 January 2012 (W1TN00740102). This letter very

     much focuses on the separation of the Post Office from RMG and the critical

     importance of getting this right, as well as the importance of building the new

     Board. For example:



      "The proposed separation of Post Office Ltd from Royal Mail Group is an

      important part of the process outlined during the passage of the Postal Services

      Act and it brings with it necessary governance changes. It is important that Post

      Office ltd can flourish under a strengthened Board, providing increased levels

      of oversight and challenge to the company. Under your leadership as Chair, it

      is important that the Board's oversight of Post Office Ltd is strengthened

      through these changes."



      "One of your immediate priorities will be the appointment of further non-

      executive directors to bolster the Post Office Ltd Board. I very much welcome

      Neil McCausland's appointment as senior independent director. A further non-

      executive appointment will need to be made swiftly. I understand that you are

      making progress in identifying candidates. As we have discussed, and as

      referred to in my letter of 25 October last year, I expect a Shareholder Executive

      official to take a position on the Post Office Ltd Board from the point of



                                           9
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      operational separation from Royal Mail this spring. You and Stephen Lovegrove

      are in touch to finalise how this change will be implemented."



      The letter also pointed out the need for the Post Office to increase its corporate

      capacity at the executive level. "I understand that the company's executive

      team has also undergone significant change in recent months, with new

      appointments made recently to the positions of Finance, Commercial, Human

      Resources and Financial Services director. It will be important to ensure a

      continued mix of skills and experience on the Board and executive which equips

      the business to meet the challenges it faces. As Post Office Ltd separates from

      Royal Mail, it will inevitably need to increase its corporate capacity, posing a

      greater leadership challenge to the executive team. Once you have completed

      the establishment of the Post Office Ltd Board, you should meet with the

      Shareholder Executive team to discuss your impressions of the current Board

      and executive and what, if any, further action needs to be taken."



29   Sir Vince Cable elaborated on the Government's key expectations for the Post

     Office following my recent appointment as Chair:



      29.1 a refreshed Post Office Board operating under my leadership;



      29.2 separation from RMG, allowing both companies to focus on their core

             businesses;




                                         ff
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




      29.3 £1.34bn of Government funding to March 2015 to maintain the Post Office

                network at around its then-size and coverage, to finance network

                transformation to reduce its future reliance on subsidy from Government

                and to support the Post Office's strategy to grow new revenues and

                manage its costs carefully; and



      29.4 the potential, in time, for ownership of the Post Office to be converted to

                a mutual structure, giving stakeholders a greater say in the business.



30   I replied saying that I was honoured to have the role of Chair of the Post Office's

     Board at this important moment in its history. I made clear that we were making

     progress on appointing new non-executive directors ("NEDs"), and that while this

     was not as straightforward as I had hoped, I was not willing to compromise on

     quality.



31   From 1 April 2012, when the Post Office became a separate entity, the senior

     executives became accountable to the Post Office Board for executing the day-

     to-day running of the business. I was responsible for the running of the Board

     which was still very much in its infancy. I worked closely with the CEO (previously

     the Managing Director of the Post Office) providing support and advice on the

     many key issues facing the business. I also worked closely with the newly

     appointed Company Secretary to shape the workings of the Board, e.g. the

     frequency and duration of meetings, the subjects to be discussed, and

     attendance at the meetings.




                                          11
                                                                                    W ITNO0740100
                                                                                  W ITN00740100




Appointment Process



32   1 have been asked about the background to my appointment as Chair and the

     application process. My recollection is that I was approached by Donald Brydon

     at some point in the spring or summer of 2011, to ask whether I would be

     interested in becoming the Chair of the Post Office, which was due to be

     separated from RMG in April 2012. After some thought, I agreed to apply. From

     memory, I was interviewed by Egon Zehnder, the executive search firm who were

     handling the assignment. My name was then put forward to the Shareholder

     Executive and I was interviewed by civil servants at the Shareholder Executive,

     including its then head, Stephen Lovegrove, and subsequently by the Post Office

     Minister at the time, Edward Davey MP. My appointment was then recommended

     to Sir Vince Cable who, as then-Secretary of State, approved it.



33   During the process I also spoke to, amongst others, civil servants in the Post

     Office team at the Business Department, Paula Vennells who was Managing

     Director of the Post Office Division of the Royal Mail at that time, and her

     predecessor, Dave Smith. I think I also spoke to Paul Murray who was the Chair

     of the Audit and Risk Committee at Royal Mail.



34   I wish to be absolutely clear that none of the people to whom I spoke with during

     that appointment process mentioned Horizon or the problems which sub-

     postmasters were experiencing or had experienced with it. These issues were

     first mentioned to me in September 2011 after I had arrived at the Post Office

     during my induction period, as I will come onto more fully.
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




35   Nor did anyone mention the fact that the Post Office, then part of Royal Mail,

     carried out its own prosecutions. I did not have a general understanding when

     joining the Post Office of risk and compliance issues arising from (i) prosecuting

     sub-postmasters for theft and false accounting and (ii) pursuing civil litigation

     against sub-postmasters to recover alleged shortfalls in branch accounts. These

     issues did not come up in the application process either. My understanding of

     these issues changed in the course of my work as Chair as more information

     about them came to the Board, in the Significant Litigation Reports in the Board

     packs for Board meetings. POL also commissioned legal advices on these topics

     which were sometimes shared with the Board. My understanding improved on

     these topics as and when the Board was asked for their input on these issues,

     or had advices / summaries of advices shared with them. I will come onto these

     in due course.



Suitability for the Role of Chair



36   The emphasis for the Post Office was all on the Government's vision for turning

     the Post Office around as set out in some detail in Vince Cable's letter of 11

     January to which I referred in paragraph 28 above. That is, making it sustainable

     by developing new streams of income, modernising it and in the process, making

     it profitable instead of loss-making and therefore ready for mutualisation. This

     was the brief for which I was selected. My knowledge of Whitehall and

     Westminster, my experience of running operations and delivering change in

     social security operations, of HR with a particular emphasis on developing



                                        13
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     capability at senior levels, together with my Board and executive coaching

     experience were, as I understood it, the things which made those concerned

     consider that I was suitable for the role.



Constitution of the Post Office Board



37   To complement my experience of the workings of Government, Donald Brydon

     was instrumental in finding a potential Senior Independent Director with a

     successful commercial track record in turning round retail businesses. This was

     an appointment which I welcomed and Neil McCausland was appointed at almost

     the same time as me.



38   My responsibility at the outset of my tenure included creating a new Board. I

     thought a great deal about governance and how to establish a Board that would

     rise to meet the task it had been set. I tried very hard to create a Board with the

     skills and experience to cover areas which I knew at the time were critical to the

     Post Office's business. Each NED had considerable experience in their area of

     expertise and I set out to ensure that they would complement each other in terms

     of the way they approached issues and contributed to Board discussions.



39   In appointing the four independent NEDs, my aim was to find experienced

     individuals who were committed to achieving the Government's policy for the

     Post Office and who had relevant expertise in the key areas on which I knew the

     Board needed to focus, namely retail; financial services; mutualisation; and the

     transformation of service delivery, including IT. I also needed to find someone



                                         14
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     who had the qualifications to chair the Audit, Risk and Compliance Sub -

     Committee (the "ARC"). I was conscious of the need to build a board which would

     both challenge and support the senior executives. It was not easy to recruit

     people of the right calibre who were ready to commit the necessary time to this,

     and the fees on offer were not competitive for the degree of effort required. I was

     not willing to compromise my standards, as I said in my letter to Sir Vince Cable

     of 19 January, and so this process took time.



40   Individual descriptions of all the NEDs taken from the Annual Report and

     Accounts for 2012/13 are exhibited at (WITN00740103). I found all of them to be

     hard-working, intelligent individuals with personal integrity. We were uniformly

     committed to making a meaningful contribution to the key business issues and

     we strove to do the right things. The NEDs were, in my experience, not reluctant

     to challenge the senior executives where challenge was needed.



Leadership Style



41   I consider my leadership style to be open and inclusive, and I encouraged

     discussion. I shared with the Board what I thought and knew, and I encouraged

     challenge and debate. I saw Board members on a one-to-one basis at least once

     or twice a year, and outside Board meetings we would have NED only breakfasts.



42   The Chair's role is to oversee the Board's efforts to hold the senior executives to

     account and to safeguard the long-term health of the company — I was direct with

     senior executives when I felt they needed challenge, and risked falling short of



                                        15
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     expectations. At the same time, I was committed to creating an atmosphere

     which encouraged people to contribute and made efforts to support their

     development.



43   It is also fair to say that I have high standards and I believe in the value of being

     direct. I expected the same levels of professionalism and honesty from the

     executives and Board members I worked alongside.



44   I also made it a priority to establish a culture between the Board and the senior

     executives which provided the right balance between support and challenge.

     There is always a tension between these two approaches. However, when

     compared to other boards that I had served on, or worked with, the senior

     executive team at the Post Office required a greater degree of support. Most of

     the senior executives who were in place on 1 April 2012 when the Post Office

     separated from RMG, had previously been running the subsidiary of a large

     organisation: they were now charged with running an independent company

     which was embarked on a major turnround strategy. This was a very big step-

     change in their responsibilities. I took time to reach an assessment of the people

     on the top team. Over the first few weeks and months, I came to the view that

     certain of the senior executives who were in place on 1 April 2012 had the

     potential to make a success of their new responsibilities even though they may

     have lacked relevant experience; many did not. And new roles needed to be

     created to give the Post Office the corporate capacity it now needed (for which it

     had previously been able to rely on Royal Mail). Accordingly, over the four years

     that I was on the Post Office Board the majority of senior executives who had
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     been in place on 1 April 2012 left the business and were replaced by others with

     more relevant experience. When I left the Board in July 2015, of the senior

     executives who had been inherited from RMG on 1 April 2012, only Paula

     Vennells, Kevin Gilliland and Nick Kennett remained in post.



45   There were, of course, limitations to the support we could provide to the relatively

     inexperienced senior executive team. I was contracted to the Post Office for two

     days per week. Many of my NED colleagues were only contracted for two or three

     days a month. There could be no question therefore of the experienced NEDs

     taking on any of the operational responsibilities of the senior executives. Nor

     should we have done given the distinct roles which the Board and the executives

     needed to play (see paragraph 48 below). And we could not safely instigate a

     wholesale change of the Post Office's senior executives all at once. (It was for

     Paula Vennells to appoint her direct reports, taking into account the views of the

     Board's Nominations Committee (see paragraph 73.3 below) which would

     include mine and those of the other NEDs). My approach was to provide

     guidance to the senior executives and to ensure that where possible they had

     access to coaching and training that would help them deliver. Where it was

     concluded that a particular senior executive simply did not have the experience

     and/or skill-set required for their new role in the independent Post Office, or the

     potential to develop them, then over time they were replaced. Our ability to recruit

     people with the right experience and approach was constrained throughout my

     time at the Post Office because of very restrictive Government policies affecting

     the level of remuneration payable to the top executives in the Post Office. I will




                                         17
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     come back to this point at the end of this statement, when I describe my reasons

     for resigning.



The role of the Post Office Board



46   As explained at paragraph 23, as Chair of the Board I was engaged to work two

     days per week in the role. In practice, I devoted more time than this to the Post

     Office throughout my tenure.



47   The clear steer which I was given by the Shareholder Executive and as I recall

     it, Donald Brydon, was that the Board should operate as closely as possible to

     the manner in which a quoted company Board would operate. As we were wholly

     owned by the UK Government, we were, of course, always very conscious of the

     need to adhere to the Government's policies for the Post Office, that the Post

     Office was subsidised by the tax payer and was in receipt of a large investment

     of public money (£1.34 billion in all over 3 years from April 2012 to April 2015)

     and that budgets therefore had to be spent wisely.



48   In all companies a clear division of responsibilities is key. The Board itself was

     collectively responsible for setting out the overall strategy and primary business

     objectives in the context of Government policy, and holding the senior executives

     to account for their delivery. We developed a purpose and vision for the future

     development of the Post Office and guided the Post Office through this transition

     period. The Board's responsibilities included, and were not limited to, identifying

     and evaluating long-term goals, present and future opportunities, risk appetite
                                         l
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     and proper frameworks for risk management, and maintenance of proper

     accounting. Most importantly, we determined strategic options. As a Board we

     would meet as often as was required. We had scheduled meetings eight times a

     year and in practice would meet more frequently as required.



49   I used notebooks throughout my time at the Post Office — my habit was to write

     notes of my reflections, key events and conversations which I had in the role of

     Chair in these notebooks as an aide memoire. I have included reference to these

     entries and exhibited these to this statement at times in order to assist the Inquiry.

     A handwritten entry of mine, made at the turn of 2012, outlined how I saw the

     role of the Board at that time (WITN00740104).



      "Role of Board to ensure the company is run in the best interests of its

      shareholders and wider stakeholders by: -

      agreeing its strategy,

      holding the executives to account in delivering the strategy,

      ensuring that key risks are identified and mitigated and key decisions are made

      properly,

      ensuring that there are proper processes in place for developing the succession

      pipeline to the top."



50   I also made a reference to the need for "delegation limits". These were agreed

     delegations that specified, for example, what levels of expenditure had to come

     to the Board for approval or were delegated to the senior executives. Some items




                                          19
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     of expenditure had to be referred to the Department of Business, Innovation and

     Skills ("BIS") for their approval.



51   To promote effective corporate governance, I and the Board needed to retain an

     objective view of how to achieve the long-term health and success of the

     company, and to support and challenge the senior executives who were the ones

     who dealt with the day-to-day operational management. My focus during this time

     was to ensure that the work undertaken by the senior executives was in line with

     the Post Office's vision, direction and priorities. It would not have been

     appropriate for the Board to be involved in the granular day-to-day operations of

     the business, any more than it would have been for the Board of a large

     commercial company.



52   The CEO, Paula Vennells, and her senior executive team had the responsibility

     of running the business. The Board relied on the senior executives to provide

     them with regular, accurate and timely information; and updates on various topics

     of substance such as operations, performance, finance, risk and significant

     developments. Papers put to the Board prior to Board meetings were expected

     to be of sufficient quality to allow the Board to properly consider, guide and

     provide support and challenge on these matters and decide on key issues which

     were put to it. It was the senior executives' role and responsibility to put forward

     to the Board all the relevant information that enabled the Board to deliver its

     strategic goals and mission. As Chair, it was my responsibility to ensure that

     agendas for Board meetings took account of any subject matters raised by the

     senior executives and by my fellow N EDs, provided sufficient time for discussion,



                                          20
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     and encouraged contributions and debate. I am reminded of a provision in the

     Financial Reporting Council's Corporate Governance Code which was sent to

     me in an early Board pack during my tenure (WITN00740105): "The Board

     should be supplied in a timely manner with information in a form and of a quality

     appropriate to enable it to discharge its duties".



Responsibilities of the Board in a company owned by HM Government



53   I was aware from my experience of working in Whitehall that the civil servants

     and Ministers who were responsible for the Government's interests in the Post

     Office would take a much closer interest in the running of the company than

     would normally be the case with the shareholders of a quoted company. I knew

     they would be concerned not only about the Post Office's success in

     implementing their strategy but also about issues which were likely to be

     politically sensitive, such as any changes in the configuration of the branch

     network and the stance of the National Federation of Sub-postmasters (the

     "NFSP"), the union responsible for representing the views of sub-postmasters,

     which was very influential with the Government. It was also the case that the Post

     Office depended on both a government subsidy and government investment to

     enable it to reduce the former. It therefore needed to make the case for these

     investments and demonstrate that they were being used wisely and well. In

     recognition of this, one of the NEDs was nominated by the Shareholder

     Executive. But the fact that the Post Office was solely owned by Government did

     not significantly affect the way the Board went about its business.




                                         21
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




54   During the period up to 1 April 2012, prosecutions were conducted by RMG, but

     between then and when I left in 2015, prosecutions by the Post Office were

     conducted by a team that reported to the General Counsel of the Post Office.

     During my tenure the Board was never involved in any individual prosecutorial

     decisions. I recall that shortly after I arrived at the Post Office, Susan Crichton,

     the then General Counsel, informed me that the prosecutions were conducted at

     "arm's length" from the company and that the Board would have no involvement

     in the decision-making process. The Board trusted the senior executives, more

     specifically, the General Counsel, and relied on them to provide the Board with

     updates relating to prosecutions. I did not question the practice (which we had

     inherited) of fraud investigations and prosecutions being undertaken at arm's

     length from the Board. I had been used to similar arrangements when I was in

     the Department of Social Security. From 4 July 2012 onwards, throughout my

     tenure, the Board received a regular report entitled "Top 10 Criminal Cases" and

     it recorded the most notable cases in which sub-postmasters were being

     prosecuted for theft and fraud. I did not have a role in selecting these cases, but

     they appear to have been the most sensitive / high value prosecutions. In

     reviewing the materials provided to the Board ahead of each meeting for the

     purpose of preparing this statement, I have noted that the Board did not discuss

     the details of individual prosecutions. However, we did consider prosecutions at

     a policy level (as I will discuss further below), and in particular whether or not the

     Post Office should continue to bring private prosecutions.



55   Similarly, the Board did not get involved in the detail of civil litigation. The Board

     understood that the oversight of civil litigation was happening at a more granular


                                          22
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     level by the senior executives. We expected to be kept updated on issues relating

     to this, again by the General Counsel and their team, and consulted where

     appropriate. I do not recall there being a piece of litigation during my tenure

     where the Post Office's General Counsel escalated strategic issues to the Board

     for our input on the litigation strategy. I am not a lawyer but I understand that

     there is an added complication when involving a Board in the detail of litigation,

     in that there can be a challenge with retaining legal privilege, such that only a

     core group are involved in the decision-making process.



56   The Board did receive `Significant Litigation Reports' for noting in our Board

     packs. The first such document was provided to the Board in December 2011

     (WITN00740106). It contained a reference to Shoosmiths threatening to bring

     civil cases against the Post Office based on what were said to be wrongful

     convictions. I will explain more fully in due course that in this instance, we were

     advised by Susan Crichton that these claims were "weak" and were being

     defended. After that, these cases started to be reported to the Board for noting

     on a regular basis. Over time, the litigation reports became more informative than

     they were originally. The ARC did consider whether the Board should be making

     provision / setting aside money for claims against the Post Office. I was not a

     member of the ARC but I did sometimes attend its meetings.



57   The Board dealt with IT, accounting and legal issues broadly in the same way as

     one would expect a quoted company Board to deal with them. I set out below my

     answers to the specific questions I have been asked on this topic:




                                        23
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




58   On IT issues the Board had oversight, primarily through the ARC, of the workings

     of the current IT systems and used both independent and internal auditors for

     assurance on these. It also had oversight of the future facing strategy for IT and,

     as this was developed, for large IT procurements.



59   On accounting issues, the Board again used external and internal auditors to

     assure it, again through the ARC, of the reliability of these systems. The external

     auditors attended the ARC and took the Committee's members through the

     financial results at end-year and half-year, as well as providing written comments

     on these. The Chair of the ARC introduced the Board discussion of the full-year

     results.



60   The Board was provided with legal advice by the Post Office's legal team led by

     its General Counsel. I do not have a specific recollection of the Board's oversight

     of the Post Office's compliance with the Equality Act 2010.



Board Operations — July 2011 to September 2011



61   I have been asked some specific questions about how the Board operated during

     the relevant periods.



62   When I joined the Post Office in the summer of 2011, it was still part of RMG, and

     accountable to the Royal Mail Board chaired by Donald Brydon. There were clear

     existing reporting lines between the Post Office executives and the Royal Mail,

     with the Post Office subsidiary being accountable to the CEO of RMG, and


                                        24
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     through her to the Royal Mail Board. Paula Vennells, then the Managing Director

     of the Post Office subsidiary and CEO designate of the Post Office, reported

     direct to Moya Greene, the CEO of Royal Mail. My recollection is that Paula

     Vennells was a Director on the Royal Mail Board. She and Moya Greene had

     one-to-one meetings and I believe that prior to my appointment, she also had

     one-to-one meetings with the Chairman of the RMG Board. The Post Office was

     supported by the corporate centre of the Royal Mail Group in areas such as

     finance, including audit, HR, communications, IT and procurement. There were

     other lines of accountability within Royal Mail, for example between the Post

     Office's Finance Director and the Royal Mail's Group Finance Director. These

     reporting lines continued to operate until separation the following April but I was

     not part of them. I was focussed on learning about the business, building the new

     Board and steering the negotiations with Royal Mail over the separation issues

     and other major issues affecting the Post Office's future such as its objective to

     build its government business. One of the key issues in the separation of the

     Post Office from RMG was, as I have said, how to build its own corporate

     capability to enable it to stand on its own two feet.



63   There were also well-established reporting lines between the Post Office

     executives and the Post Office team in BIS. I did not participate in those meetings

     but my impression was that there were good working relationships between the

     people concerned. I had meetings from time to time with officials in the BIS Post

     Office team, in the Shareholder Executive, with the Chair of the Shareholder

     Executive and occasionally with Ministers over issues connected with separation,




                                         25
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     mutualisation, the Post Office's future streams of income and its funding. I had

     good relations with them all.



64   At the time I joined the company, the Post Office's corporate governance was in

     transition. I had no reason to think that the Royal Mail Board was anything other

     than effective in its governance of its Post Office subsidiary but it was unable to

     give the Post Office the attention which its own Board would give it after April

     2012 because of the scale of the Royal Mail's overall business of which the Post

     Office was only a relatively small part.



65   I have been asked about what internal Post Office resources were available to

     the senior executives for expert advice on technical IT matters when I joined the

     Post Office. Until its separation from Royal Mail, as I recall, the Post Office was

     able to draw on the expertise of colleagues in the Royal Mail's IT department,

     and the internal audit function in Royal Mail as well. The Post Office also had its

     own IT team headed up by Lesley Sewell.



Board Operations — September 2011 — April 2012



66   Donald Brydon had set up an embryonic Post Office Board before I arrived. He

     chaired it. As I recall, it consisted of Les Owen who was one of the NEDs on the

     Royal Mail Board, the Group Finance Director of the Royal Mail Group, Paula

     Vennells and the newly appointed Post Office Finance Director. I and Neil

     McCausland, the new Senior Independent Director for the Post Office attended

     the Board meeting on 22 September 2011 which Donald Brydon chaired. After



                                         26
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     that, I took over the role of Chair and Donald Brydon did not attend the Post

     Office Board again.



67   At this time, the embryonic Post Office Board was focussing heavily on what

     needed to be done before separation. There were two main issues — what the

     terms of trade should be following separation between RMG and the Post Office

     (the latter's largest stream of income) and what should be transferred to the Post

     Office in terms of people, functions, accommodation and systems. These were

     complex and important questions. When I arrived, less progress had been made

     on those than I would have expected so they were urgent. These negotiations

     were made more challenging by the fact that very often the responsible senior

     executive at the Post Office was negotiating directly with a senior executive at

     RMG, who up until the separation, was either senior to them, or their direct boss.

     The Board was also considering other very important issues, such as Project

     Eagle, which was a major negotiation about the terms of the Post Office's joint

     venture with the Bank of Ireland; the Network Transformation Programme, which

     was part of the government funding package, designed to maintain the size of

     the Post Office network, modernise it and improve its financial sustainability.



68   In that period, I was working with Paula Vennells, the General Counsel and the

     Company Secretary to develop the Board's Terms of Reference and the way in

     which it would work, and the roles of its Sub-Committees as well as overseeing

     the process to select additional non-executive Directors. The non-executive

     Directors were all appointed between September 2011 and September 2012.




                                        27
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




69   Between September 2011 and April 2012, the Post Office Board met 8 times.



70   The agendas for Board meetings were developed in collaboration between me,

     Paula Vennells and the Company Secretary. The NEDs were also invited to

     contribute their views about what should be discussed.



71   The then-Directors of the Board attended the meetings as did the Company

     Secretary. After I took over the Chair role from Donald Brydon, these were Neil

     McCausland, the SID, Les Owen who was a NED on the Royal Mail Board, Paula

     Vennells, then Managing Director of the Post Office, and Chris Day, the Post

     Office's Finance Director. Over the following months, Les Owen resigned and

     new NEDs joined the Board as they were appointed. I do not recall any

     executives from the rest of the Royal Mail Group attending the Board meetings

     but senior executives in the Post Office attended meetings when their areas of

     responsibility were being discussed substantively.



72   In the period before separation, the Board appointed a Sub-Committee on Audit

     and Risk, Remuneration and Nominations. An embryo Audit and Risk Committee

     ("ARC") had been appointed before I arrived at the Post Office. The first meeting

     of the ARC under the new Board took place on 23 May 2012. Alastair Marnoch

     was the Chair. The Remuneration and Nominations Committees (I chaired the

     latter) were appointed after I had arrived with the first meetings taking place on

     4 October 2012 and 7 November 2012 respectively. (In the period before May

     2012, the senior executives were employed by RMG who managed their

     remuneration.)



                                        28
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




73   The Inquiry has asked for details about the Post Office Board's subcommittees,

     membership and Terms of Reference. In respect of the key subcommittees:



      73.1   The Remuneration Committee was made up of at least two independent

             non-executive directors and required to meet at least three times each

             year. The Committee was established to recommend to the Board the

             remuneration strategy and any changes to individual elements of the

             remuneration package for the Post Office's executive directors,

             members of the Group Executive who report directly to the Chief

             Executive, other significant senior level appointments with comparable

             remuneration and to provide an oversight function for remuneration of

             the directors of the Post Office Management Services Limited (POMS)

             board. I exhibit various versions of the Terms of Reference for the

             Remuneration Committee which have been made available to me: the

             Terms of reference adopted in 2012 (W1TN00740107), reviewed by the

             Board in February 2015 (WITN00740108), reviewed by the Board in

             February 2014 (and a version with no date (W1TN00740109)).



      73.2   The ARC was made up of at least three members, all of whom were

             NEDs. At least one of the members was required to have recent and

             relevant financial experience, ideally with a professional qualification

             from a professional accountancy body. During my time as Chair, the

             Chairman of the Committee was Alasdair Marnoch and the members

             included Tim Franklin and Neil McCausland. The Committee were


                                       29
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




       required to meet at least three times a year at appropriate intervals in

       the financial reporting and audit cycle. The Committee was established

       to assist the Board in fulfilling its fiduciary responsibilities which included

       providing an independent view on accounting, financial control and

       financial reporting practices; taking all reasonable steps to ensure

       accurate and informative corporate financial reporting and disclosures;

       oversight of the Post Office's risk management systems, operational

       controls and key systems; and ensuring compliance with FCA standards.

       I exhibit various versions of the Terms of Reference for the ARC which

       have been made available to me. This includes a version approved by

       the Board on 23 January 2013 (WITN00740110), approved by the Board

       on 26 March 2014 (WITNO0740111), approved by the Board on 27 April

       2015 (W1TN00740112), dated September 2015 (WITN00740113) (and a

       version with no date (W1TN00740114)).



73.3   The Nominations Committee was made up of three members, including

       at least two independent NEDs who were required to meet at least twice

       each year. The Committee was established to recommend the

       appointment of individuals to the Post Office Board, to its sub-

       committees and to Executive Committee positions which report directly

       to the Chief Executive, the Company Secretary and to the POMS Board.

       The Committee would also consider / recommend to the Board any

       proposals to remove or replace individuals holding office as a Director or

       reporting directly to the Chief Executive and the Company Secretary. I

       exhibit a version of the Terms of Reference for the Nominations



                                   30
                                                                                WI TN00740100
                                                                              WI TN00740100




       Committee reviewed by the Board on 25 March 2015 (WITN00740115)

       and a version reviewed by the Board in February 2014 (WITN00740116).



73.4   The Pensions Committee was made up of three members, including at

       least two independent NEDs who were required to meet at least three

       times each year. The Committee was established to provide guidance

       on, oversight of and authorisation in respect of pensions and pre-

       retirement risk benefits provision within the Post Office and to put into

       effect appropriate investment strategies for the Post Office Pension Fund

       on behalf of the Board. I append a version of the Terms of Reference for

       the Pensions Committee approved by the Board on 16 July 2014

       (W1TN00740117).



73.5   The Project Sparrow Sub-Committee was made up of three members,

       including at least one independent NED and the Chair, and was to meet

       as often as required. The Committee was established to make

       recommendations to the Board in respect of Project Sparrow and provide

       strategic oversight of the delivery of the project and the development of

       the Initial Complaints Review and Mediation Scheme, which I will come

       onto in due course. I exhibit a draft version of the Terms of Reference for

       the Project Sparrow Committee, which was included in the 9 April 2014

       Project Sparrow meeting pack (WITN00740118).




                                  31
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




74   At the time that I joined, the Board received regular reports on the Post Office's

     financial performance, on separation issues, mutualisation, health & safety, and

     the Post Office governance and network transformation.



75   The IT Director would attend Board meetings when there were substantive

     discussions of IT issues. I do not recall the level of IT expertise amongst the other

     senior executives.



76   Members of the executive team who had substantive items of Board business

     attended the relevant meeting(s) to present the issues and to participate in the

     Board discussion. Issues that were for noting and not for discussion at the Board

     were presented in papers written by the responsible executives but they would

     not attend the meeting unless their item was to be discussed.



77   I have considered POL00021431 (minutes of the meeting of the Audit, Risk and

     Compliance Committee on 23 May 2012). The work undertaken to assess the

     risks and compliance issues for the Post Office following the separation from

     RMG, including POL's prosecutions involvement, would have been led by the

     Post Office's legal function and particularly Susan Crichton. I do not recall any

     particular issues on prosecutions involvement in the context of the separation

     being escalated to the Board.



78   Over the following months, the Post Office Board grew as the additional non-

     executive Directors joined and themselves learned about the business. The

     Board was complete in September 2012 when the last NED joined the Board with


                                         32
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     experience of the financial services sector. Over that time, the Board developed

     its ways of working with the senior executives, a pattern of Board and Board

     Committee meetings, and a clear focus for its agendas.



Other Matters



79   As I stated earlier, there are some matters raised in the section of the Rule 9

     notice pertaining to corporate governance at the Post Office on which regrettably

     I am unable to help the Inquiry, as they did not fall within my responsibilities as

     Chair of the Board and were not escalated for Board discussion. In particular:



      79.1 I was not aware of the existence of the Second and Third Supplemental

             Agreements between the Post Office and Fujitsu which dated from 1999

             and 2000 respectively; I do not recall these clauses ever being raised

             for Board business.



      79.2 I was aware that the Post Office operated suspense accounts but did not

             know any detail of the nature of any unattributed surpluses. For

             completeness the Board's knowledge of the suspense accounts was (as

             far as I can track) as follows, and did not extend to the nature of

             unattributed surpluses. I cannot expand upon this subject further, but I

             provide this detail below in order to be helpful to the Inquiry:



             79.2.1 Following the publication of Second Sight's interim report in July

                    2013, the Board was updated on the technical considerations


                                         33
                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                   WI TN00740100




      review undertaken by the IT team on key matters such as

      processes around        communication and hardware failures,

      including the possibility of introducing a Suspense account at

      Branch level (POL00099218).



79.2.2 In an update paper to the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee for the

      meeting of 18 February 2015, it became clear that Second Sight

      had raised concerns on the policy over suspense accounts

      (POL00040911).



79.2.3 The Board also received a paper on supplementary evidence

      which the Post Office was giving as part of the BIS Select

      Committee investigation, in which the issue of suspense accounts

      was discussed (WITN00740119). I understand from this paper

      that the BIS Select Committee was informed that the Post Office

      was denying Second Sight access to information about

      movements into and out of the suspense account. I understand

      that in June 2014 Second Sight asked the Post Office to explain

      the operation of its suspense account and the Post Office replied

      in July 2014. In response to Second Sight requesting for some

      data on accounting entries posted to the suspense account, the

      Post Office sent a paper to Second Sight explaining the aspect of

      the operation of its suspense account that it understood to be of

      specific interest in more detail. I have not seen this paper




                         34
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




                     explaining the operation of the suspense account. I do not recall

                     this issue ever being raised for Board business either.



(C)    THE HORIZON SYSTEM



80    The Inquiry seeks to gather a clear account of the implementation and failings of

      the Horizon IT system over its lifetime. The Inquiry is necessarily looking back

      at the events concerning Horizon from the perspective of knowing the flaws that

      were uncovered with the system years after my departure from the Post Office.

      A huge amount is known now that the Board did not know then. Before I go on

      to answer the questions asked about my conduct, I think it might be helpful to

      explain in broad terms the nature of the information that was presented to me

      about the Horizon system during the period when I was Chair of the Board, and

      the views I and my fellow Board members formed on the back of that information.



81    In that period, we mistakenly believed that the Horizon system was robust, and

      that the Post Office was safe to rely on it in the course of its prosecutions. We

      formed that belief on the basis of the information that was provided to us. As I

      have previously explained, I am not an expert on large IT systems nor do I have

      any expertise in the field of criminal prosecutions. In forming a view on these

      matters, I was largely reliant on the expertise of those who advised the Board.

      The following factors are relevant to the understanding that the Board had about

      Horizon during the relevant period.




                                         35
                                                                                  WI TNO0740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




81.1 Firstly, we were repeatedly assured by the senior executives that there

      had been internal and external audits of the system which had

      sufficiently tested its integrity; and that it was not possible for thousands

      of pounds to "disappear" from sub-postmasters' accounts without their

      knowledge. These assurances were made to us from the start to the end

      of my tenure, by a range of individuals, both internal and external

      advisors.



81.2 Secondly, that same assurance was provided by the company that

      developed and sold the Horizon software, Fujitsu. I believed Fujitsu's

      repeated assurances at the time, and continued to believe in them up

      until the point of Fraser J's judgment. I was horrified to read in Fraser J's

      judgment that he found evidence from key Fujitsu witnesses to be

      "misleading", as "[un]interested in        accuracy in       any... evidential

      exercises", and "[not] remotely accurate". This evidence was absolutely

      crucial in getting to the bottom of the Horizon issues in order to start the

      process of delivering justice for affected sub-postmasters but only

      became available at the insistence of Fraser J, presiding over a High

      Court which was able to cross-examine Fujitsu's witnesses. I note that

      Fraser J announced that he had "grave concerns" about the evidence of

      Fujitsu employees in a number of the prosecutions against sub-

      postmasters; so much so that he intended to refer his concerns to the

      Director of Public Prosecutions for further investigation.




                                  36
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




81.3 Thirdly, the independent investigations into the integrity of Horizon during

       my tenure; both the investigation which I personally ensured occurred,

       and the investigations commissioned by the senior executives following

       discussion with the Board, also failed to uncover the issues that Fraser

       J uncovered at trial.



81.4 Fourthly, the body responsible for representing the views of sub-

       postmasters, the NFSP, and in particular the then general secretary,

       George Thomson, repeatedly made assertions about his confidence in

       the Horizon system.



81.5 Fifthly, at that time I was of the view that if sub-postmasters had been

       convicted in a criminal court then it was reasonable to assume that they

       were in fact guilty of a crime. I took comfort from the fact that the criminal

      justice system was designed to ensure that there was a fair and rigorous

       assessment of a prosecutor's case. As I was informed in a briefing paper

      on March 2012 (P0L00179470, POL00107701), which I will come onto,

       in the case of Post Office Ltd v. Lee Castleton, the Court ruled that the

       losses claimed were real deficiencies and that data from the Horizon

       system was reliable evidence.



81.6 Sixthly, the Horizon software facilitated over 1,500 transactions per

       second and 6 million per day across 11,800 branches (P0L00115924).

      It seemed unlikely to me that a system that was in such regular use could




                                   37
                                                                               WI TN00740100
                                                                             WI TN00740100




      contain within it systematic faults that created erroneous accounting

      data, without that being plain to everyone using the system.



81.7 Seventhly, and in my view most importantly, I have now learnt that during

      the relevant period the Board was given an incomplete picture of

      Horizon's integrity. Important documents and advices were written on the

      Horizon issues that were not brought to my or the wider Board's

      attention. To be clear, I was never provided with the following key pieces

      of information:



      81.7.1 Gareth     Jenkins'   note   entitled   Local   Suspense   Problem

             (FUJ00083375). I was never made aware of the Local Suspense

             Problem and it was never escalated to the Board.



      81.7.2 The draft report by Helen Rose dated 12 June 2013

             (FUJ00086811) that raised issues with Horizon's integrity. Nor did

             I receive any summary of this report's significance, any briefing

             about it, or any passing reference to it in any papers I received. I

             cannot say what actions the Post Office took in response to this

             report. I never saw it during my tenure and it was never escalated

             to the Board. I have since learned from the Inquiry's evidence that

             a member of the Post Office's senior executive team, Susan

             Crichton, was aware of the Helen Rose report (P0L00139690).




                                   38
                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                     WI TN00740100




81.7.3 Simon Clarke's advice on expert evidence dated 15 July 2013

      (POL00006798) which found that the credibility of the Post

      Office's key prosecution witness in respect of the Horizon system

      (Gareth Jenkins) was "fatally undermined". I was aware that

      Cartwright King was involved in a disclosure review in respect of

      the Post Office's past criminal cases after the Second Sight

      Interim Report (which I will cover in more detail later). But I was

      not informed about this advice. I had not heard of Simon Clarke

      until I received a media enquiry about his advice in late November

      2020 after the High Court cases in 2019. I will come onto the fact

      that, looking back at the chronology, I am astonished that the

      Board received no notification whatsoever about this advice. It

      referred to the Helen Rose report and found that Dr Jenkins, the

      Post Office's key Horizon expert relied on for prosecutions, "had

      not complied with his duties to the court, the prosecution or the

      defence", by failing to disclose material known to him which

      undermined his expert opinion in Horizon's robustness. This

      advice came at a crucial time when we were considering Second

      Sight's review of Horizon-based prosecutions (the Interim Report)

      but was never shown to the Board.



81.7.4 Simon Clarke's advice on the duty to record and retain material

      dated 2 August 2013 (POL00006799). This advice raised

      fundamental issues to the effect that the Post Office had

      abrogated its disclosure obligations as a prosecutor. Because it



                          39
                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                     WI TN00740100




     was never brought to my attention, I cannot say what steps the

     Post Office took in response to it. Again, I am astonished that this

     document was never provided to the Board. The context to part

     of this advice, which I saw for the first time in preparing this

     witness statement, was that Simon Clarke understood that

     someone within the Post Office ordered the "shredding" of a note

     recording a conference call where Horizon-related issues and

     possible defects may have been discussed. He understood that

     some within the Post Office did not want to minute / retain future

     notes of this nature. Simon Clarke advised that this was an

     abrogation of the Post Office's disclosure duties and the

     "shredding" allegation if true could amount to a conspiracy to

     pervert the course of justice. I had no idea, whatsoever, of

     allegations of such serious misconduct in the Post Office's

     prosecutions function, nor that we had received legal advice that

     the Post Office may have breached its duties so fundamentally.



81.7.5 Brian Altman KC's advice of 2 August 2013 in which he

     considered Cartwright King's disclosure review (POL00006583).

     Among other matters, I now know that this advice drew attention

     to the limited nature (by time and scope) of the Cartwright King

     review and Mr Altman KC's own view that Mr Jenkins was tainted

     and his position as an expert witness untenable. I only received

     incomplete briefings about this advice in Board packs and

     meetings. We were simply told that Mr Altman KC's view was that



                         40
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




                    the approach being taken by Cartwright King in reviewing

                    disclosure was "fundamentally sound" and that no "systemic or

                    fundamental flaws in the review process" were detected. I was

                    never told that our key expert witness on Horizon issues was

                    tainted and his position untenable. I have no doubt that learning

                    this information would have alarmed me, and caused me and

                    other Board members to ask questions. We were merely informed

                    in Significant Litigation Reports (see those between September —

                    November 2013, the latter being POL00026626) in identical

                    terms that "POL is not issuing any new criminal summons pending

                    the instruction of a new, independent expert who can give

                    evidence to support the Horizon system. The process of

                    identifying this expert is underway". The crucially important

                    reason as to why a replacement was needed was omitted. It was

                    not unreasonable to infer that this was for some prosaic reason.



82   I find it extraordinary and highly regrettable that these pieces of information were

     not provided to the Board (or, that where identified, they were only summarised

     in an incomplete way). I do not know the reasons for this, but it of course meant

     that important Board scrutiny was avoided. I look back at these omissions and I

     feel very badly let down by them. They meant that the Board did not ask

     questions which might have got to the truth of the matter — which was that

     Horizon was unsafe and should not have been relied upon for prosecutions. In

     the absence of these pieces of information, I also now see that the Board made




                                         41
                                                                                          WI TNO0740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




     the ill-informed decisions at some critical junctures as I will explain at the relevant

     points in this statement.



83   1 want to be very clear that I never engaged in any form of "cover up" nor did I

     observe any culture of "cover-up" on the Board. My career was mainly in the civil

     service and I am a strong believer in transparency and accountability. I always

     sought to communicate openly and candidly — especially with the MPs, who were

     the main third-party stakeholders with whom I dealt over the Horizon issue. The

     Board and I believed in sharing information. If information was ever kept at Board

     level and not more widely disseminated, there were always good reasons for this,

     which I will come onto when these issues arise in the chronology of events.



84   And finally, it is, of course, the case that during the relevant period the Board was

     presented on a number of occasions with a contrasting view that the Horizon

     system could produce erroneous transaction data and therefore the convictions

     based on this data were unsafe. I wish to assure those affected by the actions of

     the Post Office and Fujitsu that the Board did try to address the concerns that

     were being raised about the Horizon system, and I did challenge the senior

     executives particularly when they resisted my suggestion to commission an

     independent investigation and over its terms of reference. During my tenure the

     Board (like any other board) had a reasonable expectation that we should be

     able to rely on the information we were provided by the senior executive team. I

     now realise that the briefings that we were given by senior executives on Horizon

     issues were, at critical points, incomplete, and sometimes misleading. This is the




                                          42
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




      context in which the Board's failure to get to the truth about the Horizon system

      should be understood.



(D)    KEY EVENTS - SEPTEMBER 2011 TO MAY 2012



85    In the next section of this statement, I will turn to the key issues with which I was

      involved in my early days on the Board: the Ernst & Young audit findings, the

      Shoosmiths litigation, my interactions with Members of Parliament advocating for

      sub-postmasters and the instruction of Second Sight.



Ernst & Young's Audit Findings



86    I have been referred to a draft document produced by Ernst & Young and entitled

      "Management letter for the year ended 27 March 2011" (POL00030217). I have

      no recollection of this document. I was not at the Post Office for the financial year

      ended 27 March 2011 and having reviewed the documents made available to the

      Board ahead of its 22 September 2011 meeting, which was the first I attended,

      this document does not appear to have been circulated to the Board. I note that

      in the `management comments' section of the relevant excerpt from this report

      there is reference to actions being undertaken with a completion date of July

      2011 (POL00030217/0023 & 0024).            This further suggests the report was

      prepared before I commenced my tenure at the Post Office.



87    In the minutes of the first Board meeting I attended on 22 September 2011

      (POL00030365) there is a record of a comment I made under the sub-heading


                                          43
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     "IT Audit (SAS70)". According to the minutes, I "stressed that the Business

     needed to be influenced by the cost as to which route was pursued. Further

     clarification is required as to POL's recommendation and a noting paper needs

     to go to the next board". Before this observation is a record in the minutes as

     follows: "Les Owen clarified that.... The ARC was not suggesting we should push

     Fujitsu to do a SAS70 audit if it meant POL would pick up the costs; Chris Day

     emphasised that Fujitsu do not undertake a SAS70 audit but they recognise

     customers, including POL, would expect it. He explained that POL were looking

     at any costs which would be passed on from Fujitsu before going down this

     route". That provides context to my observation on cost, which I expand on

     further in paragraph 90 below.



88   I cannot recall this remark or the discussion which occurred at the Board meeting

     on this topic. However, I note from my review of the minutes that it was made in

     the context of a discussion on a paper prepared by Mike Young, the Post Office's

     Chief Operating Officer, entitled "the Post Office IT Audit Update (SAS70)"

     (WITN00740120). I have re-read this paper, which included (I) a detailed update

     on the audit work undertaken by Ernst & Young, (ii) an account of the work being

     undertaken with Fujitsu to execute Ernst & Young's recommendations, and (iii)

     an update on the work being undertaken by the senior executive team to

     determine whether or not to insist that Fujitsu adopt SAS70. It is clear from

     reviewing Mike Young's note that, as I would have expected, he and the rest of

     the senior executive team were working to implement Ernst & Young's

     recommendations and these efforts were being monitored by Ernst & Young and

     would be assessed during the course of the next audit.


                                       44
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




89   While I am on the topic of the "the Post Office IT Audit Update (SAS70)", I note

     that I have been asked the question in the context of the 22 September 2011

     board meeting: "Please describe your understanding of the importance of the

     audit controls described and EY's recommendation for SAS70 audit". On a point

     of accuracy, I am not sure it is correct to say that Ernst & Young made a

     "recommendation for SAS70 audit". Mike Young's note stated that "the Ernst &

     Young audit management letter recommended that POL should keep SAS70 as

     an option and under consideration as a framework for its service management

     controls" (emphasis added). This description accords with my reading of the

     "Management letter for the year ended 27 March 2011" (P0L00030217) which

     (as I note above), I do not believe I saw at the time but I have reviewed in

     preparing this statement.



90   Returning to the Board meeting on 22 September 2011, and the record in the

     minutes of me stating "that the Business needed to be influenced by the cost as

     to which route was pursued", I can only think that by this comment I was

     addressing a concern that Fujitsu may seek to pass the cost of the SAS70 audit

     on to the Post Office on which Les Owen had commented (see para 86 above)

     (POL00030365). I recall that from my earliest days with the Post Office, I had

     concerns about the Post Office's relationship with Fujitsu and whether or not it

     was an equal relationship. I felt that the Post Office's reliance on Fujitsu was not

     healthy and that Fujitsu had the upper hand in relations with the Post Office. It

     may be that my comment at the Board meeting on 22 September reflected a

     concern that Fujitsu would find a way to make the Post Office pick up the bill for



                                         45
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     the SAS70 audit, or as a more general signalling to the senior executive team to

     take a commercial approach to its discussions with Fujitsu.



91   I also note that at the 22 September 2011 Board meeting, we were provided with

     another note by Mike Young entitled "Technology Update — Tactical and Strategic

     Relationship with Fujitsu", which informed the Board of discussions with Fujitsu

     about extending elements of the Post Office's existing contract with Fujitsu

     beyond the 2015 termination date (WITN00740121). It may be, but I cannot say

     for certain, that my comments as to the cost implications of Fujitsu completing a

     SAS70 interview were connected with our discussions about broadening the

     range of suppliers available to the Post Office and reducing the business's

     reliance on Fujitsu. The minutes record that Donald Brydon asked the senior

     executive team to present "an integrated Network & IT strategy" at a future Board

     meeting (POL00030365). It would appear that there was an appetite to take a

     step back and consider the Post Office's IT strategy in its entirety.



92   In my notebook I have a contemporaneous note of an introductory meeting I had

     with Angus Grant, the audit partner at Ernst & Young responsible for the Post

     Office, that took place a few days after the 22 September 2011 board meeting

     (WITN00740122). It provides further context for my views at this time on the

     relationship between the Post Office and Fujitsu.



93   My note (which was handwritten) reads as follows:



      "27/9



                                         46
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




      Angus Grant E+Y [partner assigned to PO]



      With Fujitsu, PO drove a hard bargain on price but they took back on

      quality/assurance.

      *Chris's [newly appointed FD for PO.] role in relat. to procurement.

                                                 v. close relat. with Mike Young.

      RMG good procurement — Cath Harmiston.

      IT — have made progress

           getting documentation + process better

      Horizon — is a real risk for us.

                  does it capture data accurately

                  cases of fraud — suspects suggest it's a systems problem.

      POL v. Fujitsu — naïve/too nice.

      Lesley Sewell [PO's IT Director] "knows what good looks like".

      Over dependence on Fujitsu? POL + Fujitsu know what they need to do re the

      audit.

      E+Y to come to Board/Audit Ctee by end of 2011.

      *AP to help put pressure on Fujitsu?"



94   I do not have a detailed recollection of this meeting, but it is clear from my notes

     that Angus Grant wished to raise a number of concerns he had regarding Fujitsu

     in general and Horizon in particular. This included the fact that the Post Office

     was "naïve/too nice" in its commercial dealings with Fujitsu as well as drawing to

     my attention the fact that when charged with fraud, suspects suggested it was in

     fact a problem with the Horizon system. My note of the meeting would suggest



                                         47
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     that Angus Grant had identified Horizon as "a real risk" for his audit team and that

     they had to provide assurance that the system was capturing data correctly.



95   The first Board meeting that I chaired took place on 10 November 2011

     (POL00021502). I have been asked if there was any discussion of the "Fujitsu —

     Viability of introducing a SAS70 or Equivalent audit report" at the Board meeting

     (POL00362957). This is the noting paper that I requested at the September 2011

     Board meeting, as discussed at paragraph 87 above.



96   The minutes do not record any discussion of the contents of the noting paper but

     it is stated the paper was "duly noted" by the Board. On reviewing the paper now,

     I am not surprised that it did not lead to a discussion at the Board meeting. The

     purpose of "noting papers" was to provide the Board with a concise update on

     an issue rather than put a decision to the Board. This noting paper was drafted

     by Mike Young, the Post Office's Chief Operating Officer. It informed the Board

     that the Post Office, Ernst & Young and Fujitsu were continuing to discuss how

     best to establish a SAS70 report or equivalent audit approach as had been

     foreshadowed in Mike Young's note to the Board ahead of the 22 September

     2011 meeting.



97   I cannot recall the discussions that took place on this issue over twelve years

     ago. However, it is clear from the contemporaneous documents that

     consideration was given at this time as to whether Fujitsu should introduce a

     SAS70 audit, or something akin to it, and an awareness that should that route be

     pursued, Fujitsu might seek to pass the cost of doing so onto the Post Office. It



                                         48
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     is also apparent that there were a number of other issues being considered as

     part of our wider IT strategy, to which I have referred in the preceding paragraphs.

     Reviewing the contemporaneous records it seems very unlikely that we would

     not pursue the SAS70 audit simply out of a concern regarding cost. Instead the

     contemporaneous records suggest we were focusing on what actions needed to

     take priority and the SAS70 audit was just one of a number of possible actions

     that the Post Office was considering at that time. Indeed at the 23 May 2012 ARC

     meeting which I will come onto the SAS70 audit was eventually recommended:

     "It was recommended that the business insist that Fujitsu provide a

     SAS7011SA402 certificate to provide a transparent audit of their controls"

     (POL00021431).



98   On 23 May 2012, I attended the first formal meeting of the ARC, which was

     attended by (amongst others) Angus Grant from Ernst & Young (POL00021431).

     I do not have a detailed recollection of this meeting. I note, however, from

     reviewing these minutes that the meeting considered a report from Ernst & Young

     setting out their "preliminary conclusions on the financial position and results of

     operations of POL for the financial year ended 25 March 2012". I note that "the

     auditors found that the IT systems were insufficiently effective to be fully relied

     upon for audit control purposes", but the minutes go onto record that Ernst &

     Young had adopted "mitigating procedures" and "had been able to rely on the IT

     systems supporting the POL financial statements". It was also noted that: "the

     POL and Ernst & Young IT teams were working closely on an agreed plan of

     further improvements in FY13". This was, as mentioned, my first ARC meeting

     and I was not an ARC member, though I attended a number of the meetings. I



                                         49
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     would have expected the then-Finance Director, Chris Day, and Lesley Sewell,

     IT Director, to take forward the actions required under Alastair Marnoch's

     guidance.



99   I have sought disclosure from the Post Office's lawyers and have exhibited to this

     statement what I am informed is the EY audit report discussed at the ARC

     meeting (W1TN00740124), though I do not remember this document. This

     document deals with the audit and accounting picture for the Post Office at the

     time.On IT, its content is consistent with the note in the ARC meeting minutes

     that "the IT controls in the business had improved" and though "the IT systems

     were insufficiently effective to be fully relied upon for audit control

     purposes... through adopting mitigating procedures, Ernst & Young had been

     able to rely on the IT systems supporting the POL financial statements". As

     someone who does not have IT expertise, Angus Grant's appearance at the ARC

     would have been what I relied on (as well as commentary by my colleagues who

     were members of the ARC) in order to understand the risk to the business (if any)

     of the audit assessment. I can see, with hindsight, that this document mentions

     the issue of `'control over privileged users" to Horizon. This is something that

     Fraser J found was an important issue with the system in his judgment. I did not

     appreciate and was not informed at the time that this technical IT issue could

     have a bearing on the safety of the Post Office's prosecutions against sub-

     postmasters — it is not all clear that this is the case from the face of the document.

     Ernst & Young do also note in respect of the IT audit, "we should note that there

     were improvements from the prior year, notably in the two highest risk areas

     identified. We ultimately obtained mitigating audit evidence to rely on the IT


                                          50
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     control environment". By the time of 23 May 2012, as I will shortly come onto, I

     was already engaging with Lord Arbuthnot and other MPs about a new review of

     Horizon, and had sought and received numerous and detailed assurances from

     Post Office executives about Horizon's integrity and told that it could be robustly

     relied on for prosecutions.



100 For example, I received an important briefing from Susan Crichton dated 12

     March 2012 (POL00179470, P0L00107701) that I will come onto below at

     paragraph 121, stating categorically that "There are no reported cases where

     data stored on the Horizon [sic] has been found to be an inaccurate record of

     actions taken in branch" and that "the Horizon system...has been found to be

     robust". If the existence of the Ernst & Young audit affected the assessments that

     I had been given, meaning that Horizon was unsafe for prosecutions, I certainly

     expected to be told this. I believe that I would have come away from these reports

     noting their headline: that though improvements were to be made (and the Post

     Office and Ernst & Young were "working closely" on these), with additional testing

     Ernst & Young had ultimately been able to rely on the IT systems supporting the

     Post Office's financial statements. In any case, around the time of this meeting,

     I was commissioning the independent review of Horizon cases with Second Sight

     and the MPs.



Shoosmiths Litigation



101 I chaired the meeting of the Board on 13 December 2011. Prior to the meeting

     the Board was provided with a one-page document drafted by Susan Crichton,



                                        51
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     entitled "Significant Litigation Report" (WITN00740125). This was the first time

     that the Board had received such a report. In line with best practice, they would

     become a regular feature of the "board packs" provided to directors in advance

     of meetings.



102 In this first Significant Litigation Report Susan provided a brief summary of the

     claims being brought against the Post Office and advised the Board that she

     considered "the legal claims to be weak and the damages claims to be inflated".

     She went on to state that the "considered legal view is that the claimants are

     unlikely to succeed" (WITN00740125). In the paper, Susan referenced advice

     received from Richard Morgan KC that some cases might go against the Post

     Office, but it would appear that it was his view that this had more to do with "the

     quality of the judges" than the merits of the claims.



103 The Board was not provided with a copy of the correspondence from the sub-

     postmasters' lawyers nor any written advice from Richard Morgan KC. It would

     have been wholly unusual for the Board to be provided with documents of this

     nature. I have explained at paragraph 55 above, the approach that the Board

     took during my tenure to the management of litigation. In summary, the Board

     needed to be made aware of any significant risks faced by the business, including

     litigation, but it was for the Post Office's in-house lawyers, and the external

     lawyers they engaged, to manage this litigation to achieve the best outcome for

     the Post Office.




                                         52
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




104 The minutes for the Board meeting on 13 December 2011 record that the

    "Significant Litigation Report" was "noted" and that "Susan Crichton was asked

    to give an oral update at the January Board" (POL00027270).



105 I chaired the meeting of the Post Office Board on 12 January 2012. the Post

    Office has provided me with a copy of the "board pack" for this meeting. We were

    again provided with a document entitled "Significant Litigation Report"

    (POL00095587). This document is dated "January 2012", however, it appears to

    me to be exactly the same as the document with the same title that was noted

    by the Board at the December meeting.



106 The minutes of the meeting (POL00021503) record a discussion of the

    Significant Litigation Report. According to the minutes, Les Owen who was a

    non-executive director of RMG and had temporarily been appointed to the Board

    by Donald Brydon, asked "for assurance that there was no substance to the

    claims brought by sub-postmasters which had featured in Private Eye". It seems

    to me that Les' question was exactly the right one to ask of Susan Crichton.

    According to the minutes, Susan provided a clear assurance as to the integrity

    of the Horizon system which was being challenged by the sub-postmasters.

    Susan said that the "[Horizon] system had been audited by RMG Internal Audit

    with the reports reviewed by Deloittes [sic]. The audit report was very positive".

    Susan also noted that "the business has also won every criminal prosecution in

    which it has used evidence based on the Horizon system's integrity".




                                       53
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




107 Whilst I cannot recall Susan Crichton making these assurances or my reaction

     to them at the meeting, on reviewing the minutes I feel sure that I would have

     taken comfort from the fact that Deloitte, an extremely well regarded third party

     firm of professionals, had reviewed the Internal Audit reports.



108 I have been asked why Susan Crichton was "given the task" of clearing "the audit

     report with the external lawyers and if it is possible to give the report privileged

     status it would be circulated it to the board [sic]" (POL00021503). I have no

     recollection of any discussions on this at the Board meeting. However, it is not

     clear to me on reviewing the minutes that this task was "given" to Susan by the

     Board. The minutes state that "Susan Crichton suggested" that she clear the

     audit report with the external lawyers. It would seem more likely to me that Susan,

     as the Post Office's most senior lawyer, advised the Board that these steps

     should be taken before the Internal Audit report was provided to the Board. As

     for why Susan considered it necessary for the report to be reviewed by the

     external lawyers, as a non-lawyer I can only assume that there was a process

     that had to be gone through with the lawyers handling the sub-postmasters

     litigation before the document could be shared with us.



109 Putting aside whatever process the lawyers advised us to follow, I do think it was

     right that the Board wanted to see the Internal Audit report for itself. From the

     minutes of the meeting, it appears that the Internal Audit report was central to

     Susan Crichton's confidence in the integrity of the Horizon system.




                                         54
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




110 The Board met again on 5 February 2012. Ahead of this meeting we were

     provided with a three-page table entitled "POST OFFICE LIMITED LITIGATION

     MATTERS — COMMERCIAL LITIGATION PRIVILEGED AND CONFIDENTIAL —

     CLAIMS    IN   EXCESS      OF   £5O0K     AND/OR      CLAIMS    WITH     WIDER

     SIGNIFICANCE FOR THE BUSINESS" (POL00095835). The document

     provided greater detail regarding the litigation being brought by Shoosmiths than

     Susan had covered at the previous Board meeting in January. From this point

     onwards, the litigation reports provided to the Board tended to be in tabular

     format. The minutes of the 9 February 2012 Board meeting record that the table

     was "noted" by the Board (POL00027579).



111 Ahead of the 9 February 2012 meeting the Board was also provided with a "Board

     Status Report" table (POL00096036). Row "9b" of the "Status Report" addressed

     the Deloitte report that the Board had requested at its January meeting. It is

     recorded that the "final amendments to report awaited".



112 The same status is recorded in the "Board Status Report" provided to the Board

     ahead of the Board meeting on 15 March 2012 (POL00096371).



113 The Board pack for the following meeting of the Board on 18 April 2012,

     contained a document entitled "Review of Key System Controls in Horizon"

     (POL00107127). I assume that this is the Internal Audit report reviewed by

     Deloitte to which Susan Crichton referred at our 12 January 2012 meeting. The

     minutes of the meeting of the Board on 18 April 2012 do not record any

     discussion of this document.



                                        55
                                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                                  WI TN00740100




114 The Board continued to receive the "Significant Litigation Report" on a regular

     basis and its contents were noted at its meetings. From the 4 July 2012, the

     "Significant Litigation Report" included a summary of criminal cases as well as

     civil cases.



115 On reflection, I think that the creation of the "Significant Litigation Report" was a

     sensible development. It ensured that the Board was aware of litigation involving

     the Post Office and could, should it wish, ask further questions of the responsible

     executives. In my experience of sitting on a board, it would be very unusual for a

     board to provide detailed in-put on litigation strategy. From a corporate

     governance perspective, it is essential for a board to understand (i) the potential

     cost of any litigation so that it can consider the effect it may have on the financial

     health of the company and the need for provisioning and (ii) that the litigation is

     being handled by the appropriate professionals in a cost-effective manner.



Initial engagement with Parliamentarians



116 I have been asked specific questions by the Inquiry in respect of the

     commissioning of Second Sight and my initial engagement with Parliamentarians

     including Lord Arbuthnot2 and Oliver Letwin MP. I will address these questions in

     this section. I will then turn to the later developments with Second Sight.




       2 For
               completeness, Lord Arbuthnot was James Arbuthnot MP at the time of these events. I will

       refer to him in this statement as Lord Arbuthnot.


                                                56
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




117 The starting point is that, as mentioned above, prior to joining the Post Office in

     September 2011 I was not made aware that issues had been raised in respect of

     the Horizon system. This did not come up in the application process, nor in any

     of the conversations which I initiated to help me understand the challenges of the

     role. The first time that the Horizon issue arose for me was on 26 September

     2011 — there was an email from Donald Brydon to Paula Vennells, copied to Moya

     Greene, myself and others. He referred to the Private Eye article about a class

     action by sub-postmasters and this raising questions about Horizon — he asked

     whether there had ever been an independent audit of Horizon (W1TN00740126).

     Paula replied that day highlighting that each time a case had gone to court, the

     Post Office's position about the safety of the Horizon system had been upheld.

     She also raised that: "to avoid future doubt, the Post Office took a decision

     several months ago to have Horizon and the newer HNGx (Horizon online)

     independently verified by an external systems auditor. This is currently in process

     and we should have the results at the end of next month." As discussed in

     paragraph 92 above, the issue was raised again with me the following day when

     I had an induction meeting with Angus Grant, the Ernst and Young partner who

     audited the Post Office's accounts.



118 As referenced at paragraph 106 above, Les Owen raised the Private Eye

     allegations at the 12 January 2012 Board meeting (POL00021503). Susan

     Crichton assured the Board as to the integrity of the Horizon system based on

     an internal audit by Royal Mail whose "very positive" report had been "reviewed"

     by Deloitte.



                                        57
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




119 As discussed at paragraph 113 above, the Board requested a copy of the Internal

     Audit Report and I believe that it is document (POL00107127). The handwriting

     on that document is mine. I cannot recall whether I reviewed this document as

     part of my preparation for meeting with MPs to discuss Horizon (which I will

     shortly come onto), but it is likely that I did.



120 On 23 February 2012, I received an email from Lord Arbuthnot asking me to meet

     him to discuss the issue of Horizon, in the context of the convictions of a number

     of affected sub-postmasters (POL00095973). He referred in that email to a

     previous meeting between me and him: I cannot remember when that was, but I

     recall him then saying something to the effect that he had felt he had not had the

     hearing he should have had from the Post Office and Royal Mail Group on the

     issue. In the email, he asked if I would meet him to talk about Horizon and

     naturally I agreed to do so, replying to him that day (POL00105470). I had a

     professional relationship with Lord Arbuthnot from my time in the Treasury, when

     he worked as the Minister of State for Defence Procurement. I was very receptive

     to hearing his concerns, and the tone of my email and prompt response

     demonstrate my attitude at that time. I forwarded Lord Arbuthnot's email to Paula

     Vennells and Susan Crichton saying that I would reply to Lord Arbuthnot that day.

     When Susan indicated that the meeting would need to be "carefully handled"

     because of Lord Arbuthnot's links with the JFSA, that there would be risks to it

     and it would be good to have an internal word, I replied that I had already

     responded to Lord Arbuthnot agreeing to meet. I did not think for one minute that




                                           58
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




     I could or should avoid a meeting with him, notwithstanding the warning given by

     Susan.



121 I asked for a briefing before my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot, which I received

     from Susan Crichton on 12 March 2012 (POL00179470, P0L00107701). This

     summarised some of the assurances which I had received, and believed, about

     Horizon's integrity at the time. These included:



     121.1 "There are no reported cases where data stored on the Horizon [sic] has

            been found to be an inaccurate record of actions taken in branch."



     121.2 "POL has rigorously tested the Horizon system, using independently

           assured processes and it has been found to be robust."



     121.3 "Horizon has been in successful operation for in excess of 10 years across

           the Post Office network (upgraded in 2010) and during that time in excess

           of 20,000 subpostmasters have used it to successfully perform millions of

           financial reconciliations."



     121.4 "The National Federation of Subpostmasters has also expressed its full

            confidence in the accuracy and robustness of Horizon."



     121.5 "The integrity of Horizon has been the subject of legal challenge. In the

            case of Post Office Ltd v. Lee Castleton, the Court ruled that the losses

            claimed were real deficiencies and that the Horizon system provided



                                         59
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




          irrefutable evidence that Mr Castleton had failed to properly manage the

          branch."



122 The Inquiry has asked me what assurance I took and communicated to Lord

    Arbuthnot in respect of the RMG internal audit and review by Deloitte. The note

    of my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot records that I said: "AP explained that the

    system had been independently reviewed by several people including RM

    Internal audit and Deloittes (who had no relationship with the Business or

    Fujitsu)" (POL00105481). I would have felt positive going into the meeting about

    the assurances I had received to date, including those summarised in the briefing

    note, and the fact that Deloitte — external and reputable auditors — had reviewed

    the internal audit report (see paragraph 113).



123 I met Lord Arbuthnot on 13 March 2012, accompanied by Alwen Lyons who was

    the Company Secretary. To my best recollection, I think that the meeting note at

    (POL000105481) reflects the content of the meeting. The handwritten note on

    page 3 under "Horizon & the balancing of accounts" is mine; the handwriting on

    the blank page at the end of the document is not mine. At that meeting Lord

    Arbuthnot explained the details of the prosecution of one of his constituents and

    said that he believed her to be innocent of her convictions and to have been the

    victim of errors in the Horizon system. He also mentioned that there were eight

    other MPs who took a similar position to his own, and that recently he and these

    eight other MPs had met some of the affected sub-postmasters and Shoosmiths,

    their legal representatives. Lord Arbuthnot was concerned too about the support

    that sub-postmasters received from the Post Office when they were faced with a



                                       60
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     discrepancy in their accounts. On this, I agreed to look at the support we gave to

     sub-postmasters especially around balancing, to see if it could be made more

     effective. It was clear that Lord Arbuthnot had been trying to gain traction with

     RMG and the Post Office senior executives before I arrived. My previous

     exchanges with him showed that he was very worried, and he did not think that

     his concerns had been taken seriously by RMG or the Post Office. I mentioned

     this exchange to Paula Vennells before the meeting.



124 During the meeting I invited Lord Arbuthnot to visit our Head Office to see how

     Horizon worked. He offered to bring with him a computer expert, possibly

     someone from Computer Weekly, who had been `sceptical about Horizon'. I

     highlighted, as I had been told at the time, that Horizon had been independently

     reviewed. However as the meeting note records, I nonetheless offered to

     consider "a further review of the system by an IT expert specifically looking at the

     integrity of the data and discrepancy errors thrown up in sub-postmaster's

     balances" (POL00105481).



125 By now the integrity of the Horizon system had been raised with me directly on a

     few occasions: my induction meeting with Angus Grant who mentioned the views

     of some `suspects' about it, the email-exchange in September 2011 between

     Paula Vennells and Donald Brydon in which the Private Eye allegations were

     raised and assurances provided, and the Board Meeting on 12 January 2012

     where Les Owen asked for assurance that there was no substance to allegations

     made in Private Eye. The combination of these instances together with Lord




                                         61
                                                                                          WI TN00740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




     Arbuthnot's concerns made me aware that it was an issue we needed to address.

     I was keen to get to the truth of the matter.



126 At this time, I thought that we needed a fresh pair of eyes to look into it. I felt sure

     the new Board would want to get to the bottom of the allegations being made

     against the business and to be transparent in the process. If the allegations

     against the Post Office were untrue, it would be essential to take Lord Arbuthnot

     and his Parliamentary colleagues with us, by which I mean addressing their

     concerns, demonstrating to their satisfaction that we had addressed these

     properly, and ensuring they understood why the Post Office had a different view

     on the integrity of the Horizon system.



127 I have been asked to explain the Post Office's purpose and strategy in engaging

     with MPs. I would not say that I had a "strategy" to deal with MPs - I have always

     sought to be honest with MPs and to take their views and concerns seriously. I

     did so on this occasion. My intention in dealing with Lord Arbuthnot, then an MP,

     about this issue (and later other MPs, including Oliver Letwin) was to listen to

     them, understand the issues they raised and help to deal with any concerns they

     had. This is evidenced from the notes detailed in my journal entry from around

     this time which stated (WITN00740127):



       "Sub Postmasters"

                     1) Substance

                     2) Handling




                                           62
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




      1) How far are the external reports we've had really (underlined) relevant to the

      issues in question? They seem to be about other things.

      ?? May 2007 Gartner Report. What exactly are they How far are the issues

      ones [about]. related matters eg contracts, training, support.

      Have we talked abt. the cases we decided not to pursue? + benchmarking with

      equiv. retailers.

              Are we truly happy that we are doing everything we should to support

      them?

      "Is it really the case that we are stymied from doing any independent review?

      Page 10 of ISMAY Report. How else do we convince reasonable people that

      we are not afraid and what if something is wrong?"



128 As the meeting note records, Lord Arbuthnot then returned to the training of sub-

     postmasters which he did not think was adequate (POL00105481). He

     introduced the issue that the sub-postmasters' contract was over 100 pages long

     and was written in 1994 when the Horizon system was not in place - it did not

     explain the process for `making good' errors clearly enough. He also suggested

     that sub-postmasters did not get a copy of their contract until they had taken up

     their appointment by which time it was too late to understand the full commitment

     they were making. I then asked if the issues being discussed were wider than

     Horizon. I promised to reflect on the meeting we had just had, and invited him to

     another meeting.



129 I sent an email to Paula Vennells, Susan Crichton and Alwen Lyons that evening

     (POL00107702). I said that Lord Arbuthnot in my view genuinely wanted to find



                                        63
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     a resolution and was willing to believe that we would do the right things. I wrote

     in this email "There is a real prize for us in finding an effective way of convincing

     him and his fellow MPs that things are as they should be". This statement

     reflected my belief based on the assurances that I had been given, that the

     concerns that were being reported by Lord Arbuthnot were not well-founded, and

     this was an opportunity for the Post Office to convince him otherwise. I proposed

     to the executives in this email "my thought" of a "new independent review" of the

     integrity of the Horizon system.



130 The Inquiry has asked me about the steps that I took to investigate the concerns

     raised by sub-postmasters and MPs concerning the Horizon IT system around

     this time. In summary, having listened to Lord Arbuthnot's concerns, I proposed

     and in due course was successful in commissioning a new independent review

     of the Horizon system (the Second Sight review), despite considerable

     opposition to this idea from within the Post Office. I will come onto the

     commissioning of Second Sight more fully in due course.



131 Two days later, there was a Post Office Board meeting on 15 March 2012 (the

     minutes of which are POL00021505). I reported that I had met Lord Arbuthnot

     and that I hoped we could find a way to convince him and other MPs with similar

     cases that the Horizon system was not at fault — since that was the position that

     I believed, based on the assurances that I had received at the time and the recent

     Deloitte review. I said that this might mean looking at a further independent study

     of the issues; my approach at the time was therefore to listen to and investigate

     the concerns raised by MPs. The purpose of commissioning an independent



                                         64
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     study was to take a fresh look at the issues, and get to the truth. If it was found,

     as I had been assured was the case, that the Horizon system was robust, this

     approach would (I hoped) allay the concerns that had been raised.



132 The Inquiry has asked me why Lord Arbuthnot's enquiries led to the discussion

     about the new independent study. As I have explained, it led me, as the new

     Chair of the Board, to decide that this issue needed looking at afresh to add to

     the previous investigations made by the Post Office. I am also asked to explain

     why such a study was not implemented following: (a) numerous complaints that

     had been made by sub-postmasters and MPs; (b) the May 2009 Computer

     Weekly article; and (c) the identification of significant BEDs, such as the Receipts

     and Payments mismatch. Since (a) and (b) pre-dated my time at the Post Office,

     and I was not made aware of (c) until the Second Sight Interim Report, I am

     unable to assist the Inquiry with this.



133 In my email to Alwen Lyons of 27 March 2012 (POL00105592) 1 referred to the

    Post Office's Ismay report of 2 August 2010 (POL00026572), which was a report

     by the Post Office's then Head of IT, Rod Ismay, responding to the challenges

     that had been made about the integrity of the Horizon system. Though the Ismay

     report pre-dated my arrival at the Post Office, I clearly had read this report by

     March 2012 and had also referred to it in my notebook (see entry referred to in

     paragraph 127 above), so I was aware that it formed part of the previous

     investigations that the Post Office had made in response to allegations against

     the Horizon system. I cannot recall having any knowledge of Rod Ismay's Terms

     of Reference. These are not included in the report nor in its covering email, which



                                         65
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    described the paper "as an objective, internal review". This report testified

    strongly to Horizon's integrity: it contained further important assurances about

    the integrity of the Horizon system, including that:



    133.1 "The allegations to which we are responding follow on from cases where

           thousands of pounds were missing at audit. We remain satisfied that this

           money was missing due to theft in the branch — we do not believe the

           account balances against which the audits were conducted were corrupt."



    133.2 "The integrity of Horizon is founded on its tamper proof logs, its real time

           back ups and the absence of "backdoors" so that all data entry or

           acceptance is at branch level and is tagged against the log on ID of the

           user. This means that ownership of the accounting is truly at branch level."



    133.3 "There are several improvement opportunities for POL .... They do not

           undermine POL's assertion regarding the integrity of Horizon, but they

           would tackle some of the other noise which complainants feed on. They

           may also help when POL does take action."



    133.4 Appendix 3 was a Fujitsu Report on Horizon's Data Integrity authored by

           Gareth Jenkins, testifying to the data integrity and controls system of the

           Horizon system.



134 The report summarised previous and current legal challenges to the Horizon

    system, and explained why these did not change the Post Office's view of



                                        66
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     Horizon's robustness. When I referred to the "good points" in the Ismay report in

     my email to Alwen, I cannot recall which points I would have been referring to,

     but I imagine they would have included some of the assurances referred to above

     (POL00105592). From the context of the email (when I say "eg.") it appears that

     I was also referring to the three strengths identified by the Ismay Report in

     relation to Horizon which are key to the allegations being made. This included

     reference to Horizon infrastructure being robust from a security and access

     perspective, resilient in continuing customer service and in holding data in queue

     in the event of incidents and strong back up and integrity features with data

     backed up in branch and centrally. From the report, I can see that apart from two

     cases, the Post Office had been able to rebut assertions by focusing on the facts

     of the Horizon transaction logs and a request for the defence to be specific about

     which transactions they considered to be "ghost" with an explanation. In relation

     to the point I make in the email, (when I say "have we benchmarked ourselves

     against other comparable retailers"), I may have been prompted by the report

     where it is mentioned that for a balance of firmness and compassion,

     "Benchmark the Post Office suspension and prosecution rates against other

     retailers" — it would have been prudent to compare ourselves against other

     companies in a comparable position, such as banks and retailers facing internal

     theft.



135 The report also gave reasons as to why further independent reviews of Horizon

     and audits had been discounted in the past in relation to giving external

     stakeholders assurance in the system (POL00026572). For example it

     highlighted that "people will always ask "what if i.e. it may not fully satisfy the


                                        67
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     questions of the outside world; the report would only be valid as at the date of

     creation, and might be deemed quickly to go out of date; Ernst & Young and

     Deloitte had said that their reports would have significant caveats and would not

     stand-up in court; and any investigation would need to be disclosed in court,

     potentially leading to a stay of criminal prosecutions if it caused the Post Office

     to doubt its systems. My email to Alwen shows that I was not persuaded by these

     arguments against commissioning a           new independent report; I said

     (POL00105592):



      "I have noted Ismay's arguments against an independent review. But if we

      follow this line, how will we ever satisfy reasonable critics that we are unafraid

      to look at this. Yes, a report would have to be disclosed — there would be no

      point doing it otherwise — but if we are so confident of our ground what are we

      afraid of? We would need to handle it carefully of course but we could get help

      with that, perhaps with [Lord Arbuthnot's] help."



136 I continued to push within the Post Office for a further independent review. My

     email to Alwen refers to a meeting the next day, however I cannot recall with

     whom I met. It may well have been with Lord Arbuthnot given the context

     (POL00105592).



137 I do not have notes of my conversations with the Post Office's senior executives

     about commissioning the independent review. However, I do recall some of these

     conversations. The Inquiry has asked me about (i) my interactions with Paula

     Vennells, the Board and other senior Post Office managers about Lord Arbuthnot
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     and the proposed independent investigation and (ii) in my view, the extent to

     which the Post Office Board and members of senior management wanted to

     investigate thoroughly whether the Horizon IT system had caused shortfalls in

     branch accounts. When following the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on 13 March

     I proposed a new independent review of the Horizon system, starting with my

     email that day to the executives discussed above, I received a negative response

     from two members of the Post Office's executive team; Susan Crichton and Mike

     Young. I cannot remember the details. I do remember having a conversation with

     them about it and being told that it was a bad idea, given the volume of

     investigations that there had already been into the Horizon system which had not

     uncovered any errors. I was also informed that the Post Office senior

     management had so much to deal with at the time, that they did not have the

     capacity effectively to deal with a new independent review. I recall explaining that

     I did not think we had any choice. I saw no alternative to this course, in order to

     satisfy ourselves of the truth and restore, if justified, confidence in the Horizon

     system after the complaints by MPs.



138 After I had made my position clear, I recall hearing nothing from within the Post

     Office about pursuing an independent review. I cannot recall how long I allowed

     this silence to persist, but I did raise the issue again to ensure that progress was

     being made. I think that I raised the issue with Susan Crichton. I was told again

     that she and Mike Young did not think it was a good idea to have a further review,

     and that they therefore proposed not to do anything about it.




                                         69
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




139 I was angry and considered this response unacceptable, especially as no-one

     had come back to me to explain the position. At that point or possibly earlier, I

     recall that I spoke to Paula Vennells who advised me to listen to Susan Crichton's

     and Mike Young's concerns. When I had emailed her immediately after the

     meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on 13 March (POL00107702) and had first

     mentioned my proposal for commissioning a new independent review, she

     replied "Sounds a good way forward". But following the resistance from Susan

     Crichton and Mike Young, it seemed to me that Paula Vennells did not take a

     position one way or the other; but she did support my view after I continued to

     push for the independent review, and the business agreed to commission it.



140 I had to be persistent to ensure that a new independent review was pursued. I

     note a line of Alwen Lyons' email of 9 June 2012 (POL00096606) in this regard:

     "Alice feels this is the business pushing back unnecessarily and she feels this

     has happened throughout the process and she is having to keep pushing us!".



141 So far as the Board was concerned, I believe I mentioned the meeting and my

     proposal to Neil McCausland, but I cannot say when that was. I am confident that

     as new non-executive Directors were appointed to the Board, they shared my

     view and the reasons for it.



142 The Inquiry has asked me to consider the email chain (POL00105597) of 3 April

     2012. 1 do not recall my conversation with Paula Vennells that is referenced in

     the email. I cannot therefore be sure why it is said that I agreed that Moya

     Greene's agreement to brief Oliver Letwin MP with Paula Vennells about the



                                        70
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     security of the Horizon system, after he raised issues about an affected sub-

     postmistress who was being prosecuted, was "inappropriate". But I am

    reasonably sure that this was because the Post Office was no longer part of

    Royal Mail Group — the separation occurred on 1 April 2012 — and therefore it

    was inappropriate for the CEO of Royal Mail to be involved in such a meeting

    which was likely to lead to action that the Post Office alone would be taking. I

     thought that the Post Office should handle Oliver Letwin's enquiry by itself and

    as I was in the process of planning a further meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on the

    issue at the time, it made sense to treat both Parliamentarians in the same way.

    I note that in Paula's letter to Oliver Letwin of the following day, she extended to

    him my invitation to Lord Arbuthnot to visit the Post Office's Head Office for a

    demonstration of the Horizon system, either with Lord Arbuthnot or

    independently (POL00115849). I am also asked whether I agree with Paula's

     statement in that letter about the rigorous testing of Horizon and that certain

     checks and procedures in respect of keying and balancing errors "resolve

     virtually all [Horizon] discrepancies satisfactorily". I cannot recall whether I had

    any visibility over that letter and the specific statement about the resolution of

    discrepancies; however, on the basis of the assurances that I have referred to

    above, I believed at the time in the robustness and safety of Horizon and its

     previous testing.



143 The Inquiry has asked about my recollection of the meeting between me, Paula

    Vennells and Duncan Tait (CEO) and Rod Vawdry (Vice Chairman) of Fujitsu

    referred to in the 18 April 2012 Board minutes (POL00021506). The minutes

    record "Paula Venells reported that she and the chairman had met with Duncan



                                         71
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    Tait (CEO) and Rod Vawdry (Vice Chairman) of Fujitsu and that she [emphasis

    added] had a further follow up meeting on 19th April". The minutes suggest I did

    not attend the meeting on 19 April 2012 and that accords with the fact that I have

    no recollection of such a meeting. On 15 March 2012 I did attend a dinner with

    Fujitsu executives (referred     to in the 18 April 2012 Board minutes

    (POL00021505) and it is possible that there was a follow-up meeting that Paula

    Vennells attended, which I did not. I do recall that the purpose of the dinner was

    to explain to Fujitsu what the strategy was for the Post Office now that it was

    independent, as part of a series of meetings with a number of key stakeholders,

    including the Bank of Ireland and with Ministers and senior officials around

    Whitehall. I do not remember whether the integrity of Horizon came up during

    this meeting; the meeting was to get Fujitsu to understand the new position of

    the Post Office.



144 The Inquiry has asked me to consider Angela van den Bogerd's email to Craig

    Tuthill (to which I was not a party) on 1 May 2012 (POL00085836), where she

    says that I asked Simon Baker of the Post Office "to find a way of demonstrating

    that the Horizon system [was] robust and not subject to "glitches" as claimed by

    the JFSA former spmrs". I do not recall using those words. I would have wanted

    to prepare thoroughly for the meeting with the MPs; I note that Craig was asked

    to "provide an easy to understand walk through document of [the Post Office's]

    appointments and training approach" for the MPs, in Alwen's email. We had a

    Model Branch in our office and I thought that it would be an informative

    experience for MPs to be taken through an interactive demonstration.




                                       72
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




145 By the time of Angela van den Bogerd's email I recall that we had resolved at the

     Post Office to commit to a further independent investigation of Horizon, after my

     persistence, to be discussed with the MPs. I — and, I assumed, others - were

     aiming to help MPs to understand at the meeting the basis for our belief in the

     integrity of the Horizon system, based on the assurances that we had received

     about its safety.



146 The meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP took place on 17 May

     2012. I have been asked about my preparations for this meeting alongside my

     interactions with others at the Post Office. I cannot recall any details to add to

     Angela van den Bogerd's email discussed above (POL00085836), which shows

     that different teams around the Post Office were assisting with the preparations;

     my email to Paula Vennells and others on 13 May 2012 about the first draft of

     the briefing pack, in which I said (among other things) that we needed a more

     open and constructive tone in the meeting (POL00105601); and the eventual

     briefing pack for the 17 May 2012 meeting (POL00105479), which has my

     handwriting on it. This briefing pack showed that there had been preparations

     around the business for the meeting, including presentations in respect of the

     background to Horizon and its use within the Post Office, a run-through of specific

     cases and case studies where prosecutions had been made on the basis of

     Horizon data; and background from the Post Office's then-Head of IT, Lesley

     Sewell. The briefing pack details some of the assurances that the latter

     presentation would give attendees about the safety of Horizon:




                                        73
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      "Although we recognize that Horizon is not perfect, no computer systems is, it

      has been audited by internal and external teams, it has also been tested in the

      courts and no evidence of problems found (of the nature suggested by JFSA)"



      "Horizon was designed with integrity in mind from the very beginning. An

      upgraded version of Horizon was deployed 2 years ago. Both versions of

      Horizon were built on the same principles of reliability and integrity:



      o An audit trail is created for each transaction.

      o Each transaction is protected with a digital signature to prevent change or

      tampering

      o Reconciliation processes automatically detects any problems"



      "As I said I'm fairly new to the Post Office from the evidence I've seen I believe

      our computer system is sound."



147 I cannot recall specifically to what extent the Post Office's IT and problem

     management teams were involved in preparing for the meeting; however, I note

     that the executives (as shown by Angela van den Bogerd's email above) would

     have been heavily involved in preparing for the meeting and delegating

     preparations around the business.



148 I think my email of 13 May 2012, demonstrates clearly my approach to handling

     Lord Arbuthnot's concerns (POL00105601). I was keen for us to be open,

     constructive, and put forward the independent investigation which we had


                                         74
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     discussed. This was both because I thought it was the right thing to do and also

     the most effective way to command the confidence of the MPs, who were clearly

     genuinely concerned for their constituents. On that basis I gave Paula Vennells

     and the other recipients of my email my view that their first draft of the briefing

     pack came across as too defensive, and counter-productive. I was keen to

     engage fully with Lord Arbuthnot and the other MPs in the meeting, hence I

     suggested that we factor in time to listen to them, and for them to contribute and

     interrupt the schedule of the meeting.



149 On my account of the meeting, I cannot add to the briefing pack, and I do not

     recall if I said anything about Ernst & Young's audit. I would not have said

     anything about BEDs as I was not aware of these or of this term. I was due to

     introduce the meeting according to the briefing pack and so I would have been

     speaking there to Horizon's integrity based on the assurances that I had

     received. The briefing pack suggested that I spoke at the meeting's introduction

     and its conclusion and explained that we were considering an independent audit

     of the system (POL00105479). In the same briefing pack, it is noted that we

     proposed that Deloitte could conduct the review. My recollection is that at some

     point Lord Arbuthnot made it clear that he did not favour of one of the Big Four

     accountancy firms conducting the review.



150 In this meeting, as the briefing pack states, we were to discuss the specific cases

     of some affected sub-postmasters in greater detail with the MPs. Angela van den

     Bogerd, who was familiar with the details of some of these cases, took the

     meeting through a very detailed demonstration of the Post Office's understanding



                                        75
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     of the cases (POL00105479). At the time, I do recall thinking that her

     demonstration was convincing; she presented stroke by stroke, as though she

     was operating a computer terminal. Angela appeared to me to be really

     knowledgeable about the details of the operations, and she struck me as being

     a very down-to-earth and straightforward person.



151 My recollection is that at that meeting, Lord Arbuthnot seemed persuaded of the

     arguments made, as I was. Atimeline document that I have reviewed states that

     he agreed with the idea of appointing forensic accountants (POL00116795).

     From an email note of the meeting (albeit drafted on 24 May) it is suggested that

     Lord Arbuthnot proposed a forensic accountant to conduct the independent

     review, to which we agreed (POL00027707).



152 Lord Arbuthnot subsequently wrote to me on 21 May 2012 as follows

     (PO LOO142368):



      "I was very pleased indeed with our meeting last week. Thank you for seeing

      me, and for being so willing to hear things from this side of the fence.



      What we agreed regarding how we proceed sounds very good indeed. I have

      asked Janet Walker in my office to contact Paula Vennells to discuss the details

      about the initial meeting with other MPs. I would like to propose something for

      the week starting 18 June. Until Janet speaks to Paula, I am not divulging

      details of our meeting to anyone. It strikes me that we ought to talk to MPs first

      before briefing any wider, and I hope you might agree.



                                        76
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




       Thank you again. It was good to see you, and I am sure what is proposed is

       exactly what ought to be done."



153 I replied on 23 May 2012 stating that we agreed to this meeting and Paula

      Vennells, Angela van den Bogerd and I would come to the next meeting with a

      proposal about the way forward — including having found someone suitable to

      carry out the task identified with a Terms of Reference and a timescale

      (POL00105486). That same day, the Board minutes record that Paula and I

      updated the Board that the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP

      had been a success: the Post Office team had taken them through their

      constituency cases, and we had agreed to use a forensic accountant to

      investigate the system and give further comfort to those concerned about the

      cases (P0L00021507).



(E)    KEY EVENTS - JUNE 2012 TO JUNE 2013



154 In the next section of this statement, I will turn to the key events in the period

      June 2012 to June 2013, which includes the instruction of Second Sight and the

      issuing of their Interim Report.



Instruction of Second Sight and engagement with the JFSA



155 I have been asked by the Inquiry whether I and the other members of the Board

      were briefed about a note of a conference with Richard Morgan KC on 4 July



                                         77
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




    2012, that was attended by Susan Crichton and Hugh Flemington on the Post

    Office's side (POL00006484). I have reviewed this note and the Board pack and

    minutes in respect of the 19 September 2012 meeting (POL00027558,

    POL00021509). I do not recall this advice and the Board pack and minutes do

    not appear to refer to it; nor does the additional disclosure that I have received

    from the Post Office say that I was sent or briefed on the advice, and so I cannot

    assist the Inquiry with this set of questions. To the best of my recollection, I was

    not informed about this conference or the fact it had taken place.



156 There is an email of 18 September 2012 when I updated Paula Vennells and

    Alwen Lyons (among others) after meeting with Lord Arbuthnot that day

    (POL000096971). In that meeting (as the email records) I said that the Post

    Office was disappointed that we had had no JFSA cases to date in the Second

    Sight review, as we wanted the JFSA team to engage. Lord Arbuthnot outlined

    that the JFSA wanted `total immunity' so that more cases could come forwards

    but he saw that the Post Office could not do that; I agreed with him that it would

    be so much better if we could work with the JFSA. Though I had encouraged

    Paula Vennells and Susan Crichton to take ownership of the Second Sight

    project, I continued to contribute to the dialogue with Lord Arbuthnot and I was

    able to assist when matters got difficult, as they appeared to have become here

    in respect of JFSA's lack of engagement. In a follow-up email, I arranged to

    speak to Paula and Alwen to give them a "bit more colour", but I cannot recall

    what I meant by that phrase (nor, that further meeting, of which there does not

    appear to be a note).




                                        78
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




157 I have been asked about the background to the appointment of Second Sight,

     including how Second Sight was identified to lead the review; who at the Post

     Office was responsible for the decision to appoint Second Sight; and whether the

     Post Office received or relied on any legal advice when appointing Second Sight.



158 On the first point, of how Second Sight were identified to lead the review, I feel

     confident recalling that Susan Crichton identified and suggested Second Sight.

     She had either come across their work before or worked with them in a previous

     capacity. I remember asking Susan whether they had significant experience in

     this area and on how to operate in a political environment. I recall being

     reassured about that. I note that on 21 June 2012, Paula Vennells met with Ron

     Warmington of Second Sight and was impressed with him (updating Susan and

     me afterwards) (P0L00105477): "I have just met Ron Warmington and want to

     put on record that he would do an excellent job for us: exactly the right quality

     level of engagement, etc., we're looking for. I made it very clear to Ron that our

     primary objective of this exercise is to be transparent and to deal with whatever

     outcomes and conclusions he comes to."



159 I remember meeting the Second Sight team around the time they were appointed

     and making it clear to them that I wanted them to pursue a rigorous investigation

     and telling them that if they needed to they could ask to see me at any point in

     their work. I do not recall them ever asking for this.



160 I have been reminded about Second Sight's proposal for the project, which was

     dated 1 June 2012 (POL00096576). This spoke about determining conclusions



                                         79
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




   from sample cases and how the review would seek to determine whether the

   Post Office had "thoroughly investigated the facts, including the alleged

   perpetrator's claims about Post Office systems and other inadequacies". This

   document refers to the fact that Second Sight would need powerful access rights

   to Post Office data and Post Office employees and agents. I do not recall the

   specifics of what happened in the days which followed between this proposal

   document and 6 June 2012. I also note that the proposal document said: "We

   are delighted that, in our initial meeting, there was not the slightest suggestion

   that the Post Office is calling for anything less than the sort of comprehensive,

   thorough, independent Review that we would be delighted to undertake"; and

   "We will be better able to forecast over-all costs once we have completed the

   initial review of some of the selected cases and that will give you an opportunity

   to maintain control over costs".



161 On   6   June   (POL00096574      and   POL00096575)       and   7   June   2012

   (POL00105472) Susan Crichton sent Paula Vennells and me drafts of the Terms

   of Reference for Second Sight's work. I do recall thinking that these early drafts

   were quite imprecise. On the 7 June 2012 email Susan refers to comments that

   Paula and I had given her that morning (I assume in person). She also said in

   that email that she had given thought to the cases in which sub-postmasters had

   been criminally prosecuted — she thought that we did not want to be seen to re-

   open these cases, but should position this as a more limited review of the existing

   evidence, while for those who had not been prosecuted POL should offer a full

   and independent investigation.




                                      80
                                                                                          WI TN00740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




162 On 8 June 2012 I replied to Susan Crichton (and others) about Susan's draft of

     the Terms of Reference for Second Sight (POL00113792) and attached a revised

     draft to this email. My first overarching comment was about including wording as

     to what the review was about, in order to improve clarity. Then I addressed what

     I saw as the 'imprecise' nature of some of the drafting in the initial draft, by taking

     out some unnecessary words and clarifying some matters. I made a comment

     that it "would be a good idea if someone on the team could put on a JFSPmasters

     hat on and see whether that uncovers any hostages to fortune" — meaning that I

     was keen for us to think about how the Terms of Reference would read from the

     point of view of sub-postmasters, and whether it was properly addressing the

     concerns of them and their representatives. I also said:



     "I have 3 outstanding thoughts —



     First, as I signal in my [Drafting Note], I don't get the emphasis on the defence

     material — won't the investigators want to look at all the relevant material whether

     defence or prosecution? If we focus too much on the defence in the [Terms of

     Reference], does this suggest that we think there is something we've overlooked

     in the past?



     Second, and connected, should we say that the reviewers will have access to

     any relevant material which the Post Office holds so that we can't be accused of

     being selective in what we give them? If so, that should come in the same place

     as the reference to MPs/[Sub-Postmasters}. (I took out the reference to the




                                          81
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     lawyers in this connection because I didn't want to encourage them, but that may

     be wrong — I don't feel strongly about this.)



     Third, should we say for the avoidance of doubt, that we will publish the findings

     in full?"



163 The following day (9 June 2012), I sent a further follow-up to Susan Crichton,

     Paula Vennells and Alwen Lyons in respect of the Terms of Reference

     (POL00096604):



     "I am clear that we should include ALL the MPs' cases, irrespective of whether

     they have been decided in Court. If we try to draw a distinction here we will be

     accused of picking cases to suit ourselves and being vulnerable on the ones we

     omit. We'll have a row about that instead of moving the issue on.



     On reflection, I don't buy the argument that we would somehow undermine the

     Court process by doing this. There are plenty of ways in which people go over

     ground which has been settled in Court and if there weren't, no-one would ever

     be able to get a conviction overturned. And if (which we don't believe) there were

     new evidence in a case which had been decided, we would want to do, and be

     seen to do, the right thing by that.



     So I stick by the TOR as drafted yesterday on this important point.




                                            82
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




    Where I think there may be an issue is the line between Shoosmith's cases which

    have been declared to us and those (many more) which they have merely hinted

    at. I suggest the way to deal with those may be by time, ie we'll include those we

     know about as of Monday week but not those which come after. As we said at

    our meeting, it would be open to the independent reviewers to say in their findings

     that they think we should extend the review.



    I am sorry to be bothering you with this on a Saturday but time is against us,

    especially as Paula is seeing James Arbuthnot on Monday afternoon and I feel

     very strongly about this."



164 I have been asked about what objectives I pursued when advising on the Terms

    of Reference. I think that the email exchanges above showed my objectives well.

    I was keen to be transparent and open and conduct the review in a way which

    would get to the truth. That is why I was keen for there to be clarity in the draft

    Terms of Reference and also why I aimed to expand its scope, by making clear

     that the investigators would have access to all of the relevant material and that

     the review should apply to all affected sub-postmasters - including those who

    had been convicted by the criminal courts. I thought this was the right thing to do

    in the circumstances: if there was new evidence in a case which had been

    decided by the courts, POL needed to do the right thing. And it was right from a

     perception point of view — I did not feel that people would trust us if the Terms of

    Reference had a limited scope and was selective in this respect.




                                         83
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




165 I have been shown an email between Alwen Lyons and Paula Vennells which

    forwards my email above of the same day and discusses it (POL00096606).

    Alwen refers to the case of Ms Seema Misra. Ms Misra worked as a sub-

    postmistress (and is also a witness to this Inquiry). At the time she had recently

    been convicted in particularly difficult personal circumstances. Her case had

    understandably received publicity because she had gone to prison where she

    had given birth to her baby. Alwen says: "Susan's anxiety and she raised this at

    the meeting with Alice before [Paula] joined was whether now contacting [Ms

    Misra] to tell her we review the case would be a red rag to a bull", given the

    circumstances of the case. I have been asked what discussion I had on this issue

    with Susan Crichton; I do not remember this discussion and I am unaware of any

    meeting note between me and Susan about this. In the next line of the email

    Alwen highlights that there had been tensions between primarily Susan and me,

    in respect of this and its implications for the scope of the review: "Alice feels this

    is the business pushing back unnecessarily and she feels this has happened

    throughout the process and she is having to keep pushing us!".



166 My involvement with how the Post Office handled Second Sight and complaints

    against the IT system would have been very limited — it was handled by the

    executives. Aside from my involvement in Second Sight's Terms of Reference

    which I have already described, (and, as I will come onto, some high-level points

    about POL's handling of them later in their engagement) I was not involved in

    this level of operational detail. It was appropriate that the executives led by Paula

    and Susan should deal with the Second Sight project operationally. However, I




                                         84
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




    was available if they ever wanted my input or guidance, and as I will explain later,

    they did turn to me when things became more difficult.



167 On 18 June 2012, there was a further meeting with James Arbuthnot and the

    other MPs. I cannot remember the extent to which I was involved in preparing

    for the meeting. Briefing was always provided for such meetings from the relevant

    areas in the Post Office and I would have reviewed it carefully but trusted the

    accuracy of the work I was given by the business. I recall that there was a private

    meeting before the main meeting, which was between Lord Arbuthnot, me and

    the executives from the Post Office who accompanied me. I do not remember

    the specifics of this private meeting. In terms of the main meeting, my

    recollections reflect the briefing document (POL00058004). The meeting I recall

    was straightforward because we were well aligned with the MPs — the key point

    of the meeting was that we were suggesting a new independent review of the

    Horizon system, which was of course what they had been pressing for



168 I have been asked about document POL00096667 which is my email to Paula

    on 19 June 2012. She forwards me an email that Lord Arbuthnot had sent earlier

    that day to Shoosmiths, in which he spoke positively about the meeting of the

    day before:



    "As you know, prior to yesterday's meeting, I met privately with the Chairman of

    Post Office Ltd and members of her staff. On each occasion, the meeting was

    cordial and productive. From these meetings, we have come up with a plan for

    the Post Office to appoint an independent forensic accountant (to be chosen in


                                        85
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     consultation with me) who will examine each case individually in order to

     establish exactly what has happened. The individual SubPostmaster / mistress

     concerned will be given the opportunity to be involved, as will his or her MP.

     Interviews will be conducted, data investigated, and in this way it is hoped that

     an explanation can be arrived at that will put to rest any question over what

     exactly has occurred.



     I must put to you here that all this is extremely sensitive. This you know, but the

     Post Office has told me and the other MPs who are interested in this matter that

     in every situation where an individual has been prosecuted for alleged fraud or

     theft involving the Horizon system, the courts have found in favour of the Post

     Office. The question was asked repeatedly of the Post Office staff yesterday

     whether there had been any case upheld where the discrepancy reported or

     found had been found to be the fault of the system. We were assured this was

     not the case.



     The MPs at the meeting were happy with the solution offered. I believe it is the

     best possible way to proceed, and am satisfied with what detail I have seen thus

     far. I have sent a press release to this effect to The Times."



169 Paula Vennells forwarded this to me and I commented that I "[just wanted] to be

     sure that he feels happy with our choice of 2nd Sight — am assuming Alwen

     [Lyons] has run that past [Lord Arbuthnot] and will pick that up with her in the

     morning" (P0L00096667). I cannot recall precisely what my views were at this

     time on the proposal to instruct Second Sight and Lord Arbuthnot's stance. I



                                         86
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    would have been pleased that Lord Arbuthnot had found the meeting the day

     before productive, and that we were taking steps to conduct a proposed review

    which at that stage was commanding the trust of Lord Arbuthnot and other

     stakeholders. I imagine that is why I commented that I wanted to be sure that

    Lord Arbuthnot was happy with the Post Office's choice of Second Sight — it was

     very important that he trusted the way forward. As previously mentioned, the day

    after this Paula met with Ron Warmington of Second Sight and was very

    impressed by him: she thought that he would do "an excellent job for [the Post

     Office]" (POL00105477).



170 I did not have any interactions with Alan Bates and the JFSA insofar as they

    related to the Horizon system or the Post Office's treatment of sub-postmasters,

    managers and counter assistants. To be very clear, in response to the Inquiry's

     question, at no point before meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and the other MPs did

    I ever (a) become aware of any BEDs or (b) understand that there were any

    actual or potential problems with the integrity of the Horizon IT system that could

     compromise its safety from the perspective of prosecutions. Before meetings

    with the MPs and other important stakeholders, I would have expected the

    executives to prepare briefing packs effectively with input from around the

     business, and I would have trusted the accuracy of work they did.



171 On 4 July 2012 there was a Board meeting and I updated the Board that Lord

    Arbuthnot and Second Sight were to meet that day and that I promised to keep

     the Board informed (POL00021508). This indicates that Second Sight had been

    appointed by this time.



                                       87
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




172 1 am asked about a further meeting with James Arbuthnot in respect of Horizon

     and Second Sight (among other things) on 4 October 2012 which is referred to

     in an email of mine (POL00107805). I cannot recall this meeting and there does

     not appear to be a note of it.



173 It is worth noting that once the Second Sight investigation started, the Post Office

     stopped pursuing criminal convictions which relied solely on Horizon data and

     also put on hold civil recovery proceedings while the report was awaited

     (POL00115924).



174 The Inquiry also asks me about my working relationship with Paula Vennells, in

     October 2012 and the level of confidence that I had in her management of

     complaints made by sub-postmasters regarding Horizon. In order to provide the

     necessary context, I shall address my working relationship with Paula throughout

     my time at the Post Office.



175 When I arrived in September 2011, Paula Vennells was the incumbent Managing

     Director of the Post Office and had been appointed to be the CEO-designate of

     the Post Office on its separation from Royal Mail. I understand that she joined

     the organisation in 2007 (as a Group Network Director). I was not involved in the

     decision about her appointment as CEO-designate; it pre-dated my appointment.

     When joining, I was struck by the wide range of challenges which faced her in

     the Managing Director and then CEO role. Throughout my tenure it remained an

     extremely demanding job.



                                         E~
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




176 My working relationship with Paula Vennells changed over time. Initially, I

    focussed on giving her the support which I thought she needed to make the

    transition from being a Managing Director to being a Chief Executive, which

    included encouraging her to work with a top class executive coach. I also sought

    to support her and build her confidence in the difficult negotiations which she and

    her team were having with the people who were effectively their bosses in Royal

    Mail.



177 Throughout my chairmanship, including the period in the Autumn of 2012, we

    met at least once a week and often spoke in between. I worked hard to support

    her, to provide a sounding board on the wide variety of issues which she and the

    business were tackling and help her grow her team. The early feedback that I

    received was that she was growing into the job. I found her to be hard-working,

    energetic, resilient and good at building and sustaining relationships with people

    both inside and outside the Post Office. I thought she was very committed to the

    demanding remit which we had been given by the Government to transform the

    Post Office and to its values.



178 Over time the challenges facing the Post Office became tougher. I did have

    concerns about her and her team's overall ability to deliver on some of the key

    objectives for the organisation. I continued to support her and to encourage her

    to find ways of strengthening her team to take some of the pressure off her.




                                       89
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




179 In relation to the handling of Horizon issues, once I had had the early meetings

     with Lord Arbuthnot and had secured the Post Office's agreement to the

     establishment of an independent review, I thought it right for Paula Vennells, as

     the CEO, to become directly involved in the relationship with Lord Arbuthnot and

     other MPs and generally to take the centre stage. She agreed to this. As I explain

     elsewhere in this statement, I had no reason to doubt the views which she and

     other Post Office executives were expressing to me about the Horizon system.



180 Later I did have doubts as to her personal grip on Horizon issues and the level

     of attention that she was giving them. At the start of the 2014/5 financial year, I

     set her a specific personal objective in respect of the priority to give to Horizon

     issues (WITN00740128), as follows: "Project Sparrow. Personally lead

     programme to ensure risks and issues are being tightly managed, keeping the

     board updated on progress". This objective was set by me as a result of my

     concerns initially dating from the lead-up to the publication of Second Sight's

     Interim Report in July 2013 and later, the mounting difficulties arising from the

     delivery of the Mediation Scheme and the deteriorating relationship between the

     Post Office and the MPs campaigning on behalf of the sub-postmasters.



181 Returning to the key events of this period, I am asked about a summary of a

     meeting between Paula Vennells and Martin Edwards of the Post Office, Alan

     Bates and Lord Arbuthnot that was held on 4 October 2012 (POL00097030). I

     was not at this meeting but it appears from the note that it was a "reasonably

     cordial" meeting which focused on how to encourage sub-postmasters to submit

     current cases of alleged Horizon errors to the Second Sight investigation. On 9



                                        90
                                                                                 WI TNO0740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




    October 2012, Paula forwarded the email saying "PPo Alice 121" which likely

    meant that she was asking for this meeting summary to be printed for one of our

    one-to-one meetings. I do not remember this one-to-one meeting and these

    meetings were not minuted. I do note that on 13 November 2012, 1 attended an

    ARC meeting (P0L00021430). In the pack for this meeting, the ARC briefing

    book provided an update about the Horizon litigation being brought by

    Shoosmiths. It was noted that: "POL Ltd is also actively considering proposals

    from Justice for Subpostmasters Alliance, an organisation "established to raise

    awareness of the issues within the Post Office Horizon system", to develop a

    system by which individual subpostmasters can raise concerns with Horizon

    within a "no blame" framework" (WITNO0740129). Subsequently a joint paper

    agreed between the Post Office and the JFSA was issued in December 2012,

    giving guidance to sub-postmasters as to the process by which they could raise

    concerns about Horizon — essentially through the JFSA or alternatively directly

    to Second Sight — with a deadline of 28 February 2013. Ultimately, the 47 cases

    examined by Second Sight came either through the JFSA or from MPs; so

    eventually we did receive some cases from the JFSA. There was then on 21

    November 2012 another Board meeting; in response to the Inquiry's question, I

    cannot recall the substance of the Second Sight and Horizon update that the

    minutes say Alwen Lyons provided.



182 There was a Board meeting on 23 January 2013 in which I provided an update

    to the Board (POL00021510):




                                      91
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




      "The Chairman updated the Board on the work being undertaken by 2nd Sight

      to investigate the claims made against the Horizon system. A cut-off date of the

      end of February had been given to JFSA (Justice For Subpostmasters Alliance)

      and individual subpostmasters to send in any cases, with 2nd Sight aiming to

      complete their work in the summer. To date there was no evidence to suggest

      fault."



183 In terms of this update, my recollections and notes do not add anything to the

     summary above. I am asked who reported to me that "To date there was no

     evidence to suggest fault" and on what basis I made that comment. This would

     have been reported to me through the executives: either from Paula, Susan

     Crichton or another senior executive. I was provided briefings for these meetings

     by Alwen Lyons and the information may have been in one of those briefings.



184 On 7 March 2013 Lord Arbuthnot wrote to me (POL00097588), stating that he

     was going to host a meeting on 25 March 2013 at Westminster to receive an

     update from Ron Warmington and Ian Henderson of Second Sight on the

     progress of the investigation. Lord Arbuthnot invited me to attend, alongside all

     other MPs and constituents who had raised this matter with them, and Alan Bates

     and Kay Linnell of the JFSA. Lord Arbuthnot was very keen that I attended, as

     were Ron Warmington and Ian Henderson.



185 Lord Arbuthnot also raised with me two further points in this letter. First, that

     Second Sight's investigations had raised questions "over the absolute integrity

     of Horizon, though without their being so fundamental as to say that the system



                                       92
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    is not fit for purpose" (POL00097588). He raised the risk that issues could arise

    with existing sub-postmasters as well as those currently being investigated and

    said he hoped "the Post Office would be ready to address this issue". Secondly,

    that MPs were likely to voice strong defences of their constituents at the meeting,

    and so he recommended that the Post Office came prepared accordingly.



186 Lord Arbuthnot also expressed his gratitude (POL00097588):



      "They tell me that investigations are proceeding well, and that your ongoing

      support and willingness to continue funding their efforts is enormously

      appreciated. I am writing to MPs this week letting them know this, so that they

      are not under any illusion of your commitment to this process. It is very

      important that they see this, and I shall do my utmost to bring it to their

      attention...



      I would like to say in conclusion that I am impressed beyond my expectations

      with not only how the investigations are proceeding, but of your continuing

      support. I cannot recall a more important campaign, nor one where the end

      result has been so consistently supported by all parties involved. You have my

      gratitude and admiration for how the Post Office is handling this."



187 I am asked about what my views were on the progress of the Second Sight

    investigation at this stage. I was naturally very pleased to have Lord Arbuthnot's

    trust and gratitude for the progress of the investigation — I had wanted him and

    the other MPs, and ideally the sub-postmasters that they were supporting, to trust



                                        93
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    the review and our intentions. I always wanted the review to be a collaborative

    process with Lord Arbuthnot and it looked as though we were on course to

    achieve that.



188 However, I did also want to understand what was meant by the somewhat

    ambiguous phrasing of "questions have been raised over the absolute integrity

    of Horizon, though not without their being so fundamental as to say that the

    system is not fit for purpose" (POL00097588). It was unclear what this phrasing

    meant, and particularly whether it could mean there were possible findings of

    systemic issues with Horizon that had made any prosecutions unsafe. I will come

    onto Second Sight's further comment about this phrasing shortly, in a meeting

    that they held with Paula Vennells and Alwen Lyons. A few months later,

    however, the Second Sight Interim Report (as I will also come onto) stated that

    they had found "no systemic issues" with Horizon from the review that they had

    conducted to date, an important finding which is inconsistent with this phrasing.



189 As noted in the Post Office's update sent to me on 11 March 2013

    (POL00097589), Second Sight were set to receive substantial fees - £250,000 —

    though their initial estimate of £100,000 was based on a small number of cases

    being reviewed (6 — 12). I wanted to ensure that the investigation was rigorous,

    professional and got to the truth, but that at the same it represented value for

    money, as I was always conscious that the Post Office was in receipt of a large

    amount of public funds. The investigation had also slipped in timetable — the Post

    Office had requested that it was completed before the summer recess, but it had

    been delayed until mid-autumn. The Post Office had not imposed budgetary or


                                       94
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     time constraints on the investigation in order to ensure investigative

     independence (see the briefing note sent to me on 19 March 2013,

     P0L00097670), but we were bound to consider the question of costs. I also note,

     as mentioned above, that Second Sight had undertaken in their proposal

     document to give a more detailed costs estimate: "We will be better able to

     forecast overall costs once we have completed the initial review of some of the

     selected cases and that will give you an opportunity to maintain control over

     costs" (POL00096576).



190 The same update document (P0L00097589) at paragraph 4 described 8

     'Common Problem Themes' that Second Sight were identifying in the course of

     their work. This paragraph said that these themes "warrant[ed] further

     investigation". As these findings were provisional, the Post Office had not yet

     submitted its evidence in reply, which is a point that I raised to Lord Arbuthnot in

     my letter to him of 22 March 2013 (that I will come onto); as their investigation

     was not complete, I imagine that I would have wanted to wait to see what Second

     Sight's eventual findings were before taking any further action about them.



191 I am asked what I did about Lord Arbuthnot's letter of 7 March 2013. I replied a

     fortnight later, and in the meanwhile I received an update from Alwen Lyons and

     Paula Vennells about their further meeting with Second Sight from 19 March

     2013, to try to understand the position (POL00097723). Alwen and Paula met

     with Ron Warmington and Ian Henderson of Second Sight that day and Alwen

     updated me that:




                                         95
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      "At the meeting this afternoon 2        Sight were surprised that [Lord Arbuthnot]

      now felt there was harder evidence against the system. They used the phrases;

      no evidence of widespread systemic failure; the number of cases we are seeing

      is small; the pattern aligns with the themes which are already in the public

      domain.



      They assured Susan and I that they intend to make it very clear on Monday that

      they have been `consolidating and distilling allegations and that the Post Office

      have not had the opportunity to respond'.



      Some of the evidence is plausible but is as yet untested.



      They are nervous about Monday, especially as it now emerges that Shoosmiths

      are attending the meeting. They know that loose language will be very

      unhelpful, and realise that they may end up in the press, which will not help the

      investigation."



192 I think I started to have doubts at this point. I was concerned that we might be

     being given a different picture from the one Lord Arbuthnot was being given by

     Second Sight. Lord Arbuthnot had written to us on 7 March 2013 saying that after

     speaking with Second Sight, he was worried that there was harder evidence

     against the system (POL00097588). Here, Alwen Lyons and Paula Vennells

     were being assured that Second Sight did not think that there were issues; I

     would have been reassured by this report from Second Sight. However, I would

     have wondered why Lord Arbuthnot had a different view after speaking to Second



                                         96
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     Sight. Indeed I wrote to Alwen and Paula later that day (also P0L00097723)

     saying that I was worried about the gap between what Second Sight had said to

     Alwen and what they had said to Lord Arbuthnot. Alwen and I agreed that we

     needed to consider how to continue to engage with Lord Arbuthnot going

     forwards and not leave it solely to Second Sight. In terms of my view as to

     whether the communications between the Post Office, Second Sight, JFSA and

     the MPs at the time were being well managed, I think my actions above suggest

     that I was not convinced they were at this point. I imagine that I would have seen

     my agreement with Alwen, to keep this point on our radar, as a prudent step

     because of my concern about this discrepancy in perceptions.



193 I can see from the correspondence that I wrote to Lord Arbuthnot in advance of

     the meeting he had organised for 25 March 2013 (WITN00740130). The first

     point that I made is that we were absolutely committed to supporting the

     investigation, and would continue to do everything we could to help Second Sight

     gather the evidence they needed to arrive at a robust set of conclusions. I

     thanked him for his collaborative approach and said I was pleased by the strong

     working relationships between the stakeholders. I said that I understood that the

     purpose of the upcoming meeting was for Second Sight to provide an update on

     the process and outline how they proposed to marshal the complex evidence

     base to arrive at a set of conclusions by summer recess. I said:



      "I know that you and Second Sight share my concern that it would be premature

      to attempt to draw conclusions from the evidence gathered to date, particularly

      given that the sequencing of the investigation means that we have not yet had



                                        97
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      an opportunity to submit our own evidence on the reported issues. Clearly this

      needs to be a facts-based investigation that allows all relevant parties to submit

      information on the matters under review".



194 On 27 March 2013 Alwen Lyons forwarded me an email from Lord Arbuthnot in

    which he said that Ian Henderson's (of Second Sight) note of the meeting with

    MPs was different from his own recollection of the meeting, in some important

    ways (POL00097887). Alwen recognised that the disparity might be explained

    by the fact that Lord Arbuthnot left the meeting earlier than Second Sight and

    they continued the discussion with MPs without him. However, Lord Arbuthnot

    stated clearly in this email that he disagreed with the recollection and

    characterisation of the meeting by Ian Henderson:



    194.1 Lord Arbuthnot disagreed that there was any "desire" from MPs to report

           on a wider range of issues than was planned in the Second Sight report;



    194.2 When Ian Henderson said that there was broad support to run a series of

           tests in the Model Office, Lord Arbuthnot said that this was "not really

           discussed";



    194.3 Lord Arbuthnot disagreed with Ian that there was any expression of views

           from MPs about internal communications within the Post Office, and

           disagreed that a suspension of all prosecutions activity by the Post Office

           was discussed at the meeting. This added to my concerns about Second

           Sight.



                                        98
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    194.4 Lord Arbuthnot also said that Ian Henderson's opinion that "extensive

           concern" was expressed about the Post Office's investigation and

           prosecution processes was "stretching things a bit".



195 It was hard to see how Lord Arbuthnot and Second Sight's recollection of a

    meeting could be so different — particularly when Second Sight were sometimes

    asserting that MPs were raising certain issues, or expressed broad support for

    certain issues, that Lord Arbuthnot did not remember being discussed. Though

    Alwen had explained that Lord Arbuthnot left the meeting earlier than Second

    Sight had, this did not appear fully to explain the disparities in their respective

    memories of the meeting. Lord Arbuthnot appeared to be giving his recollection

    of the matters that he was privy to at the meeting. I did not hear afterwards that

    Second Sight challenged his account of the meeting setting out his

    disagreements clearly.



196 On 8 May 2013, Paula wrote to me and thanked me for my "challenge" that

    morning (POL00098158), however I cannot remember what that challenge was

    about and my notes do not help me with this. Paula's email was about "a

    suggestion which could wrap this up for [the Post Office] and [Lord Arbuthnot]";

    again, I do not recall what this is referring to.



197 There was a Board meeting on 21 May 2013 (POL00021513) and I am asked

    why the Board felt the need to request an update on the Horizon position with

    the Second Sight review at this meeting. I do not recall there being a specific


                                         99
                                                                                          WI TNO0740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




          reason for the note being requested; I think it would have been good corporate

          governance for the Board to leave the operational conduct of the review to the

          senior executives, but ask for periodic updates in order to stay informed and hold

          the senior executives to account about their handling of the project. It is likely

          that the Board thought this was an appropriate juncture for an update.



     198 I am asked also whether there was any change in approach by the Post Office

          to the existence of BEDs since the instruction of Second Sight. As previously

          explained, I did not understand that Horizon was subject to BEDs nor had I heard

          of that acronym until many years after I had left the Post Office.



BED 3 Suspense Account Bug and Helen Rose Report



     199 I have been asked to consider a note drafted by Gareth Jenkins of Fujitsu entitled

          "Local Suspense Problem" (FUJ00083375) dated 15 May 2013 and a draft report

          drafted by Helen Rose a month later (dated 12 June 2013) entitled "Horizon data

          Lepton SPSO 191320" (FUJ00086811). As noted at paragraphs 81.7.1 and

          81.7.2 above, I have no recollection of ever being shown either of these

          documents during my time at the Post Office, nor do I recall their contents being

          discussed with me.



     200 The minutes for the meeting of the Board on 1 July 2013 record that Paula

          Vennells provided an update on Horizon in which she informed the Board that

          Second Sight's interim report had concluded that there were "no systemic issues




                                             100
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     with the Horizon computer system but had highlighted areas for improvement in

     support areas such as training" (POL00021515).



201 Paula Vennells went on to note that "Horizon, like any large computer system,

     would occasionally have anomalies and two were know of over recent years

     [sic]". I would assume that this is a reference to the issues identified in Gareth

     Jenkins' note of 15 May 2013 and Helen Rose's report of 12 June 2013, but I

     cannot be sure. Paula provided comfort to the Board that "these anomalies had

     not affected any of the cases which Second Sight had reviewed" and confirmed

     that Second Sight were aware of the "anomalies" and would cover them off in

     their next report (POL00021515).



Second Sight's Interim Report



202 I have been asked about my involvement as Chair of the Board with the

     preparations for the receipt of Second Sight's first interim report and the Post

     Office's response to this.



203 The responsibility for these preparations and the Post Office's response

     ultimately rested with Paula Vennells and Susan Crichton. The Board requested

     an update in May 2013 about the progress of the investigation. I do not recall if

     this update was ever provided and have found no supporting documents to

     indicate that it was.




                                        101
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




204 I am largely reliant on contemporaneous documents as to what my involvement

    was on these matters.



205 On 24 May 2013, Paula Vennells emailed me to say that she was organising

    weekly updates with Alwen Lyons (30-minute weekly conversations) in the run-

    up to the receipt of the first Interim Report (POL00098376)



206 On 28 June 2013, there were further emails between Paula Vennells and me on

    this topic. By this time, Paula was aware of the gist of the draft findings that

    Second Sight were going to make. First, Paula updated me about a meeting that

    must have taken place the previous day, presumably internally within the Post

    Office, about preparing for the draft report which, at that point, she expected to

    arrive on 1 July 2013 (P0L00098798). In fact, as we will come onto, the full draft

    did not arrive until 5 July 2013. She updated me that Alwen Lyons was going to

    be in touch on who was responsible for next steps within the business; that Susan

    Crichton had cancelled the last day of her holiday, in order to meet Second Sight

    on 1 July; and that the Post Office was getting the "best brains" on the subject.

    Paula then forwarded Alwen Lyons' notes on next steps to me (POL00098782).



207 Around this time, I must have started to have concerns about Second Sight's

    work in light of what Paula Vennells was reporting to me. The only concerns I

    recall having about Second Sight before this had been earlier in the year when it

    seemed to me that Second Sight had been giving `mixed messages' to the Post

    Office when compared to what they were saying to Lord Arbuthnot and other MPs

    at the recent meeting on 25 March 2013.


                                      102
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




208 1 do not believe that I or other Board members saw the draft report. There were

     I think, two reasons for this. First, the full interim draft report was not received

     from Second Sight until Friday 5 July. This was several days after the Board

     discussion on 1 July and only three days (including a weekend) before the

     meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and MPs at which Second Sight were due to present

     their findings. Second, I am not sure whether, even if there had been plenty of

     time to review the draft, it would have been appropriate for the Board to have

     seen it at this stage given the factual and technical parts of the report which fell

     to the senior executives to consider. We did receive summaries and updates

     about the report and the Post Office's reactions from the senior executives. I was

     sent a copy of the final version of the report on Sunday 7 July and asked the

     senior executives to circulate it to the full Board, as I will come onto.



209 By 28 June 2013 I think the broad views expressed about Second Sight's work,

     as set out in the 1 July 2013 Board update (POL00098878), had also been

     communicated to me directly by Paula Vennells. I understood those to be:



     209.1 Second Sight had not identified any systemic issues with Horizon,

            however there appeared to be `loose language' in the draft report which

            could cause people unwarranted concern.



     209.2 The Post Office was concerned about the way Second Sight had dealt

            with the issue of two `anomalies' in the system. In both cases, the Post

            Office had themselves identified these. They had put in place measures



                                         103
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




            to   address   the   anomalies    with   the   affected   sub-postmasters,

            comprehensive audits had been performed, and procedures put in place

            to catch future 'anomalies' earlier. The Post Office had drawn these to the

            attention of Second Sight but the latter were giving the impression that

            they had found these themselves (as identified in said Board update).



     209.3 Second Sight had not yet reviewed all the evidence the Post Office had

           given them. It was very hard to see in those circumstances that their

           interim conclusions would be sound. I felt that the Post Office was entitled

            to sound and evidence-based conclusions from Second Sight.



     209.4 There was a concern that Second Sight were not focusing on empirical

            evidence and sometimes relied on recollections of events; there was

            another concern that they `led the witness' in some cases.



210 To be very clear, my concern was never that Second Sight might reach adverse

    findings against the Horizon system. That was the whole point of having an

     independent investigation — to get to the bottom of the issue. But I was concerned

     to ensure that any findings they did reach were properly evidenced and

     supported. From the Post Office's reports, it seemed that Second Sight were

     concluding that there were "no systemic issues" with Horizon, whilst in other parts

     of the report they were using loose language which could undermine confidence

     in Horizon. I also could not see how they could come to very significant findings

     without hearing all the available evidence.




                                        104
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




211 The Horizon system was critically important to the Post Office. The sub-

     postmasters and people in the Crown offices and members of the public around

     the country relied on it daily for transactions. If there was any suggestion that it

     could not be relied upon, it could make the public think that their money was not

     safe with us and worry the people using the system. I was not at any point trying

     to bury information that might reveal that there was something wrong with

     Horizon. If something was wrong, we needed to know, to be open about it and

     act on it. If the findings were not evidence-based however, it was going to cause

     serious damage for no reason — and it did not appear that all of Second Sight's

     criticisms were going to be properly evidenced.



212 The email from Martin Edwards to Paula Vennells refers to a reputational risk for

     the Post Office      if legal action     was   pursued against Second Sight

     (POL00098782). I do not know where that idea came from. The Board and I were

     certainly not considering legal action against Second Sight. I cannot remember

     others in the Post Office mentioning this.



213 As Chair, I was in a position to stand back from the immediacy of certain issues

     and crises and think more broadly, drawing on my past experience. I asked

     whether the lawyers were "thinking about implications for [the Post Office] and

     the people in it" on 28 June 2013 in the context (as I say in that email) of the

     "Maxwellisation/Salmon letters angle" — this is the legal process by which

     organisations and people are given a right of reply to draft findings in an

     investigation (POL00098798). I think that such representations are important out

     of fairness and to make sure that investigations get to the truth.



                                        105
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




214 1 cannot recall what I meant when I said in the email, "Keep aiming high here!"

     (POL00098798). That is, for the goal of no interim/no meeting. But I recognise

     that is not within our control". Other emails around that time do not shed light on

     this phrase. We may have been considering whether interim findings could be

     avoided, so that Second Sight would produce a full report once they had in fact

     reviewed all the evidence provided by the Post Office — but that involves

     speculation on my part.



215 On 30 June 2013, I said to Paula Vennells that we needed to update the Board

     about the Second Sight investigation, because there was a danger that we could

     be in a "difficult situation" (my emphasis) after the draft report was provided and

     there might not be another opportunity to get the Board's involvement

     (POL00098817). Clearly, I thought that the Board should be properly briefed by

     the senior executives about the fast-moving developments on this issue. The

     "difficult situation" that I was referring to would have been the concerns which I

     have expressed in paragraph 209 above, notwithstanding the important

     conclusion that Second Sight had found "no systemic issues" with Horizon.



216 The Board had a meeting by telephone the following day, 1 July 2013, (minutes

     at POL00021515). Martin Edwards sent me speaking notes in advance for the

     update to give to the Board (POL00098877 and POL00098878). I could not have

     been provided with a draft of the Interim Report before the Board meeting

     because the Post Office itself did not receive the draft until the Friday of that

     week (5 July). I relied on the briefing pack. In respect of the two `anomalies'



                                        106
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     discussed by Second Sight, I have already mentioned above that I had not heard

     of the term 'BED' until many years after leaving the Post Office. The briefing gave

     the assurance that these were a "red herring" and explained what the Post Office

     had done both about these and any future anomalies which came to light:



      "In both cases the errors were picked up and either have been or are in the

      process    of   being   addressed    with   the   affected   sub-postmasters;     a

      comprehensive audit has been performed to check there weren't further cases

      we weren't aware of; and new procedures are being put in place to ensure such

      anomalies are spotted at an early stage in the future."



217 I am asked whether I was confident that the Post Office was aware of all potential

     BEDs with the capability of affecting accounting data. I believed in this assurance

     about the Post Office's identification and rectification of `anomalies' and its

     improved processes for dealing with any which might arise in future. In a system

     as complicated as Horizon, I would not have ruled out the possibility that further

     anomalies might be identified in future.



218 In terms of my recollection of the discussions of Second Sight at the Board

     meeting on 1 July 2013, I cannot add to the minutes (POL00021515):



      "The CEO apologised for the short notice in keeping the Board updated but

      explained that issues had arisen over the last couple of days. She gave an

      update on the Horizon review which was being undertaken by Second Sight

      and their interim report which was to be presented at a meeting of MPs on the



                                        107
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      8th July. The investigation to date had found no systemic issues with the

      Horizon computer system but had highlighted areas for improvement in support

      areas such as training.



      The CEO explained that the Horizon, like any large computer system, would

      occasionally have anomalies and two were known of over recent years. The

      Business had dealt with these anomalies to ensure no sub postmaster was out

      of pocket and these anomalies had not affected any of the cases which Second

      Sight had reviewed. Second Sight had been told of these anomalies and they

      would include them in their report.



      The CEO was concerned that the report from the independent forensic

      accountants was not as factual as expected and could lead to loose language

      at the MP meeting.



      The Board asked the Business to challenge Second Sight to ensure changes

      were made to the report where possible and asked the Business to prepare

      their communication to combat any inaccuracies."



219 I had no reason to doubt the briefing that "The investigation to date had found no

     systemic issues with the Horizon computer system but had highlighted areas for

     improvement in support areas such as training." It had been reported to me that

     Second Sight had told the senior executives this previously in person. I think that

     I understood a "systemic issue" to be a fundamental flaw with the system that

     could jeopardise its accuracy and therefore the safety of prosecutions that relied



                                        108
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     on Horizon data. As I will explain, the Post Office accepted Second Sight's view

     that some important improvements needed to be made in the training and

     support to sub-postmasters, and planned a programme of work to deliver these.

     I did not see those training and support issues as "systemic issues" with the

     computer system (and indeed, Second Sight made that distinction).          Paula

     Vennells wrote to Lord Arbuthnot later (POL00029649 as I will come onto): "We

     also discussed the vital importance of drawing a clear distinction between (i)

     systemic issues with the Horizon computer system — of which it is our

     understanding that none have been found and (ii) the wider support systems". It

     appears that both Second Sight and the Post Office were drawing this distinction,

     as Second Sight referred to "systemic issues" and training issues separately.



220 I also had no reason to doubt Paula Vennells' update that "the report.. .was not

     as factual as expected and could lead to lose language at the MP meeting." That

     was consistent with what I had been told over the previous days i.e. that Second

     Sight had not yet reviewed all the evidence that the Post Office had provided

     them, and were not sufficiently focusing on empirical evidence.



221 Paula Vennells and I exchanged emails on 1 and 2 July 2013 about next steps

     (POL00098887). Paula's email reported that Second Sight had spoken with

     Susan Crichton. On reflection they were happy to make clear that the report

     would be more balanced; that there was no evidence of systemic computer

     issues, but improvements could be made in support and training; that the Post

     Office had already corrected a number of issues; and that their work was not

     finished and therefore inconclusive. We referred here to a "Lessons Learned"


                                       109
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     exercise, as we were concerned about the quality of Second Sight's work, and

     wanted to see if there were lessons the Post Office could learn for future

     investigations and the procurement of external expertise. I do not recall the

     meeting between us later on 2 July 2013. 1 did have concerns about how Paula

     Vennells and Susan Crichton - though principally Susan who was leading the

     project - had handled Second Sight. These concerns crystallised more clearly

     with the subsequent Board discussion of the Interim Report on 16 July 2013. I

     will come onto them more fully in due course.



222 On 3 July 2013, I met Lord Arbuthnot: the briefing that I was provided by Martin

     Edwards is at (POL00115924). I have no recollection or notes which add to this

     briefing note about that meeting with Lord Arbuthnot. The briefing note outlines

     that my headline messages were: that we took sub-postmasters' concerns very

     seriously, hence setting up the Second Sight review; that though Second Sight

     had found no systemic issues, there were some important lessons for the Post

     Office in respect of training and support which we were going to act on with a

     new user forum; and that it was important to see the Second Sight review in the

     context of the Horizon system which dealt with 6 million transactions daily and

     1,500 per second — some issues were bound to arise on a system of this scale.

     A key point I wanted to convey was that that the Post Office was too important

     for confidence in it to be undermined unfairly, without properly evidenced

     findings. I was to say that the Post Office and Fujitsu would be checking the draft

     report carefully for factual accuracy over the weekend of 6 and 7 July so that the

     report could be shared on Monday 8 July, and that we wanted to attend Lord

     Arbuthnot's meeting that day with Second Sight as observers, in order to be clear


                                        110
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     about exactly what was being said and to avoid the kind of discrepancies which

     Lord Arbuthnot had reported to the Post Office in relation to the previous meeting

     held on 25 March 2013. I was to reassure Lord Arbuthnot that since the start of

     the Second Sight investigation, the Post Office had not pursued criminal

     convictions relying solely on Horizon data, and had also put on hold some civil

     recovery proceedings, but that there was a duty to protect public money in other

     cases. I was also to assure Lord Arbuthnot about the two 'anomalies' and the

     improved processes.



223 In response to the Inquiry's question as to why my briefing note did not refer to

     the CallendarSquare bug. I did not write the briefing note. I would not have raised

     this with Lord Arbuthnot in our meeting because I did not know about it.



224 Paula Vennells and I had an email exchange before the meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot on 3 July 2013 about the approach to be taken (POL00098921). I

     wanted to start the meeting collaboratively and hear Lord Arbuthnot's thoughts

     on what he was thinking — I noted that the "Position with [Second Sight was] not

     where we would like it to be - interim report not complete and what there is will

     be delivered [very] late for a meeting on Monday". Paula preferred that we go

     more on the "front foot" with raising our issues with the report with Lord Arbuthnot

     at the very start, but it appears that I was clear that I did not want us to "go on

     the attack from the start", saying that we could raise our points later if needed.

     As mentioned above, I do not remember the meeting itself. In response to the

     Inquiry's question, I am not sure what Paula meant by: "This isn't just about

     [Second Sight] — don't want to make them central. It is about no system issues,



                                        111
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     some improvements to be made, and keeping perspective so that our brand

     reputation is protected". My reply does not deal with this part of her email.



225 I am asked about my understanding of Fujitsu's remote access rights at this point.

     For completeness, I have mentioned above that the Ernst & Young audit

     presented to the ARC on 23 May 2012 did refer to the issue of "control of

     privileged users" though it said that the picture for this was improving, and

     ultimately Ernst & Young had been able to rely on the IT system

     (WITN00740124). As I mentioned I was not aware that this was an issue that

     could threaten the integrity of prosecutions, and would have expected to be

     advised if this was the case so that the Board could act in the light of all the

     relevant information. The Ismay Report had said that Horizon had "no backdoors"

     (POL00026572). I note that an email from Alwen Lyons to Paula Vennells on 24

     May 2013 (which I was later forwarded) about action points following a call with

     Lord Arbuthnot said: "Lesley [Sewell] and I had a discussion yesterday and she

     is taking this forward with Fujitsu today to ensure we get high level support for

     the review, and clear evidence about any central system which can adjust sub

     postmaster accounts if it exists, and its controls" (POL00098376). I do not recall

     and the disclosure that I have requested from the Post Office does not show this

     issue being raised again in the run-up to the publication of the Interim Report. At

     the time, from Alwen's email, I would have thought that this issue (if it was

     relevant) was being raised between Lesley Sewell and Fujitsu, who would raise

     it as appropriate with Second Sight if needed.




                                        112
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




226 I cannot remember precisely what I understood at the time as the difference

     between "system exceptions" and "systemic issues with the Horizon computer

     system", which is a distinction drawn in my briefing pack. The key points I noted

     about the 'anomalies' identified were that they had been identified by the Post

     Office itself; they had been rectified, and the sub-postmasters who could have

     been affected did not face any disciplinary action. It seemed to me that meant

     that the controls in place were working, and I was assured that we did not need

     to worry about these two 'anomalies'. The Post Office, I had been told, then

     improved processes and mitigations so that any future 'anomalies' would be

     caught even earlier. I do not have technical IT expertise, and so I relied on the

     output of Second Sight's Interim Report and the Post Office's and Fujitsu's

     assurances about IT. If these anomalies were a problem going to Horizon's

     integrity, and the safety of prosecutions, I expected to be told this. The key points

     that I think struck me at the time were:



     226.1 We commissioned Second Sight to undertake a case-based review of

            problematic cases in the context of the complaints made about Horizon,

            and they found that there were "no systemic issues".



     226.2 I was assured that the two 'anomalies' were isolated, rectified by the Post

            Office and no sub-postmaster was out of pocket.



227 Second Sight did not conclude in the Interim Report that Horizon was not fit for

     purpose or could not be safely relied on. Indeed, as I will come onto, Lord




                                         113
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    Arbuthnot's reaction to the Interim Report was also that it indicated "that the

    Horizon software itself is working as it was meant to".



228 I mentioned above that the value a Chair can add is thinking beyond the

    immediacy of a crisis. I emailed Paula on 4 July 2013 to say that it would be

    "helpful" not to commit ourselves too firmly to arrangements after the Interim

    Report with Second Sight's involvement "when everyone is tired and up to their

    ears trying to handle the immediate issues" (POL00098990). I thought it was

    prudent that we kept our options open. My concerns at this point arose from the

    meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and other MPs, when Lord Arbuthnot recalled

    important aspects of the meeting very differently from how Ian Henderson did;

    and the handling of the Interim Report. Second Sight were significantly behind

    schedule and over budget; I was assured that a number of their findings were

    not based on firm evidence (the briefing I had received on 1 July 2013 said that

    Second Sight had not yet reviewed all the evidence that POL had provided them,

    and appeared sometimes to rely on subjective interpretations of events as

    opposed to empirical evidence POL00098878); and the handling of this

    important report had been made unnecessarily difficult because of the very tight

    timescale. The Post Office were to be given the report on Friday 5 July, with the

    Post Office and Fujitsu having to work intensively over the weekend to correct

    any errors, before it was shared with MPs the following Monday and published

    on 8 July. I did not want to commit to dealing with Horizon investigations in this

    way in future, and I think that any other responsible Chair would have taken the

    same view. Second Sight's actions, I felt, did not command the confidence of the

    Post Office and also risked the confidence of MPs, given Lord Arbuthnot's



                                       114
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     different account of the meeting with Ian Henderson. In the event, Second Sight

     were retained and played an important part in the Mediation Scheme.



229 I said that the Post Office needed "a totally different approach to managing and

     rewarding" Second Sight, because of the concerns I have described

     (POL00098990). To be clear, I did not use the word "managing" in any kind of

     loaded way, seeking to control Second Sight or influence them to come to any

     particular conclusions. In the civil service, I was used to a practice where

     independent reviewers or consultants would have had an individual or team of

     people in the relevant Department who would work closely with them, not in any

     way to interfere with their work or findings, but to manage the process in a

     professional way so that there was a clear understanding on timescales and

     costs and no surprises in terms of process. I did not think this had happened with

     Second Sight despite the fact that in their original proposal (POL00096576), they

     had volunteered that "no final report [would] be issued until a draft has been

     verbally agreed and approved by the Post Office". Further work needed to be

     structured in a way that allowed time for the Post Office to provide its evidence

     and for the Post Office's representations in relation to a draft report to be

     considered, so that properly evidenced, rigorous findings could be made. I may

     also have meant that communications needed better handling, for example, by

     having an observer from the Post Office at Second Sight's meetings with MPs,

     to ensure that important differences in recollections of meetings did not happen

     again.




                                       115
                                                                                          WI TN00740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




230 I said that the Post Office needed a different approach to "rewarding" Second

     Sight because I thought that their day-rate compensation structure was no longer

     appropriate. Their own proposal document had said that Second Sight would be

     able to "forecast overall costs" after a scoping exercise "and that will give you [ie

     the Post Office] an opportunity to maintain control over costs" (POL00096576)

     but that had not happened. The review was significantly behind schedule, and

     over budget, and as a responsible Chair I needed to have regard to that. I would

     have had further concerns about this remuneration structure given my perception

     of the quality of their work and service. I am absolutely clear that I was not

     suggesting that the Post Office used remuneration to influence Second Sight's

     conclusions on Horizon. I did nothing at any point to jeopardise the independence

     of the review that the Post Office had commissioned. I intended throughout and

     in good faith to get to the bottom of this issue, while commanding the confidence

     of the different stakeholders. As I will explain fully, I later supported the

     commissioning of Linklaters and Deloitte to look at Horizon issues in 2014. I was

     not at all afraid of or averse to proper scrutiny of the Horizon system, or the reality

     that we would need to spend significant sums for this. I was clear, though, that

     any scrutiny would need to be high-quality, rigorous and evidenced, and in my

     view Second Sight's work fell short of this standard.



231 In that same email chain Paula Vennells and I arranged a call later that day (on

     4 July 2013); I cannot remember this call and I do not have a note of it.



232 The Second Sight Interim Report was dated 8 July 2013 (P0L00099063). 1 have

     been reminded of the Post Office's commentary on it (POL00029651). It details



                                          116
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     the corrections the Post Office asked Second Sight to make in advance of the

     publication of the interim report. The document contained three pages of rebuttal,

     which were also included in the Board pack for the upcoming Board meeting on

     16 July 2013, which I will come onto.



233 The document made the following general point:



       "Generally

       a. So as to avoid any suggestion that we tried to "rewrite" the report or

       compromise its independence, our comments on earlier drafts were focussed

       on correcting inaccuracies and attempting to make the report clearer.

       b. To stress the proportionality of these issues to Horizon as a whole, we asked

       SS to specify hard numbers instead of using phrases like "in almost all of the

       cases" (para. 1.7), "in a number of cases" (para. 2.6), or "multiple SPMRs"

       (para. 7.2). SS has not always done this."



234 It then had a list of factual rebuttals against the Second Sight Interim Report. I

     have already set out my views on the Interim Report. That said, I thought that the

     report made some important points about the training and support for sub-

     postmasters, which needed addressing and to which the Post Office responded

     seriously.



235 I cannot recall all the steps that I took after reading the Interim Report. There was

     of course extensive Board discussion about it which I will come onto. Alongside

     publication of the Second Sight report, the Post Office issued a statement in


                                         117
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     which it said that it would set up a working party to complete the review of cases

     started by Second Sight, and would consider all 47 cases brought forward by the

     Justice for Subpostmasters Alliance — the JFSA — and MPs (POL00168704).

     The JFSA had been invited to join the working party. Secondly, an independent

     figure would chair a review to determine how best to adjudicate disputed cases

     in future. The JFSA and other stakeholders would also be invited to take part in

     this process. Finally, a new branch user forum would provide a channel for sub-

     postmasters and others to raise issues on business processes, training and

     support. The company would take forward the proposals as an urgent priority.

     Paula raised some of these points in an email on 6 July to the Board

     (POL00099026). We were involved in overseeing the significant programme of

     work post-Second Sight, which I will come onto.



236 Lord Arbuthnot's statement about the Interim Report noted that "At the moment

     the evidence seems to be that the Horizon software itself is working as it was

     meant to" (POL00105633):



      "I am impressed with the way the Post Office has behaved on this matter. Since

      the first approach from our group of MPs, it has acted with forthrightness and

      transparency and has agreed both to support and fund the investigations. It

      clearly wants to get to the bottom of what has gone wrong. I want to put on

      record my thanks to senior staff who have made this happen.



      At the moment the evidence seems to be that the Horizon software itself is

      working as it was meant to. I hope Sub Post-Masters will welcome this news.



                                       118
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




      However, the problems investigators have discovered point to the need for

      further work. These problems involve:



      The way the Post Office has previously investigated concerns

      Instances of unreliable hardware, although this needs bottoming out

      Processes for training and support that have found to be inadequate in some

      cases

      An exceptionally complicated system used within the Sub Post Office

      A business model which might be seen as unfair towards the Sub Post-Master

      in that any faults or issues with the system give rise to a liability on the Sub

      Post-Master rather than being a risk to be carried by the Post Office

      An unresolved question about alterations by the Post Office of cash balances

      in the back-office accounting system and the consequences of such alterations"



237 I am asked to consider the following passage of the Second Sight Interim Report

     (POL00099063):



      "There is still much work to be done on the cases Second Sight has been asked

      to investigate...



      It has become clear that whereas the Horizon system appears to achieve its

      intended purpose almost all of the time and operates smoothly for most SPMRs

      and their staff, some combinations of events can trigger situations where

      problems occur...




                                       119
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




       We have so far found no evidence of system wide (systemic) problems with the

       Horizon software"



238 On this passage, I took the point that Second Sight were issuing an Interim

      Report and intended to complete their investigations. The second paragraph

      appeared to me to refer to the two `anomalies', which I was assured had been

      resolved without detriment to the subpostmasters affected, and were not

      indicative of wider problems. I was certainly reassured by the third part of the

      passage, as were most stakeholders including Lord Arbuthnot. Until then, I and

      the Board had relied on assurances from within the Post Office that Horizon was

      working as it should and now, that view was being supported by independent

      reviewers. This was therefore very significant.



(F)    JULY 2013 TO DECEMBER 2013



239 I have discussed the Board's reaction to Second Sight's Interim Report, I shall

      now turn to Project Sparrow, which was set-up by the business in response to

      the Interim Report.



240 As I have already discussed above, a good deal of the meeting of the Board on

      16 July 2013 was devoted to Horizon and the Second Sight Interim Report.

      Ahead of the meeting, the Board was provided with five papers that dealt with

      Horizon issues alongside a copy of the Interim Report itself.




                                        120
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




241 The purpose of one of these papers drafted by Susan Crichton and entitled

     "Update following the publication of the Interim Report on Horizon" was to

     consider the "options I propose a course of conduct for Post Office" following the

     publication of the Interim Report (POL00099218). The paper provided the Board

     with more detail on the three "new initiatives" outlined in the Post Office's 8th July

     2013 press release: (i) the creation of a working party to complete the review

     process started by Second Sight, (ii) consider an "independent safety net" to

     adjudicate in disputed cases in the future, and (iii) to establish a "Branch User

     Forum".



242 Of these three "new initiatives" it was the first — the setting-up of a Working Party

     — that came to be known as Project Sparrow. It is important to understand that

     "Project Sparrow" was a term of art, and over time it came to be used as an

     internal short-hand for the file review undertaken by Cartwright King, the Working

     Group and mediation process overseen by Sir Anthony Hooper and, more

     broadly, the management of the Post Office's relationship with Second Sight.

     While I was aware of Cartwright King's file review from briefings at the time I was

     not involved in the instruction, which was instigated by the legal team.



243 I have been asked in particular to consider paragraphs 3.7 and Annex A of Susan

     Crichton's report to the Board (POL00099218). Paragraph 3.7 of the report

     stated that "on the advice of our external criminal lawyers we have immediately

     begun a review of our criminal cases conducted since Separation on 1st April

     2012". Annex A provided further detail regarding this review. It would appear that

     there is a discrepancy between paragraph 3.7 and Annex A in the start date of


                                         121
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     this review. Paragraph 3.7 provided a start date of 1st April 2012, being the date

     on which the Post Office separated from RMG, and paragraph 1 of Annex A

     provided a start date of 1 January 2010, being the date on which the business

     began to use Horizon Online. It is my understanding that the start date of the

     review was in fact 1 January 2010.



244 I cannot recall my reaction to Susan Crichton's note, but I am sure that I would

     have been of the view then, as I am now, that if there was any question that the

     Interim Report might need to be disclosed to defendants in previous criminal

     cases, then an effective review system needed to be established quickly. Susan's

     note informed the Board that this was underway.



245 As to the appropriateness of the start date of the review, I cannot recall any

     particular discussion on this point.



246 Staying with the Board meeting on 16 July 2013, I have already addressed the

     Board's reaction to the Second Sight report and its concerns with how the

     process had been managed by the business (POL00021516). I have been asked

     in particular to consider my views of Susan Crichton at this point in time. After

     the publication of Second Sight's Interim Report, I felt that the Board, and indeed,

     the Post Office, had not been well served by Susan Crichton in terms of the

     handling of Second Sight. By this I mean, that the Board should not have been

     caught unawares by the timing of the publication of the report or given so little

     opportunity to discuss it on the basis of advice from the senior executives. For

     the avoidance of doubt, I do not mean that Susan Crichton or anyone else in the


                                            122
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     Post Office should have sought to influence the content of the report but it is

     normal for an organisation which is the subject of a review to have a clear timeline

     during which it may consider the findings in draft and have time to reflect on

     these, comment on them and have their views taken into account in an even-

     handed way. We felt "bounced" by the unexpected Board discussion for which

     we had had no time to prepare and for which the senior executives themselves

     were not fully prepared. I thought that either Susan Crichton herself, or someone

     accountable to her should have had a much better handle on all of this, including

     a good, professional relationship with Second Sight throughout their tenure. But

     I did not "consider Susan Crichton to be responsible for perceived deficiencies"

     in the drafting of the report.



247 More generally, I think that I had a good working relationship with Susan Crichton

     prior to the handling of the Interim Report despite what had happened over my

     initial suggestion that we needed to set up an independent review into Horizon.

     For some time, we were located close to each other in the office and we would

     bump into each other quite often and pass the time of day as well as discussing

     relevant work matters. I describe at paragraph 264 below the meeting I had with

     Susan to discuss the way forward in the light of what had happened.



248 I have also been asked to consider an email exchange between me and Paula

     Vennells on 14 July 2013 (P0L00099223), two days before the Board meeting.

     This email exchange was about the relationship between me and Susan Crichton

     following the events which I have described in this section surrounding the

     publication of the Interim Report, my belief that Susan Crichton had not



                                        123
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     adequately managed the process leading up to that, and how we could find a

     way to work together following that.



249 I have been provided with copies of an email exchange between Susan Crichton

     and Andrew Parsons dated 23 July 2013 and a copy of a document that was

     attached to the email (POL00040001 and P0L00040002). I was not party to this

     email exchange and have never seen it before. I note that I am referenced on

     the final page of the attached note: "Add piece from AP re: potential personal

     liability for the Post Office's failure to disclose something in a prosecution case".



250 In the minutes of the Board meeting on 16 July 2013, there is a reference to the

     Board expressing a general concern that the review could open up the Business

     to claims of wrongful prosecution and a particular concern as to whether or not

     Susan Crichton was "implicated in the prosecutions" (POL00021516). I expect

     that references to a "piece" regarding "potential personal liability" arises from

     these discussions at the Board meeting on 16 July. I have been through the

     "board packs" provided to me by the Post Office and I cannot locate a final

     version of the note.



251 I now know, but had no idea at the time, that Simon Clarke of Cartwright King

     authored an important advice note on 15 July 2013, the day before this Board

     meeting. I have mentioned above that Simon Clarke's advice on expert evidence

     dated 15 July 2013 (POL00006798) found that the credibility of the Post Office's

     key prosecution witness in respect of the Horizon system, Gareth Jenkins, was

     "fatally undermined". Simon Clarke's advice referred to the Helen Rose report,


                                         124
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     another document about which I knew nothing. He found that Dr Jenkins "had

     not complied with his duties to the court, the prosecution or the defence" by failing

     to disclose material known to him which undermined his expert opinion in

     Horizon's integrity.



252 I find it inexplicable that this advice was not provided to the Board given its

     obvious importance. It should have been provided to us under any circumstances

     given its very serious conclusion. But to withhold it from the Board at this critical

     juncture, where we were discussing the aftermath of Second Sight's Interim

     Report and any possible liability arising from previous prosecutions seems

     extraordinary. I believe that seeing this advice would have caused me, and other

     Board members, to (i) demand answers about the safety of previous

     prosecutions where Gareth Jenkins was used as an expert and (ii) ask about the

     significance of the Helen Rose report.



253 I cannot see a proper reason as to why the Board would be kept in the dark about

     this.



254 I have been asked to consider a letter from the Criminal Cases Review

     Commission ("CCRC") that was sent to Paula Vennells on 12 July 2013 and the

     response sent by Susan Crichton on 24 July 2013 (POL00039994 and

     P0L00040012). I have no recollection of having seen this letter at the time. I can

     see that the Post Office's engagement with the CCRC was referenced briefly in

     an update paper that I received on 27 July 2013 (POL00298004, POL00192976).

     Had I seen this letter at the time, I am sure I would have considered it to be an



                                         125
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     important communication from a statutory body that needed to be taken seriously

     by the senior management team. The thrust of CCRC's concern — that the Interim

     Report may need to be disclosed to defendants in previous prosecutions — was

     what I understood as the reason for the file review being undertaken by

     Cartwright King under the supervision of Brian Altman KC (as discussed further

     below).



255 The Inquiry has asked me to consider an email from Paula Vennells to me on 26

     July 2013 (POL00118496). I do not recall this email but it appears to be a note

     prepared by Paula of a meeting she had with Susan Crichton on 24 July 2013.

     At paragraph 248 above, I have discussed an email exchange between Paula

     Vennells and me on 14 July about my concerns with Susan Crichton's handling

     of the Interim Report and the suggestion that the two of us should sit down

     together. The second bullet point in this email appears to cover the same ground.

     The email noted my concerns with Susan's performance and it would appear that

     Susan informed Paula that we had arranged to speak on 31 July. As is discussed

     further at paragraph 264 below, it would appear that this meeting between me

     and Susan Crichton did in fact take place on 31 July 2013.



256 I note the concluding paragraph of Paula's email in which she wrote

     (POL00118496): "I remain concerned as Susan is not organised or structured

     nor is she a leader. These gaps in her capability are risks to the business. They

     are being dealt with by supporting her with individuals who are organised and

     structured, and by a process to monitor. She remains a good advisor. I will review

     the longer decision in September". As I have already discussed, I too had


                                       126
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     concerns as to Susan Crichton's performance at this time. I should be clear that

     my concerns were of a similar nature to those expressed here by Paula. I felt that

     Susan's handling of the Interim Report had not been sufficiently organised and

     structured. I did not doubt her competence as a legal advisor. I was of the view

     then, as I am now, that for a CEO to be effective they must have the ability to

     choose their own senior leadership team. It was therefore a matter for Paula

     Vennells as to how she managed Susan Crichton, but I think at this point in July

     2013 1 too was of the view that Susan's performance could be improved by way

     of support and effective monitoring.



257 On 27 July 2013, the Board was sent by email a note dated 26 July 2013 and

     entitled "Update on the work programme arising from the Horizon report"

     (POL00298004). The purpose of the note was to update the Board on the

     "programme of work" that the Post Office was undertaking in response to Second

     Sight's Interim Report.



258 The update divided the work programme into "four broad categories":



      "i.    completing the review of cases started as part of the Second Sight

             investigation, with the aim of seeking some form of resolution;

      ii.    meeting our duty to review cases that have been subject to criminal

             prosecution;

      iii.   identifying improvements in the training, support and other processes

             related to the Horizon system and branches; and




                                       127
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      iv.     meeting our commitment to review how an independent safety net could

              be introduced to help resolve disputed cases with sub-postmasters in

              the future."



259 At this stage the nomenclature was not settled, but I would have considered

     categories i. and ii. to constitute Project Sparrow.



260 The update informed the Board that the Post Office was considering appointing

     a "senior, independent lawyer, with specific experience and expertise in

     mediation" (POL00298004). The mediation process would be overseen by a

     working group including representatives of the Post Office, JFSA and Second

     Sight.



261 The Board was also updated on the progress of the prosecution case review.

     The note informed the Board that "as a prosecuting authority we have a

     continuing duty to act properly and fairly, and that requires us to disclose to the

     defence any information which undermines the prosecution ... through our

     criminal law solicitors, Cartwright King, we are complying with this duty by

     reviewing past and present prosecutions to identify any cases where the Second

     Sight report ought to be disclosed" (POL00298004). The Board was advised that

     it would be up to the defendant to decide whether to apply to the Court of Appeal

     for permission to appeal their conviction.



262 The update went on to inform the Board that so far Cartwright King had reviewed

     124 cases in total and provided additional disclosure in six of the cases. In all



                                         128
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




    cases, the "recommendation is that we oppose any attempted appeal; and it is

    not believed that any of the cases would satisfy the test for compensation from

    the Government for a miscarriage of justice under the Criminal Justice Act"

    (POL00298004).



263 The Board was given additional comfort that the review process conducted by

    Cartwright King was to be overseen by Brian Altman KC a "leading barrister and

    former First Treasury Counsel" (POL00298004). I cannot recall my reaction to

    this update on the legal review process but I am sure that I would have felt re-

    assured that the review was being undertaken by experienced external lawyers

    and that the entire process was being overseen by a leading member of the

    criminal bar. As a non-executive director with oversight, but not operational

    control, of these issues, one of the things you are keen to determine is that that

    critical issues are being appropriately resourced and that the right external

    advisors and experts are being engaged to ensure that the company is receiving

    the best advice. I think that at this point in July 2013, 1 would have felt confident

    that this was happening with regard to the legal review.



264 I followed up on the email to the Board attaching the "Update on the work

    programme arising from the Horizon report" note on 31 July 2013 to report on a

    discussion I had had that day with Susan Crichton (POL00116114). I informed

    the Board that I thought the note of 27 July was "clear and helpful" and expressed

    my pleasure thatAlasdair Marnoch "thought that the right immediate issues were

    being tackled in the right way at speed".




                                        129
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




265 In the email I raised four points with my Board colleagues. The first was the need

     to "cap" Second Sight's involvement in the review process so that we had the

     option to end the Post Office's relationship with them (POL00116114). I have

     described above in paragraph 209 my concerns with Second Sight's

     performance and the quality of the Interim Report. At this point, in late July 2013,

     I was of the view that the Post Office had to be open to considering whether there

     were other professionals and firms better able to investigate Horizon than

     Second Sight. As I have discussed above at paragraphs 257 to 258, the update

     emailed to the Board on 27 July 2013 expressed concerns as to Second Sight's

     capacity to conduct these reviews at sufficient pace to ensure that the Working

     Group could operate effectively. It must be remembered that Second Sight was

     a two-person operation and the Post Office was establishing a Working Group

     that would require these two individuals to consider each claim brought forward

     by a sub-postmaster. There was a real risk of Second Sight creating gridlock (I

     discuss at paragraphs 396 onwards how these issues developed) that would

     serve no one well.



266 The second point I raised had to do with Second Sight's costs. I have discussed

     at paragraph 230, my concern that Second Sight's costs were greatly exceeding

     their estimate (POL00116114). The Board had a duty to ensure that Second

     Sight was representing good value for money. Given my concerns with the quality

     of their work, I am sure that by late July 2013 I thought it was important that the

     senior executives managed Second Sight's costs. I discuss further at paragraph

     286 below how I encouraged the senior executives to do this.




                                        130
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




267 I have been asked on what basis did the Post Office expect Second Sight to carry

     out further work "pro bono". I was not party to the details of the commercial

     discussions with Second Sight at this time, other than being aware that they had

     significantly exceeded their original cost estimate. Given that, there may well

     have been some expectation that they would undertake at least some part of the

     next programme of work at no charge to the Post Office.



268 The third point I raised with my Board colleagues was the need to have a "proper

     process" for appointing the independent Chair of the Working Group

     (POL00116114). The Post Office was committed to making a success of the

     Working Group and therefore we had to make sure that we found absolutely the

     right person to take the role of Chair. As I noted in the email: "we cannot afford

     to make the wrong choice here".



269 Finally, I informed my colleagues that at my meeting with Susan Crichton that

     day I had asked her "to keep the Board fully informed of future developments and

     to alert me to anything which she is unable to resolve which could get in the way

     of getting the job done in the way it needs to be done" (POL00116114). I felt that

     this was a very important message to get across to Susan Crichton. It was not

     for the Board to actively manage the day-to-day affairs of the company, but it was

     our role to set strategic objectives and inform the senior executive team of the

     company's priorities. I wanted Susan Crichton to understand that these issues

     were absolutely critical and of great interest to the Board and we would therefore

     be following them closely. I also wanted to ensure that she felt able to contact




                                       131
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     me if there was any way in which I, or the Board, could assist, in ensuring that

     she had the right resources available to get the work done.



270 I have been asked by the Inquiry in connection with my email to the Board on 31

     July 2013 to "please explain to what extent, you placed pressure on the Post

     Office's executive management team to terminate               the Second Sight

     investigation". I wish to be completely clear that whilst I had serious concerns as

     to the quality of Second Sight's work, I did not place "pressure on the executives

     to terminate the Second Sight investigation". I signalled my wish to keep our

     options open as to their involvement after the publication of the Interim Report

     because of my concerns but this is not the same thing. Nor did I ever contemplate

     a situation in which the Post Office would not engage an independent firm of

     professional experts to investigate the Horizon system. As I explain below at

     paragraph 327, in 2014 I strongly supported the move to engage Deloitte to

     conduct a comprehensive review of Horizon. In the end, of course, Second Sight

     continued its work and issued its final report. Any suggestion that I wished to

     "terminate" the investigation of Horizon is entirely without foundation.



271 The following day, 1 August 2013, I sent Paula Vennells' assistant a document I

     had drafted following my meeting with Susan Crichton (POL00108058). On 2

     August, Paula Vennels replied to thank me for my note and to provide her

     thoughts on it. We both agreed that we were concerned that Susan Crichton saw

     so much as being "beyond her control". These comments accord with the views

     expressed at paragraph 256, that Susan Crichton had struggled to actively

     manage the process leading up to the publication of Second Sight Interim Report.



                                        132
                                                                                         W ITNO0740100
                                                                                       W ITN00740100




272 1 have repeated above that I never saw Simon Clarke's advice of 15 July 2013 in

     respect of Gareth Jenkins, the Post Office's expert witness. Nor did I ever see,

     or know of the existence of, Simon Clarke's advice on the duty to record and

     retain material dated 2 August 2013.



273 I am not a lawyer, but reading this advice now it reads very starkly indeed. I saw

     it for the first time in preparing this witness statement. Simon Clarke understood

     that someone within the Post Office ordered the "shredding" of a note recording

     a conference call where Horizon-related issues and possible defects may have

     been discussed (POL00006798). He understood that some within the Post

     Office did not want to minute / retain future notes of conference calls of this nature

     despite their legal obligation to do so. The suggestion for these weekly

     conference calls came from Simon Clarke himself. He advised that the Post

     Office should have and keep a record of weekly calls discussing any possible

     issues with Horizon, to ensure the integrity of future expert evidence.



274 Simon Clarke advised that if it was true that the Post Office was "shredding",

     destroying or otherwise failing to record such information, the Post Office was

     acting in abrogation of its disclosure duties and that this could amount to a

     (criminal) conspiracy to pervert the course of justice (POL00006798).



275 I had no idea, whatsoever, of allegations of such serious misconduct in the Post

     Office's prosecutions function. This is another instance where I simply cannot

     understand why the Board was informed about neither the substance, nor the


                                         133
                                                                                 WI TN00740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




subject matter, of important advice. As with Simon Clarke's earlier advice, my

view is that this advice should have been provided to the Board. It plainly raised

serious issues which would have provoked new questions from me and the rest

of the Board about the Post Office's conduct of its responsibilities. It should not

have been kept from us in any circumstances. But it is particularly shocking that

it was kept from us in the circumstances of early August 2013. This could have

been a turning point in our understanding of what was really happening.



 275.1 I wrote above that on 27 July 2013, the Board was sent by email a note

        dated 26 July 2013 entitled "Update on the work programme arising from

        the Horizon report" (POL00298004). In it we were assured that "as a

        prosecuting authority we have a continuing duty to act properly and fairly,

        and that requires us to disclose to the defence any information which

        undermines the prosecution ... Through our criminal law solicitors,

        Cartwright King, we are complying with this duty by reviewing past and

        present prosecutions to identify any cases where the Second Sight

        report ought to be disclosed". It is unfathomable to me that we were left

        with this assurance that the Post Office was complying with its disclosure

        duties, when the true position — advised to the Post Office's executives

        shortly afterwards on 2 August 2013 by Simon Clarke — may have been

        extremely far from this.



 275.2 The Post Office was starting to re-consider its conduct of private

        prosecutions. From November 2013 and particularly in January and

        February 2014 the ARC and the Board considered the private



                                   134
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




             prosecutions function. One of the options on the table was to cease

             prosecutions in-house and refer them all to the CPS. I was in favour of

             that option. I have mentioned before that I considered my Board to be a

             group of Directors with great integrity. I think now that had we known

             about Simon Clarke's advice by this juncture, the Board would have

             asked for advice and investigations into possible past misconduct by our

             prosecutors. I also think that the ARC and the Board would have viewed

             the future differently and would have agreed that the Post Office should

             stop carrying out its own prosecutions, given how clearly flawed their

             execution of these had been.



276 The Board was not provided by Brian Altman KC's advice either, also of 2 August

     2013 (POL00006583). I have mentioned above that among other matters, I now

     know that this advice drew attention to the limited nature (by time and scope) of

     the Cartwright King review and Mr Altman KC's own view that Gareth Jenkins

     was tainted and his position as an expert witness untenable. We received only

     incomplete briefings in Board packs and meetings. We were simply told that Mr

     Altman KC's view was that the approach being taken by Cartwright King in

     reviewing disclosure was "fundamentally sound" and that no "systemic or

     fundamental flaws in the review process" were detected". We were informed in

     Significant Litigation Reports (see those between September — November 2013,

     the latter being POL00026626) in identical terms that "POL is not issuing any

     new criminal summons pending the instruction of a new, independent expert who

     can give evidence to support the Horizon system. The process of identifying this

     expert is underway". The crucially important reason as to why the Post Office's



                                       135
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     expert witness needed to be replaced was omitted. It was not unreasonable to

     infer that this was for some prosaic reason. It is clear that the Board were not

     provided with three critical pieces of external legal advice dating to July and

     August 2013. It seems to me that the Post Office's legal function failed to carry

     out its responsibilities to provide the Board with accurate information about

     fundamental criticisms from independent legal experts about the conduct of the

     Post Office's prosecutions function. I find this shocking.



277 Had we been informed of Simon Clarke's and Brian Altman KC's views on Gareth

     Jenkins' unfitness as an expert witness, and had the significance of the Helen

     Rose report been explained to us, we might have been in a position to begin to

     piece together the evidence that suggested that the assurances that the Post

     Office was receiving from Fujitsu were inaccurate. One of the most sobering

     aspects of reading Fraser J's judgment, was learning about the pieces of the

     puzzle that were available to some within the Post Office in 2013 and realising

     that had those pieces been put together, the sub-postmasters affected might

     have received some measure of justice far sooner.



278 I have been asked a series of questions by the Inquiry which in essence concern

     a different point about whether or not the disclosure of the Interim Report and

     Helen Rose's report to all sub-postmasters convicted on the basis of Horizon

     data would have led to the overturning of their unsafe convictions in 2013. 1 am

     also asked whether if Cartwright King or Brian Altman KC had advised the Post

     Office to disclose the Interim Report and the Helen Rose report to all affected

     sub-postmasters, we could have cut short their agony. I cannot answer these


                                        136
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     questions; I am not an expert on criminal law and the rules of criminal disclosure

     and appeals, which I would need to be to make such judgments. I can only say

     that I sincerely wish that the review process which was undertaken by Cartwright

     King had led to the overturning of unsafe convictions. This would have spared

     those sub-postmasters the misery of having to continue their fight. I understand

     that Cartwright King advised the Post Office to provide the Interim Report to 10

     affected sub-postmasters, but I understand that this in itself did not lead to

     successful overturning of convictions.



279 At the time I felt that the Post Office was doing the right thing by establishing a

     review process that ensured that disclosure decisions were being taken by expert

     criminal lawyers who were independent of the Post Office. It seemed to me that

     this was the best way of ensuring that the correct decisions were being made in

     each case.



280 I have been asked to comment on my involvement in the "Lessons Learned

     Review", and directed to email communications in September 2013, some of

     which I was not party to. I do not have a clear recollection of this process and it

     would appear from my email exchange with Paula Vennells on 6 September 2013

     (POL00116123) that I was of the view that a "Lessons Learned" review was still

     worth doing.




                                        137
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




Continuing investigation and the establishment of the Initial Complaint Review and

Mediation Scheme (the "Mediation Scheme")



281 I shall now turn to the establishment of the Mediation Scheme which was also

     covered by the term Project Sparrow within the Post Office. The idea behind the

     scheme was to create a mechanism that allowed sub-postmasters to apply to

     enter into mediation with the Post Office with the hope of finding a mutually

     agreed resolution in their individual cases. The Mediation Scheme was to be

     overseen by a Working Group that was to be chaired by an independent,

     experienced professional and was to include representatives of the Post Office,

     Second Sight and the JFSA. The Mediation Scheme was to begin by examining

     all of the cases that had been raised by MPs and the JFSA for the Second Sight

     review.



282 I have been asked to consider an email from Alwen Lyons to me and a number

     of other members of the Board on 28 August 2013 that contained an update from

     Paula Vennells on a number of issues (POL00027792). The first issue that Paula

     addressed was the Mediation Scheme. The Inquiry has directed me in particular

     to Paula's comment "that there is a range of outcomes, from an acceptance that

     the sub-postmaster was at fault and that no specific redress should will be

     required; to recognition that the Business could have more effective support

     which will feed in to the process reengineering work now underway [sic]". I have

     been asked if I agreed with this assessment and whether or not I considered that

     there was an additional possible outcome: an acceptance that "BEDs" in Horizon

     had given rise to the complaint against the sub-postmaster?



                                       138
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




283 In summer 2013, following the publication of the Interim Report, the Post Office

     Board was of the view that the sub-postmasters had been treated poorly. There

     were clear shortcomings in the way in which they had been trained and

     subsequently supported by the Post Office. We were committed to continuing the

     investigation of the Horizon system, but given the repeated assurances we were

     receiving both internally from executives and externally from professionals such

     as Second Sight, we did not consider it likely that there were systemic issues in

     Horizon that rendered sub-postmasters convictions to be unsafe.



284 As I have already explained, the term "BEDs" was not one that I ever heard when

     at the Post Office. I do not think I had ever heard it until I read the judgment of

     Fraser J.



285 I have been asked to describe Paula Vennells' views on the Mediation Scheme

     and its terms of reference. The Inquiry will, of course, be hearing from Paula

     directly. I do not recall these in detail but I remember that Paula was committed

     to the success of the Mediation Scheme and in summer 2013 was going to great

     lengths to ensure that it was put in the best possible position to succeed. It

     appeared that at this point there was support for the Mediation Scheme from

     many people involved. I think this is demonstrated by Lord Arbuthnot's comments

     (reported in Paula's note of 28 August 2013 (POL00027792) that "1 am very

     pleased indeed with the working group's proposed process. To my mind, it

     represents the very best chance all parties — individual sub-postmasters and




                                        139
                                                                                   WI TNO0740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




     mistresses, and the Post Office have of ensuring the best outcome for everyone.

     It is fair, thorough, and independent."



286 On 29 August 2013 I was engaged in email exchanges with Paula Vennells,

     Susan Crichton and Chris Day about Second Sight's costs (POL00099510 and

     POL00099513). I have addressed at paragraph 230 above, the reasons for my

     view that Second Sight's costs needed to be closely managed. Their work had

     not been to the standard I had expected and they significantly overrun their

     existing cost estimates. As is so often the case with projects like this, cost

     management is an essential element of ensuring effective management of the

     project as a whole. If there are no cost controls in place, then all too often

     engagements become open-ended and key deadlines are missed or delayed. By

     staying on top of Second Sight's costs we had, in my mind, the best opportunity

     of ensuring that they were working effectively and reviewing cases at the pace

     that was required to ensure that the Mediation Scheme made good progress.



287 I have been asked to comment on an email from Martin Smith to Susan Crichton

     on 26 September 2013 (POL00066817). I was not copied to this email chain and

     I had not seen it before it was provided to me by the Inquiry. I do not know who

     Martin Smith is and his email address is redacted.



288 On 4 October 2013 I received an email from Paula Vennells attaching a selection

     of cases that were to be referred to the Mediation Scheme (POL00099711). I

     have no clear recollection of reviewing these cases, but as it was suggested to

     me by Paula that I should, then I feel confident that I would have read these


                                        140
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     documents. Paula said to me that reading the cases will "depress and distress

     you", which I think is indicative of the fact that the senior executives at the Post

     Office were very much of the view in Summer 2013 that the Post Office had failed

     to support sub-postmasters as it should have done. In her email to me, Paula

     sets out the steps that her team were taking to ensure that the support system

     was improved.



289 The Inquiry has asked me to comment in particular on Paula Vennells comments

     in her email to me of 4 October 2013 that Ron Warmington can be "fickle with his

     loyalties" and whether or not I consider that Ron Warmington "owed the Post

     Office loyalty"? I cannot speak for Paula as to what she meant by this particular

     phrase and whether or not it bears the gloss being put on it by the question.

     However, in my mind it was critical that Second Sight had to be independent of

     all stakeholders, including the Post Office and the JFSA. I should expect that

    Paula felt very much the same. In the course of their work with us, the Post Office

     had some reasons for wondering whether Second Sight were keeping to a

     completely independent view in the way they tackled their work.



290 On 29 October 2013, I responded to an email from Alwen Lyons (POL00099833)

     to request an explanation from her as to why the decision on the Post Office's

     role as a prosecutor had "slipped" to the end of December. I do not recall having

     a fixed view on the question at this point in time, but I do think that Lord Arbuthnot

     had questioned whether it was appropriate for the Post Office to bring

     prosecutions. I thought this was a good question and I was eager to get on and

     understand the issues and discuss them with my Board colleagues. More


                                         141
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     broadly, it was my role as Chair of the Board to ensure that executives were

     putting issues to the Board in a timely manner.



291 The Board met again on 31 October 2013. Ahead of the meeting we were

     provided with a written update from Paula Vennells (POL00027136), which

     covered a number of issues including Project Sparrow. Paula informed the board

     that Sir Anthony Hooper had been appointed as the Chair of the Working Group

     and that the intention was to begin the mediation process for some cases before

     the end of 2013, with the majority happening between January and March of

     2014.



292 Paula Vennells also informed us that Cartwright King had completed its review

     of 301 previous prosecutions and had determined that disclosure of the Interim

     Report and "associated issues" was appropriate in 10 cases. Letters had been

     sent to these sub-postmasters or their lawyers alerting them to the issue. I have

     been asked by the Inquiry what I understood "associated issues" to be a

     reference to. Given that this report was provided to me ten years ago, I am afraid,

     that I have no recollection as to how I interpreted this particular phrase at that

     time. I have assumed from the Inquiry's questions on this document, that it may

     be of the view that "associated issues" was a reference to the Helen Rose report.

     As I had not seen the Helen Rose report, I do not think it was possible for me to

     have interpreted the phrase "associated issues" in this way.



293 In this update, Paula Vennells referred to "the interest from the CCRC" and the

     fact that Brian Altman KC had been asked to conduct an independent review of


                                        142
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     the current prosecutions approach and that he had reached the "conclusion that

     our approach is "fundamentally sound" (P0L00027136). In hindsight, this was a

     wholly inadequate summary of the full advice, for reasons which I will come onto

     when I deal with the General Counsel's summary of this advice on 19 November

     2013. Paula also addressed the issue of whether the Post Office should continue

     to bring private prosecutions. Paula informed the Board that Brian Altman KC

     was to provide further advice on the Post Office's approach to prosecutions and

     that this issue would be discussed at a forthcoming meeting of the ARC. Finally,

     on Project Sparrow, Paula updated the Board on the work being undertaken to

     improve the training and support provided to sub-postmasters.



294 I was not able to attend the meeting of the ARC on 19 November 2013. The ARC

     was provided with a note from the new General Counsel, Chris Aujard, in which

     he posited several options for the future of the Post Office's prosecutions policy

     (WITN00740131). In this note, Chris Aujard summarised the advice that the Post

     Office had received from Brian Altman KC. I assume that the "backward looking

     report" is a reference to Brian Altman KC's advice of 15 October 2013. As

     discussed at paragraph 81.7 I was not provided with a copy of this advice at the

     time, and had not seen it before a copy was provided to me by the Inquiry.



295 In his note Chris Aujard provided the following summary of the "backward looking

     report" (WITN00740131):



      "The headline conclusion of the backward-looking report is that the '...review

      [of the cases that had been prosecuted over the last few years] is



                                       143
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




      "fundamentally sound" and that no "systemic or fundamental flaws in the review

      process" were detected. In addition, a number of relatively small procedural

      recommendations were made regarding matters such as document retention

      etc."



296 As a description of a report from the Post Office's most senior legal counsel, I

     expected this to be an accurate summary of the risk and the subject matter of

     Brian Altman KC's advice. In hindsight, now that I have seen the full advice, I

     regret to say that the summary does not come close to this standard.



      296.1 It is a positive-sounding summary. However, it fails to mention that Brian

              Altman KC agreed with Simon Clarke's view that Dr Gareth Jenkins'

              status as an expert witness was fundamentally undermined, and that he

              found that witness statements that Dr Gareth Jenkins had submitted to

              the criminal courts where he had omitted key information were "[of] grave

              concern".



      296.2 Brian Altman KC's advice refers to the Helen Rose report. This could

              have been yet another opportunity to inform the Board about this report

              and explain its significance.



      296.3 Brian Altman KC also refers to Simon Clarke's second advice of August

              2013. In this advice, Simon Clarke laid out his concerns that the Post

              Office had breached its obligations as a prosecutor and referred to the

              "shredding" allegation within the Post Office's criminal function. Brian



                                         144
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




             Altman KC does not go through these parts of the advice in much detail,

             but he does refer to it. This was another missed opportunity for the Board

             to be told about these very important issues. The summary did not

             provide us with a complete picture of advice: warts and all. It was the job

             of the General Counsel to manage the Post Office's legal risk; this

             required the General Counsel to provide the Board with a full and frank

             assessment of this risk. The summaries that we were given gave us the

             entirely false picture that recent advices had found nothing seriously

             wrong with the Post Office's past prosecutions.



297 I have been asked by the Inquiry for my views on Brian Altman KC's advice that

     the start date of the file review should be the 1 January 2010 and comments that

     he made about the Callendar Square bug. As I was never shown this advice I did

     not have any views on these matters.



298 In his note to the Sub-Committee, Chris Aujard reported that Brian Altman KC's

     "forward-looking report" was "similarly positive in tone" and that he had seen

     nothing to suggest that the Post Office had conducted its investigations and

     prosecutions in anything other than a "well-organised, structured and efficient

     manner" (WITN00740131). Chris Aujard reported that Brian Altman KC had

     noted that the Post Office's role as a prosecutor was "anachronistic" and not in

     line with the approach taken by other commercial organisations. Again, the

     overall picture that the Board and I were left with was that there was nothing to

     be concerned about with respect to the Post Office's past prosecutions. In fact,

     the Post Office's independent legal advisors had raised issues which appear to



                                        145
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     me to be very serious, and they were kept from us. This impeded the Board from

     properly discharging its functions.



299 The Sub-Committee was presented with four options and informed that the

     executive team at the Post Office favoured the fourth option which was to cease

     prosecutions and to increase the support provided to sub-postmasters. The

     minutes of the meeting of the Sub-Committee record that those in attendance

     discussed Chris Aujard's paper and it was decided that further work needed to

     be undertaken before a decision could be made (W1TN00740132).



300 On 25 November 2023, I met Sir Anthony Hooper, the Chair of the Working

     Group. Ahead of the meeting I received an email from Alwen Lyons

     (POL00099940) attaching a          briefing note on the         Mediation    Scheme

     (POL00099941). I have been asked for my recollection of any discussions I had

     with SirAnthony at our meeting about the Working Group's approach to convicted

     applicants. I am afraid, that I do not have any distinct recollections of this meeting

     and cannot recall whether or not we discussed this particular point.



301 I have also been asked to comment, with regard to this meeting, on whether or

     not I believed it was appropriate to replace Second Sight with an investigation

     team from the Post Office. I have already discussed my concerns about the

     quality of Second Sight's work and its capacity to undertake such a large volume

     of work at pace. It was also, at this point, felt that the Mediation Scheme, or some

     variation of it, should become a permanent part of the system that was to be put

     in place to better support sub-postmasters. The idea being that if, in future,



                                           146
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




     accounting discrepancies were identified, sub-postmasters and the Post Office

     could attempt to resolve their differences via mediation. If this was to be

     successful, it was necessary for a team at the Post Office to be able to collate

     the underlying documents and information. The Post Office could not rely on

     Second Sight ad infinitum.



302 The Board continued its discussions on the Post Office's prosecution policy at a

     meeting on 27 November 2013. Ahead of the meeting Chris Aujard provided the

     Board with an update on Project Sparrow in which he informed the Board that

     more applications had been made to the Working Group than had been expected

     and this would naturally have some effect on both the timescales for the

     Mediation Scheme and its cost (POL00026626). The minutes of the Board

     meeting report that Alasdair Marnoch, the chair of the ARC updated the board on

     the Sub-Committee discussions on the prosecution policy at its 19 November

     meeting (POL00021520).



303 I have been asked a series of detailed questions about the 27 November 2013

     Board meeting that I shall address below:



     303.1 I have been asked with regard to paragraph 3.2 of Chris Aujard's written

           update to the Board on Project Sparrow (POL00026626), why the

           Steering Group decided that the Post Office's "interests would be better

           served" by having Belinda Crowe appointed as Programme Director for

           the Mediation Scheme and Angela van den Bogerd acting as Programme




                                       147
                                                                                WI TN00740100
                                                                              WI TN00740100




      Director for the Business Improvement Project. I was not a member of the

      Steering Group so I cannot comment on why it reached this decision.



303.2 In terms of what factors were taken into account when increasing the

      budget from £1.3m to £2.2m, I cannot add to Chris Aujard's paper which

      accompanied the 27 November 2013 Board meeting. In this he stated that

      the budget increase was agreed because the scheme received more

      applications than originally anticipated — 140 instead of the original

      estimate of 75 — and these applications were also generally more complex

      to mediate than had been anticipated.



303.3 I have mentioned that throughout my tenure at the Post Office, and up

      until the point of Fraser J's judgement, I believed in the safety of the

      Horizon system and the assurances that I was given. We did not ask for

      a note from the General Counsel (POL00021520) "explaining who was

      named in past prosecutions and the liability for the Business and individual

      Board members" because I thought that there was a risk that the Post

      Office had inappropriately prosecuted sub-postmasters. I did not think that

      there was a real risk of this at the time. I have mentioned that the Second

      Sight Interim Report added to our confidence in the system; as did the

      reports that we had received about the Cartwright King and Brian Altman

      KC advices. I think that we asked for this note as part of good corporate

      governance: at this point we were taking stock of the prosecutions policy,

      and it would have been prudent to get a holistic view on the risks and

      options. I cannot see an obvious explanation for the reference to


                                  148
                                                                                 WI TNO0740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




      "individual Board members" here, as the Board were kept at arms-length

      from prosecutions. My notes do not add to this issue. The Board and I did

      not want to avoid liability from past prosecutions if these prosecutions

      were unsafe and we took steps to assure ourselves of the safety of past

      prosecutions. We had engaged Second Sight and as I will shortly come

      onto, we also engaged Linklaters and Deloitte to investigate this issue.

      However, as is evident from the discussions going on at this time about

      the Post Office's prosecution policy, many people at the Post Office,

      including me, were concerned that in the past Royal Mail Group's

      decisions to bring private prosecutions against sub-postmasters were

      disproportionate and not in line with the approach taken by other

      commercial retail organisations.



303.4 1 have been asked if I considered it to be more important to avoid liability

      arising from past prosecutions or seeing that the Post Office took all steps

      to ensure that past convictions were safe. I have described above my

      thinking at the time on the questions of whether convictions were safe. As

      to the suggestion, that I, or my Board colleagues, were more concerned

      with some perceived legal risk to ourselves than establishing the truth

      about Horizon, I reject this entirely. I have already discussed the fact that

      I believe that requests for advice on where liability might arise in these

      circumstances were prudent and in no way at odds with attempts to

      properly investigate Horizon and to adopt a far more supportive approach

      to sub-postmasters.




                                  149
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     303.5 I have been asked if the Altman or Clarke advices were discussed or

            provided to the Board. As I noted at paragraph 81.7 these advices were

            never provided to the Board. It is evident from Board papers and minutes

            of Board meetings that the Board and its Sub-Committees received brief

            and I think misleading summaries of elements of the advice provided to

            the Post Office by the external lawyers it had retained but Simon Clarke's

            advice was never mentioned, nor was his name.



304 I am asked to what extent, if it all, I or members of the Board applied pressure to

     limit the scope of the Mediation Scheme and / or the Post Office's approach to it

     because of costs concerns. I will come on in detail to the Post Office's change of

     approach to the Mediation Scheme from late 2014, at which point it was

     becoming increasingly clear that the Mediation Scheme was not going to deliver

     on its objectives for the key stakeholders.



305 On 11 February 2014 the ARC were to discuss the way forward in respect of the

     Post Office's prosecutions policy at a teleconference. As already mentioned at

     paragraph 299 above, at its 19 November 2013 meeting (WITNO0740132) the

     ARC had considered whether or not the policy should be amended, but agreed

     that before any further decisions could be taken on the policy: (a) further work

     needed to be done to understand the financial and other consequences of

     amending the policy, so that fewer cases would be referred to the criminal courts;

     (b) the ARC should understand better the work being done as part of the

     Business Improvement Programme, and the impact this would have on

     preventing (and detecting) losses at an earlier stage; and (c) the ARC should



                                        150
                                                                                WI TNO0740100
                                                                              WI TN00740100




understand better how banks and other large companies dealt with criminal loss

caused by employees. Chris Aujard led on this work and produced a paper

(POL00100193) which was circulated to me and the ARC members on 7

February 2014, so that we had time to consider this before the meeting. As the

paper notes, the options that the ARC was considering were:



 305.1 Option A: "Preserving the status quo - i.e. retaining prosecutorial

        capability and continuing with a prosecutions policy which is

        substantially the same as that which has been used in the past";



 305.2 Option B: "Pursuing a prosecutions policy more focussed on more

        egregious misconduct - e.g. higher value cases/cases involving

        vulnerable members of society/cases involving particularly wilful

        wrongdoing, and engaging with the police in relation to other matters";




 305.3 Option C: "Ceasing all prosecutorial activities but instead actively

        involving the police/CPS etc where it is felt that they are likely to take

        matters forward".



 305.4 Option A was not supported and the ARC were choosing between

        Options B and C. For option B, the proposal being put forward was that

        we imposed a financial `filter' so that higher value cases would be

        prosecuted, and also that the following factors would be considered so

        that more egregious misconduct, which the Post Office would think more



                                  151
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




              appropriate to intervene in and deter, was caught by the policy

              (POL00100193):



    "•    whether the losses in question have been repaid;

    • the nature of the alleged misconduct;

    •      whether there is evidence that the Defendant took money directly from

    us/others;

    •      whether the facts disclose a pattern of deliberate conduct designed to

    materially    benefit   him/her,   or      whether   the   fact   pattern   discloses

    inadvertence/poor book-keeping skills or "muddle-headedness";

    •      the degree of sophistication of the alleged wrongdoing;

    •      the number of incidents;

    •     the extent to which any members of the public suffered loss, and if so whether

    they were from vulnerable groups in society;

    •     the period of the alleged offending;

    •     the cost of bringing the prosecution; and

    •     whether there are any alternative, more suitable, remedies available to POL."



306 I am asked to set out the different views about the proposed changes amongst

    some Board members and senior management. These are evident from the

    emails in the disclosure:



        306.1 I set out my view in an email on Saturday 8 February: I was leaning

              towards option C and felt that it should be explored further

              (POL00027692). Brian Altman KC had highlighted that the Post Office


                                         152
                                                                                 WI TN00740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




      was in an almost unique situation as a prosecutor. I was unclear on why

      we should be in a different position from other comparable institutions

      such as banks and financial institutions who did not conduct such

      prosecutions in-house and relied on the CPS. I did not feel that I had

      seen sufficient justification "in principle" for why the Post Office should

      act differently and exercise extensive private prosecution powers. For

      further information, I asked (i) how much money would potentially be at

      risk were we to pursue Option C; and (ii) what the relative costs were of

      giving the work to external lawyers rather than doing it in-house under

      Option B. Susannah Storey replied to say that she had a similar view to

      me: she wished to explore option C further and thought it was "hard to

      imagine in 2014 POL is so different from other organisations to

      necessitate this approach" (POL00027687). I am asked why I took the

      Mediation Scheme into account when considering whether the Post

      Office should continue to bring prosecutions; looking back at my email

      on this subject, I do not recall that I in fact did so.



306.2 Neil McCausland was, I recall, in favour of option B. In an email of 9

      February 2014 he stated that his primary focus was on how to continue

      to   deter   sub-postmasters       from    attempting     to   commit   fraud

      (POL00100224). He asked whether the civil recovery process should be

      explored further because it appeared from Chris Aujard's paper to be

      more effective in recovering monies than criminal prosecutions were.




                                  153
                                                                               WI TN00740100
                                                                             WI TN00740100




306.3 Paula Vennells was also in favour of option B. She emailed us on 11

      February 2014 in advance of the ARC teleconference (POL00100223).

      She highlighted that she thought that there were a number of factors

      which distinguished the Post Office from other financial institutions who

      were content not to do their own prosecutions: "[the Post Office's] scale,

      our unique relationship with sub-postmasters, the amount of cash that is

      handled by our branches (and in many cases by individuals who are not

      employees), our large number of vulnerable customers who are more

      easily defrauded, and the fact that public money is at stake". She

      favoured option B over option C primarily because:



      306.3.1       With the Mediation Scheme underway and the extensive

             media interest in the Post Office's prosecutions, she felt that

             changing the Post Office's policy drastically by referring all cases

             to the CPS would be misinterpreted as an admission that we were

            wrong to pursue prosecutions in the past. (As an aside here, I am

             asked about the extent to which individuals took into account the

            Post Office's "corporate brand" when considering whether to

             change its prosecutorial function. This is the comment which

             probably most closely relates to the Post Office's brand).



      306.3.2         Paula Vennells was concerned that the CPS were

            overstretched and that there was a need for a deterrent effect and

            for the Post Office to protect its vulnerable customers. She

             thought that by reducing the number of cases being prosecuted



                                154
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




                    under option B and outsourcing the investigative activity, this need

                    could be met while also "extracting the PR and operating cost

                    benefits of option C".



307 Given that Paula Vennells, Neil McCausland and Alastair Marnoch (Chair of the

     ARC) were in favour of option B, I was in a minority arguing for option C. Although

     I was uneasy about continuing with a policy of bringing our own prosecutions,

     and voiced my opinion, in the end it was not entirely down to me. As a Chair I

     needed to reflect the views of the Board as a whole.



308 As I have already commented, in hindsight, it is clear that we should have known

     and been able to take into account Simon Clarke's advices and all aspects of

     Brian Altman KC's advices when we had this discussion.



309 The ARC recommended to pursue option B and this was approved at the next

     Board meeting on 26 February 2014 (POL00027337).



310 I have been asked to consider POL00116241 (briefing for Paula Vennells for 1-

     2-1 with me on 6 January 2014), POL00021521 (minutes of POL Board Meeting

     on 21 January 2014), POL00100321 (email from Belinda Crowe to me on 23

     February 2014), POL00116313 (speaking note for Board meeting on 26

     February 2014) and POL00027337 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 26

     February 2014).




                                        155
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




311 I was not involved with the Initial Complaints Review and Case Mediation

     Steering Group. Instead, I was involved with the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee

     which I chaired. My best recollection is that the Steering Group was comprised

     of the executives, but the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee was of course a Board

     Sub-Committee. I was briefed by Paula Vennells about the progress of the

     Second Sight investigation and the work of the Working Group in our weekly one-

     to-one meetings — an example of this is the briefing for her for our meeting on 6

     January 2014 (POL00116241). Additionally I would receive updates about the

     progress of the Second Sight investigation and the Working Group at Project

     Sparrow Sub-Committee meetings and during Board meetings where Project

     Sparrow was tabled for discussion. I am asked what, if anything, I did to test the

     views expressed that progress with the scheme was slowed by the capacity of

     third parties, such as Second Sight and Howe & Co. On this I trusted the

     assurances that I was given, not least because they came both from the Post

     Office and SirAnthony Hooper, who was of course independent. The Inquiry has

     also asked me why Second Sight's role changed from it writing reports to

     reviewing work produced by Angela van den Bogerd. I am unclear on this

     question as my understanding is that in February 2014 Second Sight were

     producing reports, as Paula Vennells mentioned at the Board meeting on 26

     February 2014 (speaking note at POL00116313).



312 I do not think that I had concerns with the ambit of Second Sight's investigation

     at this stage, however I did still have concerns about their professionalism and

     resourcing. I am asked about the discussion at the Board on 21 January 2014

     that led to the minute "The Board asked if the Terms of Reference agreed with



                                       156
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




    2nd Sight precluded them from working with claimants against the Post Office"

    (POL00021521). I do not specifically remember this discussion but it does not

    surprise me to read it now. I think it was good corporate governance for the Board

    to check there were safeguards in place in relation to Second Sight's

    independence. Our concerns started in March 2013 when Second Sight

    appeared to be giving different messages to Lord Arbuthnot and the Post Office

    on key issues, at the meeting to which I refer in paragraph 194 above, and these

    concerns continued with Second Sight's handling of the Interim Report, as well

    as further reports we received that Second Sight might be briefing' against the

    Post Office. An example of this was contained in my briefing pack authored by

    Belinda Crowe for the meeting that I had with Lord Arbuthnot on 28 January 2014,

    which I will shortly come onto in more detail (POL00100124). I was informed that:



    "During a wider discussion with Second Sight they mentioned to me that they

    thought that James Arbuthnot might raise the issue of their broader work and in

    particular when they might produce a further report. It is not clear whether or not

    they have briefed James' office to raise this or that it is their view that he might

    do so of his own volition. They are also proving difficult to pin down on the issue

    of Post Office funding work outside of the Working Group at the behest of MPs.

    As we discussed in the pre brief we currently have no visibility of the extent of

    contact between James' office and Second Sight and how engaged they are or

    indeed James' own views".



313 Chris Aujard also updated us on 27 January 2014 following a call with Ian

    Henderson of Second Sight (POL00116247). One of Chris' bullet points was: "Ian


                                       157
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




    said that James will push for a further report within the next few weeks. Ian

    proposed using the generic report that Second Sight are already working on to

    fulfil this role. I pushed back on this, pointing out that the report Ian was proposing

    to publish had been produced under the auspices of the Working Group and

    could not just be published. Further I questioned whether producing a report such

    as that in the midst of attempting to resolve the mediation cases risked

    prejudicing their handling".



314 I was concerned about Second Sight briefing Lord Arbuthnot and thought this

    was out of step with their engagement. They were engaged by the Post Office

    alone, and they were not strictly accountable to Lord Arbuthnot. Chris Aujard's

    update indicated that Second Sight were not taking very seriously their

    agreement with the Working Group, and the running of the Mediation Scheme

    (POL00116247). To me this reflected my concern at the time that they felt that

    they had different groups to satisfy, as opposed to conducting an independent

    report. All this did make me (and other Board members) question their

    independence and professionalism, I think reasonably.



315 I am also asked to expand on the discussion leading to the minute of the 26

    February 2014 Board meeting (POL00027337) stating "it was acknowledged

    that, in light of the facts now available, and the projected level of legal claims and

    costs, it would be sensible to commission more generic legal advice on the

    overall level of legal and financial exposure... This advice should consider the

    steps that could be taken to mitigate any exposure including considerations of

    alternative structures that might be available to deal with mediation cases". I do



                                         158
                                                                                         W ITNO0740100
                                                                                       W ITN00740100




     not specifically remember this discussion. My view on the increasing costs and

     possible legal exposure is not something that I recall in any detail. There was

     growing awareness of the complexity of the Mediation Scheme and of the

     possibility, in accordance with our briefings, that it might be a challenge for us to

     get it to work (although, in the end, a small number of cases did succeed). We

     were concerned about whether some of the past cases might need to be

     reviewed in light of some of the detail that had now been described. We wanted

     to know what the implications of all of this were and that the Post Office and its

     lawyers were doing the right thing. I think this was the right thing to do — to assess

     the legal situation, the risks and the right next steps.



316 I have considered POL00100124 (briefing for meeting with Lord Arbuthnot),

     POL00100128 (email from David Oliver to me on 27 January 2014),

     POL00100129 (attachment to former email), POL00116245 (email from David

     Oliver to you and Paula Vennells on 27 January 2014), POL00116246 (agenda

     attached to former email), POL00116247 (further briefing for meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot), POL00100142 (email chain on 27/28 January 2014), POLOOIOO141

     (email chain on 27/28 January 2014), POL00026743 (note of meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot on 28 January 2014) and POLOO100210 (email from Belinda Crowe

     to me and others on 7 February 2014) .



317 After receiving the briefing pack for my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot I asked: "If

     we have changed our policies so dramatically on suspensions etc, isn't that an

     admission that we got it wrong in the past and should therefore automatically pay

     compensation to all affected?" (P0L00100142). Paula Vennells forwarded this



                                         159
                                                                                       W ITNO0740100
                                                                                     W ITN00740100




    email to different executives to source the answer (taking me out of copy) and I

    assume that either (i) these responses were forwarded to me or (ii) I was briefed

    orally about them before my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot. Rodric Williams (in-

    house litigation lawyer) said (POL00100141):



    "1. Legally, changing the way you act does not amount to an admission that what

    you did in the past was wrong.

    2. We have a contractual right to suspend subpostmasters, which we can choose

    to exercise depending on the facts of a case.

    3. We can use a policy to help us decide if we should exercise that right, e.g. for

    consistency in application.



    4. We can change that policy., or how we apply it, if it is in our interest to do so,

    e.g. to improve the way we do business."



318 Angela van den Bogerd responded (POL00100142):



    "There are still cases today that we precautionary suspend as detailed on the

    example page that you have so not all of the 147 cases would fall into the no

    precautionary suspension category. Each case would need to be assessed on

    the facts and to put this in to context we have 147 cases over a period of 13

    years.

    From reviewing the 147 cases there are a few that if we were dealing with that

    case today we would probably have not precautionary suspended but for the

    majority these are probably at the other end of the spectrum".



                                        160
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




319 Chris Aujard responded (P0L00100142):



     "...picking upon that part of Alice's question that relates to paying compensation,

     I think that it is fair to say that we acted within our contractual powers previously

     (under the "old" policy), and that we will continue to act within our contractual

     powers under the "new" policy. I think that any claim for compensation that is

     based on the notion that once we have set a policy, then it must be fixed in stone

     for all time (as otherwise it is an admission of liability) is flawed, and would

     arguably lead to very strange policy setting behaviour. It strikes me that it is also

     fair to say that our world has changed a lot in the last few years, and one would

     therefore expect our policies to change as well..."



320 Looking at these responses now, I cannot recall exactly if I was satisfied with

     them at the time, but I do note that Chris Aujard's response to my question looks

     reasonable.



321 I have been asked to describe my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on 28 January

     2014. On this, I cannot add to the official note of the meeting (POL00026743).

     Myself, Lord Arbuthnot, Paula Vennells, Janet Walker and David Oliver of the

     Post Office were present. The note states that:



      321.1 I started the meeting giving an update about the Mediation Scheme,

             explaining that the Scheme was going slower than had been anticipated,

             in part because the Post Office was doing a very thorough job on the



                                         161
                                                                           WI TNO0740100
                                                                         WI TN00740100




      case reports which was an important area for Sir Anthony Hooper (he

      had praised their thoroughness).



321.2 Lord Arbuthnot thanked me for those comments and said that he

      received feedback that Sir Anthony Hooper was "a really good man

      doing a good job". We then moved to the topic of communications: Lord

      Arbuthnot asked that an October meeting between the Post Office and

      the MPs was reinstated as the MPs had not been updated on their

      constituents' cases for some time.



321.3 I said that communications with MPs were a good thing but we did also

      need to ensure that the Mediation Scheme was allowed to progress — in

      the end, a further meeting was agreed with MPs at this meeting, before

      the first cases had exited mediation, to update on the progress and the

      process that was underway.



321.4 Lord Arbuthnot said that he was very impressed with the general

      approach that the Post Office were taking. Paula Vennells said that the

      "Post Office were taking the issue very seriously and that was why they

      had committed 22 investigators, funded professional advisors for the

      applicants and funded the provision of an independent mediator".



321.5 Another important point, among others, in this meeting was that it was

      confirmed that Lord Arbuthnot did not engage Second Sight — Paula

      Vennells explained to Lord Arbuthnot that Second Sight were engaged



                               162
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




             (rather than employed) by the Post Office in the way that any

             independent professional service might be and were accountable to the

             Working Group. Lord Arbuthnot accepted that position.



322 I am asked whether I set out any of my concerns about Second Sight. From the

    meeting note it does not look as though I did. It could well be that because we

     clarified the independence of Second Sight with Lord Arbuthnot (and the fact that

    he did not engage them), and later in the meeting discussed how to focus their

    work ("PV also commented that Second Sight would not be advising Post Office

    on Criminal Cases or their Prosecution Policy as they were forensic accountants

    and not lawyers"), I was hopeful that things could improve (particularly as Lord

    Arbuthnot was an influential figure for Second Sight). I may well have wanted to

    focus on making the meeting constructive.



323 I note that the Board received an update paper dated 20 February 2014 about

    the Mediation Scheme authored by Belinda Crowe (POL00030712). This raised

    a number of serious concerns about the progress of the Scheme:



      323.1 That the scheme was progressing slower than was expected.



      323.2 That there was a very significant `expectations gap' between the claims

             in the Scheme and what the Scheme would deliver by way of

             compensation. We were told that we were likely to receive claims in the

             region of £100 million, but that Bond Dickinson had informed us that in

             practice, the claims were likely to be to the value of around £6 million.



                                       163
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




      323.3 That there were very high resource demands.



      323.4 That the engagement letter with Second Sight still was not agreed:

            Second Sight wanted to water down the clause restricting their ability to

            act against the Post Office in the future. This led the Post Office to

            engage in efforts to ensure that "Second Sight remain engaged in the

            Scheme and that the Scheme completes in a timely manner".



      323.5 There was a concern about the professional advisors to some of the sub-

            postmasters: "The professional advisors are also proving difficult to

            manage and there are signs that at least some are attempting to act as

            a collective to challenge the timelines and fee levels imposed by the

            Scheme although we do not know whether that will materialise".



      323.6 Belinda Crowe was concerned about the extent to which the Second

            Sight Reports would be evidenced in their criticisms of the Post Office.



324 On 10 March 2014 1 wrote to Paula Vennells as follows (POL00105552):



    "Following our helpful conversation, I am setting out what I would like on this for

    a further substantive discussion at the March Board meeting.




                                       164
                                                                              WI TNO0740100
                                                                            WI TN00740100




The definitive view on all aspects of insurance ie organisational and personal.

What policies do we have; what in practice, do we believe they will cover us

for; and what have we been doing to fulfill our obligations under our policies?



Are we safe from legal challenge in what we are/have been doing? What is the

position both since we became independent and before?



What is the worst case in relation to costs which could result from this (both

admin and settlements)?



The position in relation to SS's costs and the absence of an engagement letter

- what is the recommended action and what are the potential consequences?



The position on the lessons learned review - timing.



What options do we have to mitigate 3) above?



As I mentioned, I think someone should write to the NEDs this week and explain

what we are planning for the 26th, list the questions which we expect to answer

more precisely than I have here (taking into account the ARC discussions last

week) and ask them whether we have understood their questions accurately

and if not, what else they would like to see covered. That way we can be sure

to cover the right ground.




                                 165
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




      Finally, I am going to propose a Board Sub-C'tee chaired by me with you and at

      least one other NED on it.-



      I hope that's clear. Please come back to me on anything that isn't".



325 I am asked to summarise what my main concerns in respect of complaints made

      by sub-postmasters about Horizon were at this stage. At this stage I still of course

      believed in Horizon's integrity. The briefings however did say that the Post

      Office's conduct towards sub-postmasters in the past, for example in respect of

      training and support, may have meant that the Post Office owed sub-postmasters

      compensation. My role as Chair would be to ask for work assessing the Post

      Office's full liabilities, and possible risks from the Post Office's past conduct, to

      inform the best next steps. And as I have already noted, I accepted the Second

      Sight findings about the training and support and fully supported the work which

      the executives were doing to address these.



(G)    JANUARY 2014 TO JULY 2015



326 In this section I shall address the instruction of Linklaters and Deloitte, the

      changes that were made to the operation of the Mediation Scheme and my

      decision to leave the Post Office Board in July 2015.




                                          166
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




Instruction of Linklaters and Deloitte



327 I have been asked to describe my knowledge of and involvement with the

     instruction of Linklaters and Deloitte in 2014, and any steps taken by the Post

     Office following their reporting. I have considered UKG100002213 (email from

     Alwen Lyons to you and others on 11 March 2014), POL00107317 (Linklaters'

     Report into Initial Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme dated 20 March

     2014), POL00021523 (minutes of the Post Office Board meeting on 26 March

     2014), POL00105529 (Chris Aujard note of 19 March 2014 with attachments)

     and POL00022093 (outline of Linklaters report).



328 I first note that on 6 March 2014, there was an ARC meeting (the minutes of

     which would have been circulated to the full Board) at which further assurances

     were provided by the Post Office's external auditors, Ernst and Young, about

     Horizon on the basis of Fujitsu's IT controls report: "Angus Grant noted that the

     Fujitsu IT controls report had been received and had no issues of concern. The

     Committee discussed the independence of the report on Fujitsu's controls. It was

     noted that EY prepared the report against defined standards, and underwrote its

     accuracy. The Committee was advised that the audit of the Fujitsu work had

     improved over the last two years with higher levels of engagement and oversight,

     and that lessons learnt would be implemented at the start of the re-platforming

     process to take place in 2015" (WITN00740133).



329 Linklaters were commissioned after the Board meeting on 26 February 2014

     (POL00027337). At this the Board received a report on the challenges facing the



                                         167
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




    Mediation Scheme and steps that were being taken to address them. We were

    concerned by the progress of the Scheme and as the minutes show, Paula

    Vennells agreed with our concerns. She updated us that she had met recently

    both with Second Sight and with Sir Anthony Hooper about how to try to address

    matters more quickly. We were told:



      "The CEO informed the Board that Second Sight had yet to produce their first

      written report for the mediation scheme, and that, until such time as a number

      of reports had been produced, which would be over the next four weeks, Sir

      Anthony Hooper felt unable to form a view on the best way to manage the

      scheme going forward. He strongly advised against taking any precipitous

      action at this stage. Sir Anthony offered to meet the Board at a later date if that

      would be helpful."



330 We discussed the Mediation Scheme and possible support for Second Sight to

    enable a more efficient process. We decided to commission generic legal advice

    about:



    330.1 The overall level of legal and financial exposure (taking account of the

             possibility of class actions); and



    330.2 The steps that could be taken to mitigate any exposure including

             considerations of alternative structures that might be available to deal with

             the mediation cases (including regard to alternative dispute resolution

             mechanisms, such as the Financial Ombudsman Service).



                                          168
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




331 As a Board we had been considering the situation as a whole and thought that it

     was an appropriate time to obtain a reputable, external view about these issues.

     I remember that I agreed with the suggestion to commission further legal advice;

     I was not involved in the specific choice of Linklaters, but after they were

     instructed I was content that a reputable law firm was on-board. It is very unlikely

     that I was involved in a more granular level on instructing Linklaters and posing

     questions to them which would have been the remit of the senior executives

     (particularly the General Counsel). I cannot see that I replied to Alwen Lyons'

     email of 11 March 2014 (UKG100002213) asking the Board whether they had

     further, specific questions for Linklaters to address in the scoping document

     prepared for them, which likely means that I was satisfied with this document. I

     cannot recall why Linklaters were provided four spot reviews and were not

     instructed to contact Fujitsu.



332 I cannot see that I was briefed on Linklaters' advice before Christa Band

     appeared before the Board on 26 March 2014 (POL00021523). The long-form

     advice was provided in the Board pack for this meeting and so I would have read

     it in full (POL00107317). I am asked about my "initial views" on Linklaters' advice

     — I remember trusting it. I do also recall being struck by their criticisms of Second

     Sight's work. These included:



      "5.31 Second Sight have not done what we would have expected them to do in

      terms of an investigation into Horizon. The logical and obvious start for their

      work would have been a thorough review and description of how Horizon is



                                         169
                                                                                WI TNO0740100
                                                                           WI TN00740100




supposed to work, its day to day use by the SPMRs and an in principle

identification of any weaknesses and likely points of malfunction. This should

be done without reference to the facts of any particular case and must be done

in conjunction both with the Post Office and Fujitsu. Second Sight should have

produced a report which clearly and objectively sets out what is known about

Horizon at a level of detail which can then be used as a baseline in any

individual case where the complaint is that Horizon was not working properly.



5.32 We understand that Second Sight are due to produce a generic report

which will set out and describe themes and the types of loss that they have

identified from the Applications that have been submitted to the Scheme. Such

a report would not fulfil the objectives we here describe. Nor does the work

Second Sight seem to have done so far fulfil those objectives either. They have

descended into the detail of individual cases and commented on the particular

issues of which complaint is made. They have done so without reference to any

robust evidence as to how and why there may have been malfunctions with

Horizon or how any such malfunctions could have caused the losses in the

particular case. The views which Second Sight have expressed in individual

cases are not supported by the sort of detail or evidence which would enable

any conclusions to be safely drawn from them. There may be a question as to

whether Second Sight have the expertise which would allow them to do the

work required to a satisfactory standard.



5.33 We would, further, have expected Second Sight to have discussed its work

in progress with the Working Group. Drafts should be available and the parties



                                 170
                                                                                           WI TN00740100
                                                                                         WI TN00740100




      should have an opportunity to comment. Second Sight seem to have relied on

      concerns raised by the JFSA7 to prepare their report which they have used to

      challenge the Post Office, but they do not address any fundamental questions

      about the problems with Horizon.             These factors further illustrate the

      idiosyncratic nature of Second Sight's approach...



      5.35 We find it surprising that, against such a conclusion as to Horizon's general

      reliability, Second Sight find it possible to make comments in individual cases

      that it is likely that it is a difficulty with Horizon which has led to the losses. The

      reasons for such a view are not explained nor is there any general evidence on

      which to draw which could provide further illumination."



333 The Inquiry has asked me to consider paragraph 2.3 of the report

     (POL00107317):



      "We note that there is, so far as we understand it, no objective report which

      describes and addresses the use and reliability of Horizon. We do think that

      such a report would be helpful, though there is a decision to be made about

      how broad and/or thorough it needs to be."



334 I am asked what steps if any the Post Office took to address this suggestion. In

     short, we engaged Deloitte to scope out such a review. I think that I would have

     been led by Linklaters as to what information they needed to advise on legal risk

     about Horizon prosecutions. Here Linklaters were clearly indicating what they




                                          171
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     thought would be "helpful" by way of a report into Horizon and we accepted that

     recommendation.



335 On 26 March 2014, Christa Band of Linklaters presented her advice to the Board.

     I do not recall more about the detail of this meeting than the minutes of this

     meeting show (POL00021523). I do recall that Christa came across very well —

     authoritative, clear and she left a strong impression on the Board. Christa

     explained that because of the terms of the contract between the sub-postmasters

     and the Post Office, the Post Office would not be required to pay compensation

     under the Scheme, and that if compensation were given this would not give sub-

     postmasters outside the Scheme any legal right to demand such compensation

     although it may lead to claims of 'unfairness'. She also explained that English

     Law did not allow for compensation for distress as claimed by many of those

     participating in the Scheme.



336 Christa Band also questioned the approach taken by Second Sight with respect

     to their work to date. In particular (as mentioned in her longer-form advice) she

     said that she would have expected Second Sight: (i) to produce a review of the

     system as a 'baseline' before considering any specific complaints; and (ii) cite

     hard evidence to back up any conclusions made (POL00021523). The latter

     criticism of Second Sight was entirely consistent with what we on the Board had

     been led to believe by the executives. I have mentioned that the Post Office's

     view had been that claims were sometimes being made by Second Sight without

     citing sufficiently grounded evidence, and we now had a Partner from a highly

     reputable law firm agreeing with that view, who carried the Board's confidence at


                                       172
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     the meeting. Additionally, Paula Vennells updated the Board in that meeting that

     "the quality of the work undertaken by Second Sight had been challenged by Sir

    Anthony Hooper, Chairman of the Working Group, who was now insisting on

     more evidence-based reports" (POL00021523).



337 Christa Band's suggestion of a `baseline' review of the system appeared to me

     to be sensible (POL00021523). The idea behind Second Sight's review was that

     they were to investigate a number of problematic cases for which Horizon

     complaints had been made and then conclude, from this review, whether

     "systemic issues" in Horizon were evident. This case-led approach had been

     partly led by our desire to collaborate with the MPs to investigate specific cases.

     But the rest of the Board and I now agreed that commissioning a 'baseline' review

     of the Horizon system would be a useful step.



338 The minutes (POL00021523) record that:



      "The Board agreed that they needed to commission a piece of work, to

      complement that undertaken by Linklaters, to give them and those concerned

      outside the Business, comfort about the Horizon system.



      The Business was asked to revert with the terms of reference and timescale for

      the work which should cover:



      • The work undertaken by Angela van den Bogerd explaining

      how the system works


                                        173
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




      • A review of the data integrity aspects of the system

      • A reference to all audits and tests carried out on the system

      • A response to the most significant thematic issues raised by Second Sight.




339 The Terms of Reference were to be tested with Linklaters to ensure that the work

     would satisfy them as evidence that Horizon was reliable.



340 I do not recall whether I or another Post Office individual advised the Mediation

     Scheme Working Group and/or Lord Arbuthnot about the instruction of Linklaters

     and/or Deloitte at the time. I had no direct dealings with the Working Group, who

     were intended to operate independently and at arms-length from the Post Office,

     but there was a flow of communication between the Working Group and the

     senior executives and it is possible that one of them informed the Working Group.

     Additionally, I note that around that time I was less in contact with Lord Arbuthnot

     than I was around the time of the commissioning of Second Sight. The 26 March

     2014 Board minutes refer to an MPs meeting recently attended by Chris Aujard,

     Paula Vennells and Angela van den Bogerd, at which I was not present

     (POL00021523). I think that in any case it would have been premature to advise

     the Mediation Scheme Working Group and/or Lord Arbuthnot about these

     instructions; at this stage, the Board was seeking advice on an issue in order,

     eventually, to make its informed opinion on the way forward.



341 I have also been asked to consider POL00116439 (document pack for meeting

     of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 9 April 2014), POL00006565


                                        174
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     (minutes of Project Sparrow Sub- Committee meeting on 9 April 2019) and

     POL00006571 (minutes of Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 6 June

     2014). The Project Sparrow Committee was set up as a sub-committee of the

     Board in order to give regular and specific Board level scrutiny to Project Sparrow

     issues, which were becoming increasingly difficult as the Mediation Scheme

     progressed. As the Terms of Reference document stated, the intended purpose

     of the Sub-Committee was "to make recommendations to the Board in respect of

     Project Sparrow and provide strategic oversight of the delivery of the project and

     the development of the Initial Complaints Review and Mediation Scheme (the

     Scheme)" (POL00116439). I knew that the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee was

     going to involve difficult and additional work, and I thought that it was right that I

     took it upon myself to chair it, given how significant this issue had become.



342 I think that overall the stated purpose of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee, to

     make recommendations to the Board and provide strategic oversight on the

     project, was appropriate and fulfilled. I think that it was appropriate for the Board

     to operate at arms-length from the Mediation Scheme, the independence of

     which was very important to command the confidence of stakeholders like the

     JFSA. The Project Sparrow Sub-committee was proactive in directing the Post

     Office to explore alternatives, when it became apparent in late 2014/early 2015

     that the Scheme was not working. I note that this structure gave a Committee of

     the Board additional, and focused time to consider questions that came up with

     Project Sparrow and the future of the Scheme. Of course, the Mediation Scheme

     was being operated independently so it would not have been right for the Board

     or its Sub-Committee to get involved with the mediation process itself, Sir



                                         175
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     Anthony Hooper's deliberations and/or the operation of the Working Group. We

     were reliant as ever on the briefings and assurances provided to us about the

     progress of the Scheme, which I will come onto.



343 A slide pack for the Sparrow Sub-committee giving the options for the future of

     the Scheme say that it (the Scheme) was established "on the basis that there

     were no systemic problems with Horizon" (POL00116439). Second Sight's report

     had of course found that there was no evidence to suggest systemic issues with

     Horizon, and previous investigations into Horizon came to the same conclusion.

     We all believed that to be true and were proceeding on that assumption. This did

     not however stop us from supporting further investigations into Horizon, including

     Linklaters and Deloitte's work, and later, the CCRC's involvement which I fully

     supported.



344 I am asked whether by the point of 9 April 2014 and 6 June 2014 any members

     of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee were considering termination of the

     Mediation Scheme. On 9 April 2014, the Sub-Committee received a paper

     (POL00116439) which set out a number of options, one of which was to "Close

     the Scheme". On page 4 of that paper, 5 options were mentioned, later reduced

     to 3. I can't remember whether I or any other member of the Sub-Committee was

     independently considering that option before receiving the paper although we

     were already concerned about the Scheme, and that was in our minds in setting

     up the Sub-Committee. Some members, including me, by the point of 6 June

     2014 were considering the option (alongside two others) of completing the Post

     Office's investigations in the remaining cases and moving the governance and


                                       176
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    management of the Scheme in-house, ending Second Sight's engagement and

    dissolving the Working Group. We did not eventually opt for this. I will come onto

    these options in more detail in due course. On 28 April 2014 Chris Aujard

     provided the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee with an options paper for the

     closure / accelerated completion of the Scheme (WITN00740134). By that time I

    think that a number of Board members were concerned that the Scheme was

    unworkable and not delivering on its aims.



345 I have considered POL00116515 (email from Alwen Lyons to me and others on

    28 April 2014), POL00116516, POL00116517 (attachments). I would have read

    Alan Bates' letter of 16 April 2014 as it was sent to me. At the time I would have

    had doubts as to whether the criticisms contained within the letter were fair,

     based on the assurances that we had received at Board level about the operation

    of the Scheme. Alan Bates' letter implied that the Post Office were responsible

    for significant delays in the Scheme. But the assurances that the Board had

    heard by this point indicated different reasons for delays in the progress of the

    Scheme.



346 On 20 February 2014, Belinda Crowe authored a Board paper citing issues with

    the Scheme including the extent to which Second Sight's reports would be

    "evidenced" (POL00030712); and I have mentioned Paula Vennells' update to

    the Board on 26 March 2014 where we were told that "the quality of the work

    undertaken by Second Sight had been challenged by Sir Anthony Hooper,

    Chairman of the Working Group, who was now insisting on more evidence-based

    reports" (POL00021523). Later that month Chris Aujard authored an update


                                       177
                                                                                  WI TN00740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




paper to the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee which was also critical of the quality

and objectivity of Second Sight's work, also noting that "[Second Sight's]

resource is limited to three people and it is unlikely that they could process the

c.140 cases in the Scheme within a reasonable timeframe" (POL00022125).

These gave a different explanation for any delays in the Scheme. I do not think

that I sought to investigate Alan Bates' claim that the Post Office was responsible

for the delays because we saw the progress and conduct of the Scheme as Sir

Anthony Hooper's responsibility. If he had suggested to us that the Post Office

was responsible for delays, I do not doubt that we would have taken action in the

Project Sparrow Sub-Committee. But he had not, and had instead indicated

issues with the quality of Second Sight's work. At the Project Sparrow Sub-

Committee meeting on 30 April 2014 (POL00006566), we were informed that Sir

Anthony Hooper would be discussing Alan Bates' letter at the next meeting of the

Working Group. A reactive statement had been prepared by the Post Office in

case the letter was published, and it was agreed that the Post Office would

update Lord Arbuthnot. It was also noted that the Post Office would have the

opportunity to respond to any erroneous comments in the letter at the Working

Group meeting and that Paula Vennells would consider whether to respond to

the letter after that meeting. There is no reference in the minutes of the meeting

to any discussion of the substance of the complaints. My recollection is that we

felt that it was for Sir Anthony Hooper in the first place to deal with these, as he

was in charge of the Working Group. Indeed, we asked for a brief update

following the Working Group of the next day, and Sir Antony Hooper was noted

as saying that he would write to the Minister rectifying any factual inaccuracies




                                   178
                                                                                          WI TN00740100
                                                                                        WI TN00740100




     (after the JFSA letter was discussed) — I think we therefore saw this issue as

     being in-hand (UKG100002308).



347 On this topic I also note that the Post Office raised the issue with Sir Anthony

     Hooper in the following month. On 19 May 2014 I received Paula's note of her

     meeting with Sir Anthony Hooper (POL00116572) In this note Paula asked him

     to comment on the Post Office's performance, and Sir Anthony Hooper "replied

     that really [the Post Office's reports] had been good and he had only asked us to

     be clearer in calling out where there was evidence of 'hands in tills'. He said the

     PO reports are thorough and name checked Angela but made the point it had

     taken everyone by surprise how much work was involved — he said the detail was

     necessary and that has taken the Post Office much more time than envisaged".

     Sir Anthony Hooper agreed the need to keep Second Sight focused on the

     narrow issue of loss and not allow wider ranging comment in the case reports —

     he agreed to raise this at the next meeting. The picture that I gleaned from this

     discussion was that some of the delays may also been attributable to the Post

     Office, but that the independent head of the Scheme was saying that the

     "thorough" work leading to these delays was "necessary".



348 I am asked about Alan Bates' comment that "POL in practice seems not only to

     be hardening its corporate defence, but now seems to be prepared to invoke the

     protection of the public purse as their last line of justification for not righting the

     wrongs they have inflicted on so many". I did not at the time think that this was

     fair. As I saw it at the time, the Post Office had commissioned the independent

     Second Sight review, which had concluded that Horizon had no systemic issues,



                                          179
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     and then entered into the Mediation Scheme in good faith to address some of

     the wider concerns about Horizon.



349 I have considered POL00117519 (email from Rodric Williams to Gareth James

     on 2 April 2014), POLOO105635 (Deloitte Project Zebra — Phase I Report (Draft

     — For validation in advance of Board discussion on Wednesday 30th April),

    POL00021524 (minutes of the Post Office Board meeting on 30 April 2014), and

    POL00006566 (minutes of Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 30 April

     2014). I cannot recall why the Post Office initially only instructed Deloitte in

     respect of Horizon Online and not Legacy Horizon; the detailed decisions on

     instructing Deloitte were delegated to the senior executives. My understanding

     at the time was that we were commissioning a piece of work to give us comfort

     about the Horizon system, pursuant to Linklaters' instructions.



350 Gareth James, a Partner at Deloitte, presented Deloitte's work to date to the

     Board on 30 April 2014. In terms of what I recall of his presentation, I cannot add

     to the minutes of this meeting (P0L00021524). At the meeting, I explained to

     Gareth James that the Board was concerned to know the truth about the reliability

     of the Horizon system, and that Deloitte's views would need to be expressed in

     such a way that would persuade reasonable lay people, by which I meant that it

     would need to help non-IT experts to understand his findings. Gareth James was

     very reassuring about the work that Deloitte had done so far. The minutes for the

     meeting record that he reported that all the work to date showed that the Horizon

     system had strong areas of control, and that its testing and implementation were

     in line with best practice. Work was still needed to assure the controls and access



                                        180
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     at the Finance Service Centre. Chris Aujard referenced allegations made by sub-

     postmasters that "phantom" transactions which were non-traceable were

     possible, and he said that assurance from Deloitte about the integrity of the

     system record logs would be very valuable. It was agreed that Gareth James

     would produce and cost a proposal for additional work to enable assurance for

     the wider system, including pre-2010 when a different version of Horizon was in

     use.



351 I do remember being reassured that a Deloitte Partner had informed us that, to

     date, the indications were that important aspects of Horizon's systems were "in

     line with best practice". This added weight to the internal and external assurances

     that we had received to date about the reliability, and safety, of Horizon.



352 On the discussion of Gareth James' work in the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee,

     I cannot recall further details than those in the minutes of that meeting

     (POL00006566). These state that Chris Aujard reported on a conversation that

     he had had with Gareth James after the Board meeting, in which Gareth James

     said that a technical aspect of the transaction log meant his assurance work

     could be completed more quickly. Chris Aujard was asked to liaise with Deloitte

     to ascertain the level of assurance that could be obtained at different timescales

     and different costs. The Committee also understood that pre-2010 assurance

     might be more difficult and take longer to obtain, and discussed the use of the

     detailed logs provided for the Court cases as evidence for Deloitte. I do not recall

     the details of this discussion.




                                        181
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




353 I am asked what concerns I or other Board members had about Deloitte's work

     at this point. I cannot recall any concerns about this. On the contrary, I remember

     that I felt very reassured by their involvement. Deloitte were a highly reputable

     firm. I also felt reassured that we were following Linklaters' advice to commission

     a further report into the overall workings of the Horizon system.



354 I am also asked on what basis I thought it was appropriate not to disseminate

     either the Deloitte or Linklaters reports further: I am clear that this was a

     provisional decision, as the minutes say that the reports "would not be

     disseminated at this point but the Business would consider .... And return to the

     committee on this issue" (POL00006566). I remember, as the minutes of the

     meeting note, that the Linklaters report was especially long.



355 There was an ARC meeting on 15 May 2014 (with the minutes at P0L00021426).

     I am asked what I recall about the Project Sparrow discussion for which I cannot

     add to the minutes:



      "(b) The Committee received a report on lessons learned from the handling of

      the commissioning of the Second Sight investigation into Horizon and

      subsequent events.



      (c) It was noted that there was a need for a formal protocol for enterprise wide

      response to enable the Business to respond quickly and effectively to any crisis,

      high risk or high-profile issue. The Committee also discussed whether there

      was a need for an identified in-house team ready to deal with such issues.



                                        182
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




      (d) It was agreed that establishing such a team (or teams) would be sensible

      action, and that appropriate oversight by the CEO and/or the Board was

      important. The Committee also suggested that scenario planning should be

      considered, and a virtual crisis management team and support (lawyers,

      accountants, internal and external resources) be put together.



      (e) Chris Aujard was asked to raise the matter at the Executive Committee,

      with a view to bringing a recommendation to the Board in due course. The

      Committee asked that the matter be considered as quickly as possible."



356 In the accompanying papers, there was the "Lessons Learned" review about the

     commissioning and handling of Second Sight, which the Business agreed to

     pursue after the Interim Report (POL00104259). On reflection, I think that this is

     an example of good governance: the Board was keen on proactively learning

     from mistakes and I have explained that we did not think that this whole episode

     had been well- handled. I completely accept that the commissioning of Second

     Sight could have been handled better, and agree with the conclusions from this

     lessons learned review, as I will explain in due course.



357 In response to the Inquiry's question, I do not recall the Project Sparrow Sub-

     Committee discussing the risk of unsafe convictions.



358 I have considered (POL00031391) Deloitte HNG-X: review of Assurance

     Sources — Phase 1 — Board Update at 13 May 2014 and (POL00021525) the


                                        183
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     minutes of the Post Office Board meeting on 21 May 2014. I cannot see that

     POL00031391 was in the Board pack for the 21 May 2014 meeting. However the

     minutes say that it had been circulated to the Board. In terms of the discussion

     of the Deloitte draft executive summary at this meeting, I cannot add to the

     minutes.



      "The General Counsel advised that the full Review should be available to the

      Business on Friday 23rd May. He would circulate it to the full Board as soon as

      possible, once he was satisfied with its drafting and the clarity of expression. It

      was agreed that he would escalate within Deloitte if he had concerns about the

      quality of the product. The Chairman stressed the importance of this Review

      and the need for it to give the Board assurance that there were (if that be the

      case) no issues with the system. She also stressed the need for the Review to

      be written clearly so that it could be used to give assurance to a wider audience.

      The Review would be considered at the next Board Sparrow Sub Committee

      (BSSC)."



359 I do recall this part of the minutes which refers to me. I was very clear that the

     Deloitte review was important to the Post Office both in getting to the truth about

     the Horizon system, and in explaining its findings publicly.



360 I am asked what changes to the Mediation Scheme I sought at this point; the

     minutes say that I asked the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee "to decide whether

     there was an option to change the scheme, before the first case was mediated,

     which could be as early as the next 4-8 weeks" (POL00021525). I cannot recall



                                        184
                                                                                  WI TN00740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




    what change I was contemplating specifically at this point as numerous proposals

    were being considered to alter the Scheme, because of our views about its

    unworkability. Paula Vennells had reported that she and Chris Aujard had met

    with Sir Anthony Hooper to understand his appetite for changing the Scheme.

    He had stressed that given the Post Office's agreement to the Scheme, they

    needed to let it run over the next 12-18 months.



361 The Board asked the Business to prepare a paper for the Sub-Committee

    analysing mediation claims including "the number of criminal cases which Post

    Office is unlikely to agree to mediate" (POL00021525). Because of the advice

    we had received about the Scheme's seeming increasing 'unviability', other

    Board members and I did want to understand the scope for potential changes to

    the Scheme. I asked that the next meeting of the Sparrow sub-committee

    consider:



    361.1 the options available for the Scheme;



    361.2 how cases could be removed from the Scheme into business as usual,

          based on a narrow definition of Horizon, and how this would be explained

          to the sub-postmasters and other stakeholders;



    361.3 the likely response from Sir Anthony Hooper, JFSA and Second Sight to

          any change; and



    361.4 PR scenario planning for all the options being considered.



                                      185
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




362 1 have considered (POL00028062) Deloitte — Horizon Desktop Review of

     Assurance Sources and Key Control Features report dated 23 May 2014. I

     cannot see that this was sent to me or other members of the Board at the time

     and I do not recall seeing it.

363 I note Chris Aujard's email to various executives on 29 May 2014 of which I was

     not a recipient (POL00031400). This said that he was disappointed with

     Deloitte's report not answering "the exam questions they had been set" and they

     had agreed to re-work the document to a more succinct "Board Briefing" note

     "addressing head-on the alleged failings in the system". Chris also said: "I should

     add that there is no suggestion from Deloitte that there is somehow something

     "wrong" with the system, or that it is not fit for purpose".



364 On 4 June 2014, Alwen Lyons sent an email to the Board in which she said that

     she "attached the Deloitte's briefing" (POL00029733). The version of the email

     that was provided to me by the Inquiry does not include the attachment. However,

     given the date, I can only assume that the document provided by Alwen was the

     document produced by Deloitte, entitled "Board Briefing" and dated 4 June 2014,

     a copy of which has been provided to me as (POL00028069). However, to be

     clear I do not recollect receiving or reading the Board Briefing dated 4 June 2014

     at that time.



365 Alwen's email of 4 June 2014 also included a short cover note to the Deloitte

     "Board Briefing" from Lesley Sewell and Chris Aujard. The executives noted that

     the briefing is "somewhat technical" and directed the Board to the limitations and



                                         186
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    assumptions which "underpin [Deloitte's] findings". The note went on to

    summarise what the executives considered to be Deloitte's "key findings", which

    were as follows:-



         "Deloitte has "not become aware of anything to suggest that the system

         as designed would not deliver the objectives of processing of baskets of

         transactions and keeping copies of them in the Audit Store with integrity";

         Deloitte' s review of "extensive operational documentation" identified

         features in Horizon "which, if implemented, would support the robust

         operation of the system";

         Those features would operate to protect transaction data integrity from

         when it enters the system in a Branch until stored in the Audit Store, and

         provide visibility to subpostmasters of any centrally generated (i.e. non-

         Branch) transactions;

         Those features were not impacted by the 2010 upgrade to the current

         day Horizon "On-Line" system (and hence were not independently tested

         at that time);

         POL has in place key controls over the day to day IT management of

         Horizon. These have been independently tested and assured by Ernst &

         Young since 2012."



366 The executives assured the Board that the "briefing has been the subject of

    intensive discussions between Post Office and Deloitte and has been escalated

    to, and reviewed and approved by a number of senior partners, all of whom are

    independent of the engagement team."



                                      187
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




367 I was provided with a copy of (P0L00029733) by the Inquiry in March 2024.

     Before I was provided with a copy of this email, I had no recollection that the

     Board had been sent the Board Briefing document dated 4 June 2024. If, indeed,

     it was provided to the Board, then I am sure that in accordance with my normal

     practice I would have reviewed the Board Briefing, but I cannot now recall having

     done so. Any reflections I may now have on the content of the report are

     unavoidably shaped by what I now know to be the issues with the Horizon

     system. On reviewing the document, for the purpose of preparing this statement,

     I did agree with Lesley Sewell and ChrisAujard's assessment that it is "somewhat

     technical"; not just in terms of the Horizon software itself but also in terms of how

     assurance reviews are conducted. However, the document makes it clear that

     Deloitte had been asked to assess the assurance evidence that was available to

     POL and which formed the basis for POL's confidence in the integrity of the

     Horizon system. Deloitte were candid that on certain key issues there was little

     documentary assurance evidence available and that in places they had relied on

     oral representations from POL and Fujitsu. In the summary of their work, Deloitte

     stated "we have not become aware of anything to suggest that the system as

     designed would not deliver the objectives of processing of baskets and

     transactions and keeping copies of them in the Audit Store with integrity".



368 Chris Aujard's update paper to the Board about Project Sparrow on 10 June 2014

     (WITN00740135) provided the following, quite reassuring, update on Deloitte's

     work:




                                         188
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      "The Deloitte report raises two types of issues: the first relates to Sparrow, the

      second to wider business learnings. This second set of issues will be dealt with

      through the Risk and Compliance Committee and the business assurance

      functions.



     As regards the Sparrow-related issues it is believed that given the limited scope

     of the work Deloitte were able to undertake it is highly unlikely that we will be

     able to extract any further comfort or assurance without their doing substantially

     more work. Furthermore, it is also clear that Deloitte will not consent to the

     publication of their report or the use of their name to publicly assert that the

     system is working with integrity unless they undertake specific testing. That said,

     the report does give some comfort for the Board on the design for processing

     and storing transaction data with integrity...



     For the avoidance of doubt Deloitte are not recommending that any further

     "backward looking" review of the Horizon system would be appropriate. In fact

     they have said 'One could thus do a lot of work and not be any further forward'.

     They have however gone on to say that, if Post Office were looking to get a

     greater degree of assurance over the Horizon system there are approaches that

     could be considered - none of which could be delivered in the near term. These

     will be brought to the ARC (or Board) via the R&CC."



369 The footnote for paragraph 5.2 said: "Subject to the limitations and assumptions

     expressed in their report, Deloitte 'have not become aware of anything to suggest

     that the system as designed would not deliver the objectives of processing of



                                         189
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




     baskets of transactions and keeping copies of them in the Audit Store with

     integrity" (WITN00740135).



370 I have reflected on whether the Board should have requested the full Deloitte

     paper. On this issue I think because we had had the positive oral briefing from

     Gareth James, and no indications from the summaries given by the executive

     team that Deloitte had uncovered any information casting doubt on the Horizon

     system, it was reasonable for the Board not to have insisted that it receive the

     full Deloitte report. We were entitled to assume that it had been accurately

     summarised in the executives' summaries.



371 I have considered (POL00108607) Chairman briefing session Sparrow — 2 June

     2014 — I cannot remember this document, or my views on it, but I assume that I

     was briefed on these lines as the document is clearly addressed to me. I am

     asked whether I thought it was appropriate at the time that in the "What does

     success look like" section of the scheme it includes "In run up to election the

     Horizon issue does not cause the minister any problems". Though this was not

     my choice of words, as a career civil servant, I understood the importance of the

     election cycle for the timetables of Government stakeholders. However I do not

     recall the election cycle influencing my dealings on the Horizon issue and I

     cannot see references to the election influencing these dealings in my emails at

     the time.



372 The Project Sparrow Sub-Committee met on 6 June 2014. There was only one

     item on the agenda, which was an update from Chris Aujard (as General



                                       190
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     Counsel) and Mark Davies (as Communications Director) on the Mediation

     Scheme. Ahead of the meeting, the Sub-Committee was provided with a note

     dated 3 June 2014 from Chris Aujard and Mark Davies entitled "Initial Complaints

     Review and Mediation Scheme : The way forward" (POL00022128).



373 The note set out the current position of the Mediation Scheme (POL00022128).

     Of the 136 cases still in the scheme only three applicants had received a report

     from Second Sight and the report expressed concerns about Second Sight's

     ability to produce the reports at the required speed. It was now estimated that

     the scheme could run until November 2015.



374 The note also anticipated future "tensions" within the Working Group as it was

     expected that Second Sight would recommend mediation in most, if not all, cases

     (POL00022128). The JFSA was expected to agree with this assessment, putting

     it at odds with the Post Office who did not believe that all cases were suitable for

     mediation.



375 The note set-out three options for the future of the Mediation Scheme

     (POL00022128):



     375.1 Keep the status quo.



     375.2 Amend the Scheme's Terms of Reference "with Post Office taking a firmer

            more proactive line to defend its position and ensure a greater degree of

            transparency around our approach to the Scheme with mediation being



                                        191
                                                                                   WI TN00740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




           based on our understanding of the legal position and desire to control

           programme costs and timescales".



     375.3 Completing the Post Office investigation in each case and moving the

           governance and management of the Scheme in-house — this option would

           involve ending Second Sight's engagement and dissolving the Working

           Group.



376 Chris Aujard and Mark Davies set out their own views on the most suitable option

     (POL00022128):



      "It is the view of the Programme, Legal and Communications and Corporate

      Affairs teams that the third option - where the Scheme is effectively moved in-

      house — is the one which is in the best interest of the business in a pure

      "commercial" sense. There is a weight of evidence to support this view,

      including value for money, time scales, concerns around the cost and quality of

      the Second Sight output, the diversion of senior management time and the

      critically important point that in two years of investigation nothing has been

      uncovered to raise doubts about the issue at the heart of this debate - the

      operation of the Horizon computer system."



377 However, they noted that to bring the scheme in-house, the business would first

     need the views of the Government given the commitments the Minister had made

     in the House of Commons.




                                      192
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




378 The minutes of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 6 June 2014

     (POL00006571) record that the sub-committee agreed that moving the

     management of the Scheme in-house would be its preferred option "subject to

     the Minister's support and there being a low probability of a successful

     application for a Judicial Review".



379 The same note was provided to the Board ahead of its meeting on 10 June 2014.

     The minutes for this meeting record that the Board agreed that neither the status

     quo nor the moving of the scheme in-house were tenable and endorsed the

     approach of seeking to refine the workings of the Scheme (POL00021526).



380 The Inquiry has provided me with a copy of a note from Chris Aujard dated 18

     June 2014 entitled "Initial Complaints Review and Mediation Scheme: Update

    Paper" (UKG100002392). I assume that this paper was provided to the Board.

     The note contained an update on legal advice that had been received that there

     was a "very low" risk of a judicial review if the Post Office pursued the option of

     continuing with the Scheme but seeking to refine its work within the existing

     Terms of Reference.



381 The note stated that the Post Office had been advised that (UKG100002392):

       "from a public law perspective it is reasonable to refuse to mediate while an

      appeal to the Criminal Courts remains possible. To further reduce the risk Post

      Office should communicate this approach in a way which make it clear that:-

      -it will investigate criminal cases;




                                           193
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      - it will immediately share anything that might suggest a conviction was unsafe;

      but

      -the criminal position will need to be resolved in the Criminal Courts before Post

      Office can take things further".



382 The Inquiry has provided me with a further update document from Chris Aujard

    dated 7 July 2014. Again, I assume that this document was provided to the Board

    (UKG100002397). The note updated the Board on the progress of the Mediation

    Scheme and brought to the Board's attention that the JFSA were "increasingly

    uncomfortable" with the role being played by the Working Group and wanted a

     position whereby all cases proceeded to mediation. The note also informed the

    Board that Second Sight had signed an engagement letter and steps had been

     put in place to try and monitor their productivity, including "fortnightly case

    scheduling and review meetings" and a request that they "account for their time

    at a more granular level".



383 The Post Office Board met again on 25 September 2014. Ahead of the meeting

    Chris Aujard and Belinda Crowe provided the Board with a note entitled "Initial

    Complaints Review and Mediation Scheme: Update Paper" (WITN00740136).

    The note provided the Board with an update on the "mechanics of case

     progression through the scheme" and assured the Board that "we have found

    nothing in the 73 cases investigated which has raised concerns about faults with

    the Horizon system, the safety of convictions or Post Office's liability for the

    losses being claimed by applicants".




                                         194
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




384 The note also updated the Board on the most recent meeting of the Working

    Group on 16 September 2014 (WITN00740136). It was explained that "the Chair

    [of the Working Group] was doing all he could to avoid a situation which might

    cause the Working Group to fracture" and that the Post Office had made it clear

    at the meeting that "overturning a criminal conviction is a matter for the Courts

    and not mediation. Our approach to consequential loss claims will be informed

    by reference to legal principles". According to the note, "asserting our position on

    these points unsurprisingly provoked a response from other members of the

    Working Group and JFSA announced that they would leave the meeting at two

    points, but, in the end, did not do so". The question of Second Sight's productivity

    was also raised at the Working Group meeting with the note recording that "we

    took the opportunity at the Working Group meeting to expose and express more

    publicly our concerns at Second Sight's unacceptably low productivity levels

    which, despite repeatedly assuring the Working Group has been three cases a

    week, has in fact been less than half that".



385 The minutes of the Board meeting on 25 September 2014 record an oral update

    from Chris Aujard and Belinda Crowe on Project Sparrow. The minutes stated

    that "the Board was encouraged by the recent progress and the fact that all the

    Post Office investigations should be finished by December (POL00021528). The

    Board members understood that the next few weeks could be controversial as

    the Business was about to refuse to put cases involving criminal convictions into

    mediation".




                                       195
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




386 I have been asked to describe the Post Office's approach to the Mediation

     Scheme from this point onwards, which I do in Section G above. I have also been

     asked to explain to what extent I communicated with the Board, ShEx/UKGI or

     BETS about "complaints" from sub-postmasters. The Opening Statement from

     the UKGI to the Inquiry sets out in some detail how the Post Office interacted

     with the ShEx and BIS/BEIS. I had very little involvement in this process. I note

     that according to the minutes the ShEx Director, Richard Callard, attended both

     the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee on 6 June 2014 and the meetings of the full

     Board on 10 June 2014 and 25 September 2014. The minutes for the latter

     meeting record that "the Board asked the Business to work with ShEx to update

     the Minister on the Post Office position regarding the investigations, the Scheme

     and Second Sight" (POL00021528).



387 As to my communications with the Board on these issues, I would discuss them

     with my Board colleagues at Board meetings and Sub-Committee meetings, as

     is recorded in the minutes.



388 In response to the Inquiry's question, I think I recall that Susan Crichton left the

     Post Office in order to take up a new position elsewhere.



Second Sight's thematic reports



389 I have considered (POL00004439) Briefing Report Part 1 by Second Sight dated

     25 July 2014, (POL00030160) Briefing Report Part 2 by Second Sight dated 21

     August 2014 and (POL00002415) the Post Office's Reply to Second Sight's



                                        196
                                                                                  WI TN00740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




Briefing Report Part 2 dated 22 September 2014. However, I am regrettably

unable to assist the Inquiry with its questions about Second Sight's thematic

reports. I was not involved at all in seeking to influence Second Sight's thematic

reports, or in the Post Office's reply to the Briefing Report Part 2. Second Sight's

thematic reports do not appear to ever have been provided to the Board, likely

because they were being prepared for the purposes of the independently

administered Mediation Scheme, run by Sir Anthony Hooper. The work

programme and replies to the thematic reports were very much being run by the

senior executives. I note that Paula Vennells gave us an update on 16 August

2014 (WITN00740137) - we would not have scheduled a Board meeting in

August, but Paula Vennells would send out updates on important current matters

to keep the Board updated. This referred to the Post Office's view of Second

Sight's Part Two draft report being very low quality: "Second Sight have produced

a Draft Part Two report (essentially a briefing report for Applicants and mediators

on 'thematic' issues arising from Scheme applications) which we believe is of a

very poor quality. It lacks evidence and analysis and is therefore unhelpful in

terms of assisting a resolution of applications. We have provided detailed

comments to Second Sight along with a letter for the record setting out why we

consider the Report to be lacking. We are working through our next steps and

will provide a detailed update at the Board in September". The update paper

about the Mediation Scheme that the Board received for its 25 September 2014

briefly mentioned media activity following Second Sight's Part Two report

(WITN00740136). The Board was not therefore invited to engage with the

Second Sight thematic reports (and, as a result, I also cannot comment on the

impact if any of Second Sight's thematic reports on the Mediation Scheme).



                                   197
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




390 1 have been asked to explain the extent to which the Second Sight Thematic

     Reports caused a change in mine or the Post Office's approach to the Mediation

     Scheme. As I have discussed above, I did not see the Thematic Reports. I shall

     come onto the discussions that led to the disbanding of the Working Group but,

     as far as I am aware, the Second Sight Thematic Reports did not form a part of

     those discussions or the resulting decisions.



End of the Working Group



391 On 23 October 2014 1 received an email from Lord Arbuthnot to my personal

     email account (POL00101477). In his email Lord Arbuthnot expressed concern

     about the Mediation Scheme and said that he was receiving lots of requests to

     talk to the media about the Mediation Scheme but that he would prefer to speak

     with Paula before talking to the press. Lord Arbuthnot appeared to suggest in his

     email that he was considering calling the Post Office's "good faith" into question.

     I cannot recall my reaction to this email (other than being surprised that it was

     sent to my personal email address) but I do recall that at this time in late 2014

     there was a feeling from amongst those involved in the Mediation Scheme that it

     was not fulfilling the purpose for which it was established. I certainly would not

     have agreed with Lord Arbuthnot's suggestion that the Post Office may not have

     been operating in "good faith".



392 The following day I exchanged emails with executives at the Post Office about

     how best to respond to Lord Arbuthnot (P0L00101481). It is clear from Chris



                                        198
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




    Aujard's email to me and others at 9.18am on 23 October 2014 that Lord

    Arbuthnot had made repeated attempts to contact Paula Vennells, however, she

    was on annual leave. As I noted in my response to Chris Aujard, on 24 October,

    Lord Arbuthnot was providing us with an opportunity to tell our side of the story

    and it was important therefore that we engaged with him. I was always of the

    view that the Post Office had to do everything it reasonably could to engage with

    the MPs who were campaigning on this issue.



393 The Board met on 26 November 2014. The Inquiry has directed me to a

    document that appears to have been prepared by Paula Vennells and is entitled

    "Update for Board/Alice" (POL00116824). It does not appear in the Board papers

    for the 26 November meeting so I assume it was provided to the Board via email

    or in some other way. In her note Paula updated us on her meeting with Lord

    Arbuthnot and his parliamentary colleagues. Paula stated that "the meeting with

    the MPs was at times difficult and unpleasant. The behaviour of JA, Andrew

    Bridgen and Mike Wood was at times rude and certainly inappropriate". I do recall

    being disappointed at hearing Paula's account of the meeting which I recall being

    supported by other executives who attended it. The MPs present wanted to

    change the mechanics of the Mediation Scheme such that the Working Group no

    longer sifted cases and instead all cases proceeded to mediation. It is hard for

    me to recall the details of our discussions on this point in the Autumn and Winter

    of 2014, but this was certainly an issue that was at the forefront of our discussions

    on Horizon issues. Our concern with putting every case straight into mediation

    was that it would undermine Sir Anthony Hooper's independent process; and, as

    Paula also referenced in her note, we had received legal advice to the effect that


                                        199
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     cases that had been concluded in the criminal courts should not be submitted for

     mediation.



394 It is evident from Paula Vennells' note that by this point in 2014, the Post Office

     feared that the Working Group could collapse. As I have already noted, Lord

     Arbuthnot's frustrations with the scheme were not news to us. The JFSA were

     similarly frustrated with the Scheme and as Paula mentions in her note were not

     participating in the business of the Working Group (POL00116824). I was also

     concerned that, despite the best of intentions when it was established, the

     Mediation Scheme was not going to be able to bridge the significant gaps in

     expectations between the Post Office and the sub-postmasters in individual

     cases.



395 The minutes of the Board meeting on 26 November (POL00021530) record that

     Paula Vennells updated the Board on her meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and

     colleagues and her proposal to write a letter setting out the Post Office's position

     on the expectation that the letter would become public. I have been asked to

     what extent the Board "challenged" Paula with regard to the Post Office's position

     on the Mediation Scheme. I cannot remember the discussion at this meeting, but

     the Mediation Scheme was a frequent topic of discussion between Board

     members and between me and the senior executives throughout this period. It

     would not appear from the minutes that any of my colleagues expressed a view

     that the Post Office should accept the position of Lord Arbuthnot and his

     colleagues to allow all cases, including those that had been determined in a

     criminal court, to proceed to mediation.



                                        200
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




396 On the same day that the Board met, Lord Arbuthnot issued a public statement

     in which he withdrew his support for the Mediation Scheme (POL00101690). He

     complained that the Scheme had "ended up mired in legal wrangling". As I have

     noted above, by this point there was an expectation at the Post Office that the

     Mediation Scheme would collapse very soon. This was, of course, a gravely

     disappointing prospect. At the Post Office we considered that we had devoted a

     considerable amount of resources, not just in terms of the money spent

     administering the Scheme, funding Second Sight, and providing the applicants

     with funding for their own support in the process, but also the time of numerous

     Post Office employees in investigating the cases submitted. However, the

     Scheme had moved too slowly and it was becoming clear that the MPs

     campaigning on this issue expected that all of their constituents would enter the

     mediation process, whereas we had always understood that this was a matter

     for determination by the independent Working Group.



397 To some extent, I saw the force in Lord Arbuthnot's statement that "the scheme

     was set up to help our constituents seek redress and to maintain the Post Office's

     good reputation. It is doing neither" (POL00101690). It was clear that the Scheme

     was satisfying nobody. Where I profoundly disagreed with Lord Arbuthnot was

     on his assertion that the Post Office had acted in bad faith, albeit that he made

     no reference to this in his public statement. The Inquiry will, of course, be

     investigating the Scheme and how it was managed, but I feel confident in saying

     that I was never aware of any attempt by the Post Office to undermine its

     success. I recall there being a real sense of hope when it was established; a view


                                       201
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




     that was clearly shared by Lord Arbuthnot at the time. And I was also made aware

     of the efforts to which the Post Office team were going to make sure it functioned

     as well as possible.



398 Paula Vennells sent a letter to Lord Arbuthnot on 28 November 2014 setting out

     the Post Office's view on the Mediation Scheme (POL00101596). I cannot recall

     being involved in the drafting of this letter, but I broadly agreed with its contents.

     Lord Arbuthnot's suggestion would have robbed the Working Group of any

     purpose. I had always understood that the process of mediation was not suitable

     for every type of dispute. The purpose of the Working Group was to ensure that

     only those cases that stood a chance of resolution through mediation were

     submitted to the process. I could not see at this point how a resolution could be

     reached in every case through mediation.



399 A few days later I met Lord Arbuthnot at a conference in Turkey that we were

     both attending. In my email to Paula Vennells on 1 December 2013, I recounted

     my brief encounter with Lord Arbuthnot (POL00101606). I had raised with Lord

     Arbuthnot the behaviour of his colleagues at their meeting with Paula — she and

     her colleagues had found them to be rude and unpleasant — however, Lord

     Arbuthnot told me that that they had been more "restrained" than he had

     expected. As I said to Paula in my email, the main thrust of Lord Arbuthnot's

     argument was that there were "big wrongs which we were not acknowledging".

     At the time, I had no reason to accept this assertion. From my first meetings with

     Lord Arbuthnot in my earliest days on the Post Office Board, I had consistently

     wanted the Post Office to acknowledge the concerns being raised by MPs on



                                         202
                                                                                        WI TNO0740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




     behalf of their constituents and to create processes that would address those

     concerns. That had been the original intention of the Mediation Scheme which

     was established with Lord Arbuthnot's blessing and the active participation of the

     JFSA. Nothing I had seen over the previous two and a half years gave me

     grounds for believing that there were "big wrongs".



400 I have reflected on this relatively brief discussion with Lord Arbuthnot and my

     account of it to Paula Vennells. By 2014 I was even more confident about the

     integrity of the Horizon system than I had been in 2012 not long after I first joined

     the Post Office. When I had first met with Lord Arbuthnot in March 2012 the

     issues he raised were relatively new to me. I did find it hard to believe that an

     organisation such as Royal Mail Group, and a computer system that conducted

     millions of transactions a day could be responsible for miscarriages of justice

     especially given my faith in the processes of the Courts, and the view of the

     General Secretary of the NFSP that there was no truth in the allegations.

     However, notwithstanding my initial view, serious concerns were being raised, so

     I was determined to set up a process that would allow us to get to the truth of the

     situation. By 2014, I was of the view — which I now know to be mistaken — that

     these processes had demonstrated that no such issues existed. Second Sight's

     Interim Report had, as I understood it, concluded that there were no systemic

     issues with the Horizon system (even though it had raised very serious issues

     relating to training and support that we had sought to address), as to the best of

     my knowledge, at that time, had the work completed by Deloitte. Nor had the

     Second Sight reports into the cases that had been put to the Working Group

     identified any issues that called into question the security of the Horizon system.



                                         203
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




     As I said to Lord Arbuthnot: "we had found nothing of any significance"

     (POL00101606). This was my honestly held belief right up until I read the

     judgment of Fraser J.



401 As sincere as my belief was, it was incorrect. There were indeed "big wrongs"

     and the processes that the Post Office had established failed to identify these

     "big wrongs" and perhaps even served to provide a false sense of security to the

     Board. 'Big wrongs' were also concealed from the Board — major issues with our

     prosecutions conduct were flagged by the Brian Altman KC and Simon Clarke

     advices of July and August 2013, but never shown to the Board.



402 In my email of 1 December to Paula Vennells (POL00101606) I noted that Lord

     Arbuthnot had said that he thought Paula and I "believed what we were saying";

     which we did. As I noted then, the obvious implication of Lord Arbuthnot's

     comments was that we were being "hoodwinked by others". When I wrote those

     words in 2014, 1 did not believe that we had been "hoodwinked". I now realise

     that briefings that we were given by senior executives on Horizon issues were,

     at critical points, incomplete, and sometimes misleading. I also now know, thanks

     to the tenacity of the sub-postmasters and the indefatigability of Fraser J, that

     the Post Office was being provided with inaccurate information by Fujitsu. We

     were a committed and pro-active Board, acting with integrity, which understood

     that part of our oversight role was to bring a degree of professional scepticism to

     the assurances that we were receiving from the senior executives, which we did

     on a number of occasions. I expected to receive detailed and accurate written

     and oral briefings on the key issues and through mechanisms such as the Project


                                        204
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    Sparrow Sub-Committee, I and my fellow Directors wanted to engage fully in the

    challenges that the Post Office faced. We always pushed the executive team to

    appoint the best professionals and as such we had the benefit of advice from

    Deloitte, Linklaters and leading barristers. However, it would seem now that the

    Board was indeed not given the full picture on many different occasions.



403 On 8 December 2014 Lord Arbuthnot responded to Paula Vennells' letter of 28

    November 2014 (POL00101700). All I can recall of my reaction to this letter at

    the time was the surprise within the Post Office that Lord Arbuthnot was

    suggesting that the company was seeking to prevent 90 per cent of cases from

    proceeding to mediation. This was not the case. As the Post Office's evidence to

    the BIS Select Committee stated (in respect of the 3 February 2015 evidence

    sessions): "the Post Office has declined to mediate just 5 of the 41 cases passed

    to the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR) for mediation"; and "In

    relation to the erroneous 90% statistic, Post Office agrees with the explanation

    provided by Second Sight in their evidence that the 90% figure may reflect the

    number of cases that Post Office wished to discuss with the Working Group at

    one particular meeting. What it does not reflect is the number of cases Post Office

    has declined to mediate - this is much lower at only 12% of cases so far

    recommended as suitable for mediation by the Working Group. Nor does it reflect

    the number of cases that Post Office passed directly to CEDR for mediation

    without the need for discussion at the Working Group" (WITN00740119).




                                       205
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




404 However, this one eye catching but erroneous statistic became totemic of what

     was beginning to feel like an irreconcilable difference between the Post Office

     and the sub-postmasters that Lord Arbuthnot represented.



405 I note an email that I was forward by Paula Vennells on 2 December 2014 from

     a mediator who had been involved in trying to resolve a case involving one of

     Oliver Letwin MP's constituents (POL00101611). The mediator acknowledged

     that the Post Office had considered this case to be one which did not seem

     suitable for mediation, and the mediator could see why, but notwithstanding that,

     the Post Office team "put in a great deal of effort in trying to resolve the case

     through mediation and I don't see how they could have done anything more given

     the circumstances." Such positive reports of the Post Office's engagement with

     and commitment to the mediation process, seemed entirely at odds with the

     picture being presented by Lord Arbuthnot in his letter.



406 As I have re-read the letter in preparing this statement, I am struck by the fact

     that much of Lord Arbuthnot's focus is on the training and support provided to

     sub-postmasters not on alleged technical and security flaws in the Horizon

     software. At paragraph 4 of his letter (POL00101700), Lord Arbuthnot wrote:

     "your assertion that 'no fault with the system has been found in any of the 119

     cases' incorrectly limits the meaning of the word `system' to the software ... And

     as the Minister said in the Statement `what it has found to be lacking in the system

     is not the software but the support and other issues around the software". These

     issues of support and training had been raised by Second Sight in the Interim

     Report and I found them to be compelling as I knew the executives did.



                                        206
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




407 It is also apparent to me now as I have re-visited this exchange of

     correspondence between Paula Vennells and Lord Arbuthnot that it was highly

     regrettable that such mistrust had developed between the leader of the Post

     Office and the leader of the group of MPs campaigning on the Horizon issues.

     Lord Arbuthnot's letter of 8 December 2014 contains several allegations of bad

     faith towards Paula and I know that Paula felt aggrieved at the manner in which

     MPs had challenged her at the meeting in paragraph 393.



408 I have been asked whether any action was taken in response to Lord Arbuthnot's

     letter of 8 December 2014. As far as I am aware, no particular action was taken.

     I think his letter was seen simply as a public statement of the views that he had

     shared with Paula Vennells on 17 November 2014 and very briefly with me in

     Turkey. As I note above, by this stage Paula Vennells and Lord Arbuthnot

     appeared to have become entrenched in their contrasting views of the situation.



409 On 12 January 2015 the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee of the Post Office

     Board met. Prior to the meeting on 8 January 2015 the Sub-Committee received

     a detailed paper from Chris Aujard and Mark Davies on the current status of the

     Mediation Scheme (WITNO0740138). The thrust of the note was that the Working

     Group should be provided with one last chance to get the Mediation Scheme

     back on track but should that fail the Scheme should be bought "in-house", by

     which it was meant that it would be administered directly by the Post Office.



410 In the note Chris Aujard and Mark Davies informed the Sub-Committee that:



                                       207
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




      "To date we have found no evidence, nor has any been advanced by either an

      Applicant or Second Sight, of either faults with the Horizon system or unsafe

      convictions (on the latter point, every case investigated has been scrutinised by

      our external criminal lawyers), and no convictions have been appealed".



      "Now all cases in the Scheme have been comprehensively re-investigated, PO

      can be satisfied that the real basis of the Applicants' complaints is not the

      reliability of the Horizon platform, but the Applicants' dissatisfaction with how

      the PO engaged with them in their specific case. Further, there is still no

      evidence whatever of a systemic flaw in the Horizon system, which is critical to

      PO's entire operation across the network."



411 These assurances were the foundation for the discussion around how best to

     position the Mediation Scheme for the future. The Board Sub-Committee was

     told that we were not dealing with a flawed IT system, but rather with complaints

     about how sub-postmasters were trained and supported. As I have noted

     elsewhere, I had a lot of sympathy with these complaints and felt that sub-

     postmasters had been investigated in a heavy-handed manner.



412 I have been asked for my recollections of the discussions that led to the minute:

     "the Committee discussed Second Sight and their 'Part Two' report due to be

     finalised in April. The Committee agreed that the Business was unlikely to be able

     stop this report from being produced but should press Second Sight to complete

     the individual case reviews by the end of March i.e. give the cases priority"

     (POL00006575). The note from Chris Aujard and Mark Davies that was provided


                                       208
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    to the Sub-Committee ahead of the meeting expressed frustration with Second

    Sight as it was felt that the firm was not always acting in an even-handed manner

    and had recommended nearly all cases for mediation without explanation

    (WITN00740138). Despite these frustrations, I have no recollection of there

    being any suggestion that Second Sight should not produce their final report.

    Chris Aujard and Mark Davies informed the Sub-Committee in their note that the

    Post Office had responded on 7 January 2015 to a set of questions prepared by

    Second Sight for the purpose of producing their final report and that a meeting

    had taken place on 9 January 2015 between the Post Office and Second Sight

    to discuss the responses in more detail. What we wanted Second Sight to do,

    however, was prioritise their Mediation Scheme work and the expectation of the

    Sub-Committee would have been that this message would have been

    communicated to Second Sight via the senior executives.



413 I have also been asked why the Sub-Committee considered it "appropriate" to

    write to the BBC's lawyers. I recall that there was a concern that certain BBC

    programmes were only airing the JFSA's account of the Mediation Scheme and

    the Post Office wanted to ensure - primarily by engaging with programme editors

    - that its account was also taken into consideration. I understood that lawyers

    engaging in respect of editorial accuracy in such circumstances was normal.



414 On 16 January 2015, a few days after the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee

    meeting, I was informed by Mark Davies that the Houses of Commons Business,

    Innovation and Skills Select Committee had scheduled short hearings on the

    Mediation Scheme. In my email to Mark Davies, I described this as "unwelcome"



                                      209
                                                                                     WI TNO0740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




    (POL00101999). I am sure that, based on my own experience as a civil servant

    preparing for Select Committee hearings, I was commiserating with Mark who

    would bear the brunt of preparing for the hearings, which would be a very time-

    consuming task. As I went on to note, I thought that the hearings should provide

    the Post Office with an opportunity to get its "position across".



415 The Post Office Board met again on 28 January 2015 (P0L00021531). By the

    time of this meeting, I had informed my colleagues that I would be leaving the

    Post Office. (I explain below my reasons for this decision). Mark Davies explained

    that the business would be giving evidence to the BIS Select Committee from 3

    February 2015. Paula Vennells was going to be representing the Post Office with

    JFSA, NFSP, CWU and Second Sight all participating too. He also informed the

    Board that the Post Office had received a letter from the CCRC asking for

    information on the criminal cases involved in Sparrow. The Post Office had 28

    days in which to respond.



416 I welcomed the CCRC's intervention. I believed that the Horizon system was

    safe, but I couldn't see how the Post Office on its own could bring closure to this

    issue. So I thought it was helpful that another well respected independent agency

    was getting involved, and if — despite all the assurances we had been given, both

    internal and external - there was something wrong, the CCRC would be in a good

    position to find it.



417 The Project Sparrow Sub-Committee met again on 18 February 2015. The Sub-

    Committee      was     provided   with     a   paper   addressing   CCRC's   review



                                         210
                                                                                  WI TN00740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




    (POL00102169), supplementary evidence that was to be provided to the BIS

    Select Committee (W1TN00740119) and a note from Jane MacLeod and Mark

    Davies on the Mediation Scheme (POL00040911). The paper on the CCRC

    informed the Sub-Committee that: "POL's external criminal solicitors have

    reviewed all relevant Crown Court and Magistrate Court cases going back to

    2010 in which the primary evidence was Horizon data, including those with

    suggested problems with Horizon training or support. Once these were identified

    they were reviewed thoroughly to assess whether any of the material should have

    been provided had they been aware of information contained within the Second

    Sight Interim report. This also included considering information for disclosure.

    We have not received any applications for permission to appeal to the Court of

    Appeal."



418 The supplementary evidence to the BIS Select Committee (W1TN00740119)

    stated that:



    "Horizon is audited and accredited in the following ways:

    Ernst & Young produce an annual ISAE3402 service auditor report over the

    Horizon processing environment;

    each year Bureau Veritas perform ISO27001 certification - this is the industry

    standard security accreditation;

    Information Risk Management (IRM) accredit Horizon to Payment Card Industry

    Data Security Standards on an annual basis;

    Fujitsu undertake regular industry standard testing on the system; and

    the Post Office audit team perform risk based reviews."


                                       211
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    "Suggestions that Horizon suffered from system-wide flaws triggered both

    Second Sight's initial investigation and the Scheme itself. After two and a half

    years of investigations it is now evident that the Horizon system is robust and

    works as it should. This is also the broad consensus of those who have given

    evidence to this Inquiry."



419 The update paper on the Mediation Scheme informed the Sub-Committee that

    Second Sight were increasingly willing to speak publicly about their work and that

    one of their directors was making disparaging comments about the Scheme on

    social media (POL00040911). The Sub-Committee was also informed that JFSA

    no longer wished to take part in the business of the Working Group. Against this

    background, the note suggested to the Sub-Committee that the work of the

    Mediation Scheme should be expedited by removing the Working Group and

    allowing all "non-criminal" cases to proceed to mediation. It was noted that by

    adopting this approach the Post Office would "meet our commitment made to

    applicants at the outset of the Scheme: providing them with a thorough re-

    investigation of their case by Post Office, the opportunity of an independent

    review by Second Sight and, where appropriate, mediation."



420 As the minutes of the Sub-Committee meeting on 18 February make clear

    (POL00006574), there was a lot of discussion as to the future of the Mediation

    Scheme. It is clear from the minutes that the intention was always for Second

    Sight to remain involved in the process and that the Post Office would continue

    to offer their services to applicants who wished to have their case reviewed by


                                      212
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




    the firm. The Sub-Committee concluded that it could support Jane MacLeod's

    and Mark Davies' proposal in principle and asked the executives to clarify a

    number of important points.



421 I recall being unsure as to how Sir Anthony Hooper would respond to the

    proposed changes. These would render the Working Group redundant as its

    primary function — a point which the JFSA denied — was to decide which cases

    should proceed to mediation. Given that the JFSA and the MPs were not happy

    with how the Working Group was proceeding, it did seem illogical to me that they

    objected to the Working Group being disbanded. The idea was to continue with

    mediation (which would still be overseen by the CEDR) to try and resolve some

    of the cases, without the filter of the Working Group. Some conflated the winding

    up of the Working Group with the winding up of the Scheme, which was wrong.



422 The CCRC's review was also discussed at the Sub-Committee. The minutes of

    the meeting stated that the Sub-Committee asked the executives to "engage

    constructively with the CCRC" and to consider how they might be able to provide

    Brian Altman KC's advice to the CCRC (POL00006574). These instructions were

    entirely consistent with my view that the business should be doing all it could to

    assist the CCRC with its inquiries. As I have discussed above at paragraph 416,

    I welcomed the CCRC's involvement as I now felt that it was best equipped to

    deal with the most important of the JFSA's claims — that there had been

    miscarriages of justice as a result of the Horizon system.




                                      213
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




423 I have been asked to explain why Brian Altman KC was instructed to provide

     advice on the differences between the criminal offence of theft and false

     accounting. I had not seen the advice, dated 8 March 2015, before preparing this

     witness statement. I do not know why the advice was sought or what was done

     with it.



424 On 9 March 2015, Paula Vennells wrote to Jo Swinson MP, the Parliamentary

     Under-Secretary-of-State for the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills,

     to inform her that from now on there would be a presumption in favour of

     mediation for all non-criminal cases (UKG100003789). In the letter, Paula stated

     that "I am pleased to confirm that no evidence has been found through the

     investigations of any system wide issues with Horizon". As Paula noted in her

     letter, the reason for this change of approach was to accelerate the workings of

     the Scheme.



425 The letter also stated that Second Sight would be producing their final report and

     that the Post Office would ensure that the firm's services remained available to

     any applicant who wished to avail themselves of an investigation by an

     independent firm of forensic accountants (UKG100003789).



426 I have been asked a series of detailed questions regarding this letter, which I

     shall address below:



     426.1 I have been asked to explain the reasons for "terminating" Second Sight's

                instructions. This question is premised on a mis-understanding of the


                                         214
                                                                                 WI TNO0740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




       facts. As is noted in Paula Vennells letter of 8 March, Second Sight were

       retained to complete their final report and were available to any sub-

       postmaster who wished to use them as part of the Mediation Scheme.



426.2 To what extent, if at all, was the timing of this decision influenced by the

       impending General Election. I am not aware that the decision, which had

       been a long time in the making, was in any way influenced by the

       upcoming General Election.



426.3 To what extent, if at all, did the Post Office rely on legal advice in making

       its decisions. As the documents show, the decision to alter the

       mechanisms for entry into the Mediation Scheme were discussed at

       length by the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee and the Post Office Board.

      I cannot recall any written legal advice being provided to the members of

       the Board ahead of those discussions, and no such advice appears in the

       documents I have been provided. I note, however, that Jane MacLeod,

       the Post Office's General Counsel, was involved in developing the

       proposals put to the Sub-Committee and the Board.



426.4 To what extent, if at all, did the end of the Working Group remove

       independent and centralised oversight of the Mediation Scheme as a

       whole. I had taken comfort from the fact that a figure such as Sir Anthony

       Hooper was overseeing the overall operation of the Mediation Scheme.

       However, the process of mediation in individual cases remained




                                   215
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




            unchanged and they were still to be undertaken by the independent

            CEDR.



     426.5 Did the Post Office intend to mediate the outstanding cases without further

            investigation into alleged BEDs in the Horizon System. No. At the time

            the decision was made to bring the Working Group to an end, Second

            Sight was working on their final report into the Horizon system.

           Additionally, as the letter makes clear, Second Sight were still available to

            review individual cases as part of the mediation process.



427 On reflection, I am not sure that the Mediation Scheme — which was established

     with high hopes and the full support of the JFSA and the MPs campaigning on

     their behalf — could have been a success. With the benefit of hindsight, the issues

     at its heart do not appear to have been amenable to mediation and I note that in

     the minutes of the 18 February 2015 meeting of the Project Sparrow Sub-

     Committee, it is recorded that according to the CEDR the Mediation Scheme had

     below average rates of settlement (POL00006574). Nor were the processes of

     the Mediation Scheme able to uncover the issues that form the basis of Fraser

     J's judgment. Despite the involvement of Second Sight and the CEDR, the issues

     with the Horizon system that Fujitsu had worked so hard to mask were not

     uncovered.



428 The minutes of the next meeting of the Post Office Board on 25 March 2015,

     record a "verbal update" from Mark Davies on Project Sparrow (POL00027279).




                                        216
                                                                                       WI TN00740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




     I have been asked what was the content of that update, but I am afraid that I

     cannot recall it.



429 I have been asked with reference to the 2 July 2015 Post Office Board meeting,

     if the changes to the Mediation Scheme announced in early March were

     influenced by commercial negotiations with Fujitsu about extending the firm's

     contract with the Post Office. As far as I was aware, there was no connection at

     all between the two. The minutes of the 2 July 2015 meeting demonstrate, to my

     mind, how the Board grappled with critical issues such as the one-year option to

     extend the existing Fujitsu Horizon contract prior to it being replaced by other IT

     providers (WITN00740139). The minutes record a lively discussion and a good

     deal of scepticism about extending the Post Office's relationship with Fujitsu.



430 The final meeting of the Post Office Board that I chaired took place on 15 July

     2015 (WITN00740140). I had given careful thought to when would be the best

     time to leave the Post Office Board. Unusually my contract made no mention of

     my period of office and no-one from BIS had discussed these with me, so it was

     something that I had to consider for myself. The other NEDs on the Board had

     been appointed for terms of between 3 and 4 years.3 When I had taken the role,

     I had thought that I would most likely serve for five years, and then step aside for

     somebody else to take the Board through the next phase of the Post Office's

     strategic plan. However, in late 2014 I was involved in the process of recruiting a

     new Chief Financial Officer, which unfortunately was an extremely frustrating and




      3 Information taken from 2013 Annual Report




                                           217
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




     demoralising process. The Post Office needed a senior and highly experienced

     CFO to lead its drive to profitability and potentially, someone who could act as a

     successor to the CEO. The Board felt that it had found such a candidate in

     Alisdair Cameron, who had held a number of senior finance roles at British Gas.

     Given that the Post Office is a state-owned private company, all Board hires

     (which would include the CFO role) and the remuneration to be offered had to be

     approved by the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills. Despite the

     Board having found a highly competent individual — who is still in his role at the

     Post Office — it took sixteen-weeks of wrangling with government ministers and

     civil servants over Alisdair Cameron's remuneration before his appointment was

     approved. This was a disheartening experience for me and the other Directors

     and it made me reflect on how much energy and enthusiasm I had left for the

     role of Board Chair. After a lot of thought, I decided that a four-year term was

     sufficient.



431 As with all career decisions there was a personal element to my decision to retire

     from the Post Office Board. My husband was retiring from his demanding role in

     May 2015 and we had two grandchildren with another two on the way. At 66

     years-of-age, I felt that it was an appropriate time to retire and was very much

     looking forward to spending more time with my husband and young

     grandchildren.



432 I am exhibiting my journal entry in respect of why I chose to leave the Post Office

     as it shows my thought process at the time (WITN00740141). The entry was

     written in preparation for my meeting with the then head of the Shareholder



                                        218
                                                                                        WI TN00740100
                                                                                      WI TN00740100




       Executive to tell him about my decision. Though it is in shorthand, I wondered if

       it might be useful to show it at this point.



433 I first noted what I saw as my achievements during my tenure as Chair (and I

       include some italicised text in square brackets to explain my notes at times)

       (WITN00740141):



   -    " Separation [from RMGJ

   -    High quality board and governance

        Strengths exec team

        All diff (apart from Paula) all much better, as is underpinning layer

        Results stuck to our bottom line target

   -    The income line was sticky

   -    Completely different attitude to subsidy / profit

   -    Changed the image of the PO — Sharon White



        I then noted the `difficult issues' which I had dealt with during my tenure. I

        included the "Horizon issue" on this list:



        "V diffic. [difficult] Issues

   -    Modernisation [The various initiatives to modernise the Post Office and its

        functions]

   -    Crowns — IA [This was a piece of industrial action which we had dealt with]




                                            219
                                                                                      WI TNO0740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




-   Franchising including Witney [this was an intensive project where we changed

    the contractual terms with sub-postmaster and converted some Crown offices

    into franchised offices]

-   [Horizon issue]

-   Mutualisation"



    The notes then read:



4 "Real sense of satisfaction

    but the price for this



    taken brain space / heavy lifting



    knew it would be difficult — like a challenge



    but diffics. [difficulties] greater than anyone could have anticipated - frustration



    Exog. [exogenous] Change in market

    Digital



    Partly PO — too slow

               - too unfit for the purpose



    Partly partners — RM [Royal Mail] + Bol [Bank of Ireland]




                                        220
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




       Partly shareholder — not you [This was referring to Mark Russell]



   a) Gvt. business— done everything required of us including my lobbying

   b) Respect + support



       Fully aware of implications of being Gvt owned but can't achieve this turnaround

       in this context with hands tied behind our backs



       Diffic. to find finance director within the salary range but we did so — 16 weeks

       to agree it is unacceptable. Unnecessary paralysis.



       Saps energy



       + The Board felt second guessed — what is the point of being here?



       I am clear that 4 years is enough for me. Will have given it everything I can.

       Time for someone else to have a go with fresh energy."



434 I was anxious to ensure that my exit from the Post Office was orderly and allowed

     the Government enough time to find a replacement, so despite starting

     discussions about my desire to retire in October 2014, I continued to serve as

     Chair for a further eight months.



435 I would like to be clear that, if there is any suggestion that I left the Post Office

     because the going was getting too tough with Horizon, that is absolutely not the


                                         221
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




    case. Horizon was not the reason for my leaving, as I have set out. When I reflect

    on my time at the Post Office, it is in fact right to say that my confidence in Horizon

    only grew during my time. At the end of my tenure, it was stronger than it was at

    the start. Second Sight's Interim Report, the assurances that I received from

    executives arising from the findings of the Mediation Scheme, and the oral

    briefing that the Board received from Gareth James also made me feel reassured

    that the system was safe. The latter was probably the `high-water' mark of my

    confidence in the system.



436 I have been asked to summarise the position of the Mediation Scheme at the

    point at which I left the Post Office Board. My understanding was that the Scheme

    was proceeding on the basis set out in Paula Vennells letter to Jo Swinson MP

    on 8 March 2015. I have also been asked for my knowledge of BEDs in the

    Horizon system at the time I resigned. It is a source of the profoundest regret that

    I left the Post Office Board in July 2015 without understanding of the issues with

    the Horizon system that are so devastatingly detailed in Fraser J's judgment. My

    understanding was that the work undertaken during my time on the Post Office

    Board had repeatedly demonstrated that there were no such issues with Horizon.

    I had understood that the assurances as to the operation of the Horizon system

    - most recently provided to Jo Swinson MP (as the responsible Minister) and the

    BIS Select Committee - were well founded and entirely accurate.




CONCLUSION




                                         222
                                                                                         WI TNO0740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




437   The Inquiry is rightly placing under a microscope the conduct of those

      individuals who were the senior decision-makers at RMG and the Post Office

      during the period the Horizon IT system was in use, including mine and that of

      the Board, during the period of my tenure from 2011 to 2015. I have reflected

      deeply on the events of those four years and I fully understand that the people

      who were wrongly pursued and convicted by RMG and the Post Office have

      had their lives and their families' lives wrecked by this over many years. I am

      profoundly sorry for this. I sincerely regret that I was unable to get to the truth

      of what had happened despite the actions I took to do so and that those people

      were not given the justice they deserved earlier. I am glad to have this

      opportunity to stand right back and consider what happened in the light of

      everything I know now (and there is still a great deal that I do not know). I have

      come to realise that although I was well-equipped to deal with the role forwhich

      I was recruited (and was in large part successful in achieving the challenges

      set out in Vince Cable's letter to me a few months after I was appointed), I was

      not as well equipped to deal with what turned out to be an issue which required

      both legal and technical IT expertise.



438   Because my awareness of the sub-postmasters' concerns about the Horizon

      system developed slowly and incompletely during my tenure, I did not fully

      realise the scale of the issue until after I had left the Post Office. Had I realised

      fully at the outset, or soon after I arrived at the Post Office what was at stake

      here, and taking account of my lack of deep relevant IT and legal experience, I

      think this was a situation in which it could have been right to appoint external

      experts to give me and the Board direct relevant advice, independent of the



                                         223
                                                                                         WI TN00740100
                                                                                       WI TN00740100




      executives in the Post Office. (This is not a course which I would normally

      advocate because of the risk of damaging constructive working relationships

      between a board and its key executives.) This could have led us to understand

      better the full picture, or at least, the full picture which was available within the

      Post Office. However, given the difficulty which Fraser J experienced in getting

      the full picture from Fujitsu in the High Court, I cannot be sure as to whether in

      these circumstances we would have uncovered what he eventually uncovered.



439   I did not have the benefit of hindsight at the time. I was working very hard to the

      best of my ability to fulfil the remit which I had been given. The Horizon issues

      emerged in a fragmented way over many months while I was Chair. I

      approached them with a genuinely open mind and sought to put in place

      mechanisms which would get to the truth but for all the reasons which I have

      explained, that was not the outcome achieved and I bitterly regret that.



440   I turn now to my more detailed reflections. Firstly, on the appointment of Second

      Sight, with the benefit of hindsight, I now think that I should have involved my

      fellow Director, Neil McCausland, more explicitly in my developing thinking from

      the time when Lord Arbuthnot first raised these issues with me. As the later

      lessons learned exercise concluded, I also think that I should have insisted that

      a proper procurement exercise was undertaken with real clarity about what we

      wanted the independent review to achieve, a clear methodology for achieving

      that, and a rigorous choice made about which organisation was best placed to

      deliver that. It is clear that, as highlighted by Linklaters in March 2014

      (POL00107317), a baseline review of the system (such as the one we then


                                         224
                                                                                    WI TNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




      commissioned from Deloitte) should have been undertaken before any

      individual case reviews took place. At the time, I thought that a case-based

      review by forensic accountants of `problematic' cases in which complaints had

      been raised against the system would be appropriate to get to the root of the

      problem, as did Lord Arbuthnot, and other MPs and representatives who were

      supportive of the Second Sight review. But in hindsight, I see that a baseline

      review at the outset would have been better.



441   Secondly, when appointing Board members, I did not seek out Board members

      with specialist expertise in the field of criminal prosecutions or technical

      knowledge around large IT solutions, nor did anyone else suggest that these

      were skill sets which would be helpful to the Board. Those areas of expertise

      would have been unusual for a Board member, and of course at the time I was

      making these appointments, I did not know that experts in those fields might be

      a useful addition to the Board. Had such expertise been available to inform our

      Board discussions we might have been better equipped to test the information

      being presented to us regarding the integrity of the Horizon software and the

      safety of the prosecutions of sub-postmasters.



442   Thirdly, and in common with the practice of the Board of any large organisation,

      we were entitled to rely on the information provided to us by the executives and

      to trust what we were being told. I am reminded of a provision in the FRC's

      Corporate Governance Code which was sent to me in an early Board pack

      during my tenure: "The Board should be supplied in a timely manner with




                                       225
                                                                                    WI TN00740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




      information in a form and of a quality appropriate to enable it to discharge its

      duties" (W1TN00740105).



443   During my tenure we were also presented with alternative information, primarily

      from MPs and sub-postmasters, which suggested the system was unreliable.

      However, at all times, the executives impressed upon the Board that the

      Horizon system was reliable, and during my tenure the external auditors told us

      that the controls were only improving. At no point was the Board informed of or

      aware of the scale of the issue overall. I was completely unaware of this issue

      before I arrived in post in the Autumn of 2011 — no mention of it was made

      during my appointment process. And though soon after that, issues were raised

      by people outside of the Post Office concerning the integrity of the Horizon

      system, my understanding was that it only affected a small number of cases.

      At a later date when the mediation scheme was launched, 150 applications

      were lodged seeking civil compensation for financial loss, but in terms of

      criminal convictions that were being challenged at that time, I had understood

      the numbers were small. Sadly, I now realise that briefings that we were given

      by senior executives on Horizon issues were, at critical points, incomplete,

      ambiguous and sometimes misleading. As I set out below, we did take a

      number of significant steps to test the information we were provided.



444   Fourthly, as a Board we had many significant issues, outside Horizon, that we

      had to deal with during the period 2011 to 2015. At the outset of my tenure the

      Post Office was engaged in important negotiations with Royal Mail Group over

      the terms of its separation. There were other key issues on the table of which


                                       226
                                                                                      WI TN00740100
                                                                                    WI TN00740100




      the most significant was the level of annual subsidy which the Government was

      willing to pay and the level of investment it was willing to make in the

      modernisation of the branches. Delivering the transformation of the network,

      the policy of "mutualisation", Post Office's relationship with the Bank of Ireland

      over its growing financial services offer, and the future of the pensions scheme

      for Post Office employees were other issues that required serious attention. On

      reflection, I am not convinced that in 2012 the Post Office was ready to become

      an independent organisation embarking on a turnaround of this scale. I knew it

      was going to be difficult. It turned out to be more difficult and far more time-

      consuming than I ever expected. I do not of course wish to minimise the

      importance of the Horizon issues against that background, but that context is

      vitally important when the Inquiry considers the actions of the Board in relation

      to Horizon.



445   Fifthly, the role of Chair of the Board, during my tenure, was a part-time role,

      and as explained in the paragraph above with a specific and challenging

      mandate. In that context I used my time to focus on what I perceived were the

      issues of the greatest strategic importance to the success of the organisation.

      My focus was primarily to make the Post Office a free-standing Government

      owned company, to oversee the investment of £1.34bn in its modernisation so

      as to turn it from a loss making to a profit-making business and reduce its

      dependence on taxpayers' money, and to secure its funding for the period after

      2015. That was an enormous task in respect of which we were largely

      successful.




                                        227
                                                                                     WI TN00740100
                                                                                   WI TN00740100




446   However, I did take significant steps to address the concerns that were brought

      to the Board's attention about Horizon. Though I trusted the assurances that I

      was given throughout my tenure about the safety of the system, I had open and

      transparent dealings with people representing the interests of sub-postmasters,

      and was involved in serious attempts to try to get to the truth about the system.

      As I detailed earlier in this statement:



      446.1 I met Lord Arbuthnot in March 2012 and insisted on commissioning the

             independent Second Sight review after hearing about his concern for his

             constituent and other subpostmasters. I made sure that the Second

             Sight review proceeded after I experienced resistance from some senior

             executives within the Post Office, and after reading an internal report

             (the Ismay Report) which said that a further review of the system was

             inadvisable. I note a line of Alwen Lyons' email of 9 June 2012

             (POL00096606): "Alice feels this is the business pushing back

             unnecessarily and she feels this has happened throughout the [Second

             Sight set-up] process and she is having to keep pushing us".



      446.2 It is worth noting that once the Second Sight investigation started, the

             Post Office stopped pursuing criminal convictions which relied solely on

             Horizon data and also put on hold civil recovery proceedings while the

             report was awaited (P0L00115924).



      446.3 Once the Second Sight review was commissioned, I wanted to make

             sure that it commanded the trust of the sub-postmasters' MPs and



                                         228
                                                                                WI TN00740100
                                                                              WI TN00740100




       representatives which it did at the outset. For instance, I made sure

      when advising on the Terms of Reference for the Second Sight review

       that cases were included where sub-postmasters had received criminal

       convictions that had been decided in court, notwithstanding the internal

       legal advice at the Post Office. I said in an email of 9 June 2012 that I

       did not buy the argument that we would be undermining the court

       process by doing this, and that ' if...there were new evidence in a case

      which had been decided, we would want to do, and be seen to do, the

       right thing by that" (P0L00096604). I note an email of Belinda Crowe's

       to Chris Aujard on 26 September 2014, to which I am not in copy, where

       she says that this email from me was "the genesis for having allowed

       criminal cases into the Scheme" (POL00209785).



446.4 I was fully supportive of the programme of work initiated by the

       executives following the publishing of Second Sight's Interim Report

       pushing for better training and support for sub-postmasters. The Interim

      Report confirmed to me that the Post Office's offering for sub-

       postmasters was inadequate.



446.5 After the receipt of the Interim Report, prosecutions dramatically reduced

       and a decision was taken by the Board in February 2014 on the

       recommendation of the ARC to make significant changes to the criteria

      for pursuing prosecutions, such that this would only happen in the most

       egregious cases. Prosecutions had been brought from 1999. I believe

       that the changes under my tenure seriously mitigated further issues.



                                 229
                                                                                 WI TNO0740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




446.6 In February 2014, when the Board was considering the future of the Post

      Office's prosecutions, I argued that the Post Office should further explore

      ceasing its private prosecution function and referring all of its criminal

      cases to the Crown Prosecution Service. Had I known of the Simon

      Clarke advice at the time, I am sure that I would have pushed harder in

      favour of this and I think my fellow Directors who argued that the Post

      Office should continue with private prosecutions would have seen the

      issues differently.



446.7 The Post Office developed serious concerns about the rigour of Second

      Sight's work and relations between them and the Post Office

      deteriorated but they continued their work to finish their role in supporting

      cases going through the mediation scheme and to complete their final

      report.



446.8 I was also fully supportive of the Post Office's commissioning further

      investigations and arrangements that were designed (i) to assist sub-

      postmasters with their concerns and (ii) to get to the truth about the

      Horizon system and the safety of prosecutions. These included:



      446.8.1          The setting up of the Mediation Scheme and the selection

                of Sir Anthony Hooper as a senior independent figure to preside

                over it.




                                  230
                                                                                       WI TNO0740100
                                                                                     WI TN00740100




             446.8.2       The commissioning of Deloitte to investigate the Horizon

                    IT system, leading to Gareth James (Deloitte Partner) providing

                    oral reassurances about the investigations of the system to the

                    Board on 30 April 2014.



      446.9 And, far from being concerned about the involvement of the CCRC, I

             welcomed its intervention in February 2015 to investigate further the

             safety of convictions that were based on Horizon data. Although, I

             appreciate my view of that process had no practical impact on either the

             instigation of it or it running its course. My support of it is nevertheless

             reflective of the mindset I had at that time.



447   I have set out in this statement the numerous factors which influenced my

      mistaken belief in the integrity of the Horizon system. I have also set out in this

      statement the actions that I took, such as the insistence on an independent

      review, which genuinely went further than others in Post Office considered were

      necessary at that time. But, on reflection, I wish that I had asked to see the full

      advice which Brian Altman KC wrote and of which the Board were aware. This

      would have revealed the existence of the Simon Clarke advice and would have

      led us to ask more questions. But at the time, I had no reason to ask for this. I

      also cannot be certain about the difference it would have made to the eventual

      outcome: it would have alerted us to serious issues within the Post Office's

      prosecutions function, but, as we now know, Fujitsu were concealing flaws in

      their software, including in the High Court.




                                        231
                                                                                                      WITNO0740100
                                                                                                     WITN00740100




448    I hope that                        useful.in.helping the Inquiry to gather a clear account




                     mY,evidenpe




                                     is
        of what happened during my period                 Chair at the Post Office over the period




                                                     as
        2011 to 2015. I recognise that it is              the nature of the chairmanship role that




                                                    in
       unexpected and difficult issues will arise, and that you have to face into such

       issues and deal with them. That I tried to do, throughout my chairmanship. I

       repeat again, I am truly sorry that during the period when I chaired the Board

       we did not get to the truth about the problems affecting the integrity of the

       Horizon system, and that this prolonged the suffering of those who were

       wrongly convicted.



449 1 have answered this statement in light of the facts known to me and information

      made available to me at the date of 26 March 2024. I understand that I




                                                                                              will
      continue to receive disclosure from the Post Office and other facts and

      information may become known to me. I may submit a supplementary statement

      to assist the Inquiry if 1 have disclosed to me new information that is relevant to

      my assistance to the inquiry.



      Statement of Truth

      I believe the content of this statement to be true


      Signed:                      GRO
       Dated:
                                                                                     W ITNO0740100
                                                                                  W ITN00740100




Index to First Witness Statement of Alice Perkins

 No.   URN             Document Description                         Control number

 1.    WITN00740101    Signed letter of appointment, Alice Perkins VIS00014027
                       and Donald Brydon, 21 July 2011

 2.    WITN00740102    Letter from Vince Cable to Alice Perkins, 11 VIS00014026
                       January 2012

 3.    WITN00740103    Post Office Annual Report and Financial      VIS00013998
                       Statements 2012-13

 4.    WITN00740104    Manuscript of Alice Perkins notebook entry   VIS00014004
                       on role of the Board, 2012

 5.    WITN00740105    FRC Corporate Code of Governance             VIS00014010

 6.    WITN00740106    Significant Litigation Report, December VIS00014000
                       2011

 7.    WITN00740107    Remuneration    Committee Terms         of VIS00014011
                       Reference version adopted in 2012

 8.    WITN00740108    Remuneration    Committee Terms of VIS00014007
                       Reference version reviewed by the Board in
                       February 2014

 9.    WITN00740109    Remuneration     Committee Terms        of VIS00014014
                       Reference, version with no date

 10.   WITN00740110    Audit & Risk Committee Terms of VIS00014009
                       Reference version approved by the Board
                       on 23 January 2013

 11.   WITN00740111    Audit & Risk Committee Terms of VIS00013996
                       Reference version approved by the Board
                       on 26 March 2014

 12.   WITN00740112    Audit & Risk Committee Terms of VIS00014018
                       Reference version approved by the Board
                       on 27 April 2015

 13.   WITN00740113    Audit & Risk Committee Terms of VIS00014005
                       Reference version dated September 2015

 14.   WITN00740114    Audit & Risk Committee Terms            of VIS00014017
                       Reference version with no date

 15.   WITN00740115    Nominations    Committee   Terms    of VIS00013999
                       Reference reviewed by the Board on 25
                       March 2015




                                      233
                                                                                W ITNO0740100
                                                                              WI TN00740100




No.   URN            Document Description                      Control number

16.   WITNO0740116   Nominations   Committee  Terms   of VIS00014008
                     Reference reviewed by the Board on
                     February 2014

17.   WITNO0740117   Pensions Committee Terms of Reference     VIS00013994
                     approved by the Board on 16 July 2014

18.   WITNO0740118   Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Terms of VIS00014003
                     Reference

19.   POL00021431    Audit & Risk Committee Meeting Minutes,   POL-0018061
                     23 May 2012

20.   POL00099218    Update following the publication of the POL-0098801
                     Interim Report on Horizon, July 2015

21.   POL00040911    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Update POL-0037393
                     and options, 11 February 2015

22.   WITNO0740119   Business, Innovation and Skills Committee: VIS00014006
                     Inquiry into Post Office Mediation:
                     Supplementary evidence from Post Office
                     Limited

23.   POL00179470    Email from Susan Crichton to Alice Perkins POL-BSFF-
                     CC Glenda Hansen and Alwen Lyons, 0017533
                     attaching briefing paper for Alice Perkins'
                     meeting with James Arbuthnot, 12 March
                     2012

24.   POL00107701    Briefing Note on the Current Status of POL-BSFF-
                     Claims involving Horizon for meeting with 0017534
                     JA, 12 March 2012

25.   POL00115924    Briefing for meeting with James Arbuthnot, POL-0116926
                     3 July 2013

26.   FUJ00083375    Note authored by Gareth Jenkins titled POINQ0089546F
                     'Local Suspense Problem', 15 May 2013

27.   FUJ00086811    Horizon data, Lepton SPSO 191320, Draft POINQ0092982F
                     Report by Helen Rose, 12 June 2016

28.   POL00139690    Email from John Scott to Susan Crichton POL00139690
                     CC John Scott re Weds Call — Integrity of
                     the Horizon System and Branch Support
                     Programme, 14 August 2013

29.   POL00006798    Legal advice on the use of expert evidence POL-0017590
                     by Simon Clarke, 15 July 2013




                                   234
                                                                                   W ITNO0740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




No.   URN            Document Description                          Control number

30.   POL00006799    Advice on Disclosure and the Duty to POL-0017591
                     Record and Retain Material by Simon
                     Clarke, 2 August 2013

31.   POL00006583    Interim Review of OK Processes by Brian POL-0017668
                     Altman KC, 2 August 2013

32.   POL00026626    POL Board - Agenda for 27 November 2013 POL-0023267
                     and corresponding papers & Various
                     Meeting Minutes from 2013

33.   POL00030217    POL Draft Management Letter for the Year POL-0026699
                     ended 27 March 2011 by Ernst & Young
                     from Angus Grant to Sarah Hall.

34.   POL00030365    Board Meeting Minutes, 22 September POL-0026847
                     2011

35.   WITNO0740120   POL IT Audit Update (SAS70), September VIS00014002
                     2011

36.   WITNO0740121   POL Technology Update - Tactical and          VIS00014001
                     Strategic  Relationship with  Fujitsu,
                     September 2011

37.   WITNO0740122   Manuscript of Alice Perkins notebook entry VIS00014016
                     on the induction meeting with Angus Grant,
                     27 September 2011

38.   POL00021502    Board Meeting Minutes, 10 November 2011 POL0000035

39.   POL00362957    Noting Paper — Viability of introducing a     POL-0185272
                     SAS70 or equivalent audit report

40.   WITNO0740124   EY Audit Results Report for the 52 weeks      VIS00014013
                     ended 25 March 2012

41.   WITNO0740125   Significant Litigation Report, December VIS00014015
                     2011

42.   POL00027270    Board Meeting Minutes, 13 December 2011 POL-0023911

43.   POL00095587    Significant Litigation Report, January 2012   POL-0095170

44.   POL00021503    Board Meeting Minutes, 12 January 2012        POL0000036

45.   POL00095835    Post Office Limited Litigation Matters - POL-0095418
                     Commercial Litigation - Claims in Excess of
                     £5000K and/or claims with wider
                     significance for business, 1 January 2012

46.   POL00027579    Board Meeting Minutes, 9 February 2012        POL-0024220

                                     235
                                                                                  W ITNO0740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




No.   URN            Document Description                         Control number


47.   POL00096036    Board Status Report, November 11 - POL-0095619
                     February 12

48.   POL00096371    Board Status Report, November 2011 - POL-0095954
                     March 2012

49.   POL00107127    Review of Key System Controls in Horizon, POL-0105435
                     from 18 April 2012 Board Pack

50.   WITNO0740126   Email exchange between Donald Brydon         VIS00013993
                     and Paula Vennells CC Moya Greene, Paul
                     Murray and Alice Perkins re Private Eye
                     reference, 29 September 2011

51.   POL00021503    Board Meeting Minutes, 12 January 2012       POL-0024226

52.   POL00095973    Email exchange between Alice Perkins and POL-0095556
                     Susan Crichton, forwarding email from
                     James Arbuthnot MP re Sub-postmasters
                     and the Post Office, 24 February 2012

53.   POLOO105470    Email exchange between Alice Perkins and POL-0104650
                     James Arbuthnot MP re Sub-postmasters
                     and the Post Office, 24 February 2012

54.   POL00105481    Notes of the Meeting with James Arbuthnot, POL-0104661
                     Alice Perkins and Alwen Lyons, 13 March
                     2012

55.   WITNO0740127   Manuscript of Alice Perkins notebook entry   VIS00013995
                     on external reports, cases and independent
                     review, March 2012

56.   POL00107702    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells, POL-0110803
                     Susan Crichton, Alwen Lyons and Lesley
                     Sewell re meeting with James Arbuthnot
                     MP, 13 March 2012

57.   POL00021505    Board Meeting Minutes, 15 March 2012         POL0000038

58.   POL00105592    Email from Alice Perkins to Alwen Lyons re: POL-0104609
                     material for meeting on 28 March — Issues
                     of substance and handling, 27 March 2012

59.   POL00026572    Horizon — Response to Challenges POL-0023213
                     Regarding Systems Integrity, Ismay Report,
                     2 August 2012

60.   POL00096606    Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen Lyons POL-0096189
                     re: 2"d Sight TOR, 9 June 2012



                                    236
                                                                                W ITNO0740100
                                                                              WI TN00740100




No.   URN           Document Description                       Control number

61.   POL00105597   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan         POL-0104597
                    Crichton and Alwen Lyons, RE: telephone
                    call with Oliver Letwin MP expressing
                    concerns regarding Horizon, 3 April 2012

62.   POL00115849   Letter from Paula Vennells to Oliver Letwin POL-0114586
                    MP re: Robustness of the Post Office
                    Horizon System, 4 April 2012

63.   POL00021506   Board Meeting Minutes, 18 April 2012       POL0000039

64.   POL00085836   Email from Craig Tuthill to Angela-Van- POL-0082894
                    Den-Bogerd cc: Sue Richardson RE: IN
                    STRICTEST CONFIDENCE - Urgent
                    Request Please, 2 May 2012

65.   POL00105601   Email from Susan Crichton to Alwen Lyons POL-0104599
                    and Simon Baker forwarding Alice Perkins
                    thoughts, 14 May 2012

66.   POL00105479   Meeting Pack for James Arbuthnot and       POL-0104659
                    Oliver Letwin, 17 May 2012

67.   POL00116795   Second Sight Timeline document             POL-BSFF-
                                                               0031505

68.   POL00027707   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen Lyons POL-0117659
                    and Susan Crichton re note of meeting with
                    James Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin, 22 May
                    2012

69.   POL00142368   Letter from James Arbuthnot to Alice POL-0141971
                    Perkins re happy with progress and initial
                    meeting with other MPs, 21 May 2012

70.   POL00105486   Letter from Alice Perkins to James POL-0104666
                    Arbuthnot re meeting with MPs, 23 May
                    2012

71.   POL00021507   Board Meeting Minutes, 23 May 2012         POL0000040

72.   POL00006484   Summary of Conference with Counsel at POL-0017789
                    Maitland Chambers about Horizon, 12 June
                    2012

73.   POL00027558   Post Office Significant Litigation Report: POL-0024199
                    Civil Claims (Claims for Judicial Review and
                    Horizon Claims) and Principal Criminal
                    Cases brought by POL, 12 September 2012

74.   POL00021509   Board Meeting Minutes, 19 September POL0000042
                    2012

                                   237
                                                                                 W ITNO0740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




No.   URN           Document Description                         Control number


75.   POL00096971   Email from Alice Perkins to Alwen Lyons, POL-0096554
                    Paula Vennells, Jorja Preston and Theresa
                    Iles, re James Arbuthnot, 18 September
                    2012

76.   POL00105477   Email from Theresa Iles on behalf of Paula   POL-0104657
                    Vennells to Susan Crichton re 2nd Sight
                    Consultants, 21 June 2012

77.   POL00096576   Second Sight: Proposal to carry out an       POL-0096159
                    Independent Review of Past Fraud and
                    Theft Cases, 1 June 2012

78.   POL00096574   Email from Susan Crichton to Alice Perkins, POL-0096157
                    Paula Vennells, Simon Baker and others re:
                    Horizon- Terms of reference.doc; 2nd Sight
                    - Horizon Matters - Proposal.ppt, 6 June
                    2012

79.   POL00096575   Draft - POL, Terms of Reference from POL-0096158
                    Susan Crichton, 6 June 2012

80.   POL00105472   Email from Susan Crichton to Alice Perkins POL-0104652
                    and Paula Vennells re: Horizon Version 2 &
                    Draft Terms of Reference attached, 7 June
                    2012

81.   POL00113792   Email from Alice Perkins to Susan Crichton POL-0112900
                    and     Paula     Vennells   re:  Horizon
                    investigation, 8 June 2012

82.   POL00096604   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan POL-0096187
                    Crichton and Alwen Lyons re: 2nd Sight
                    TOR, 9 June 2012

83.   POL00058004   Pack for Meeting with James Arbuthnot and    POL-0054483
                    Other MPs, 18 June 2012

84.   POL00096667   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells POL-0096250
                    re: Message from James Arbuthnot to
                    Tadge Channer at Shoosmiths - Post Office
                    / Horizon, 19 June 2012

85.   POL00105477   Email from Theresa Iles on behalf of Paula   POL-0104657
                    Vennells to Susan Crichton re 2nd Sight
                    Consultants, 21 June 2012

86.   POL00021508   Board Meeting Minutes, 4 July 2012           POL0000041

87.   POL00107805   Email from Paula Vennells to Theresa Iles POL-0110842
                    re: Fwd: our 1:1,3 October 2012


                                   238
                                                                                  W ITN00740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                      Control number


88.    WITN00740128   Post Office Short Term Incentive Plan VIS00013997
                      (STIP) Outturn and Payments for
                      2014/2015, May 2015

89.    POL00097030    Email from Paula Vennells to Theresa Iles POL-0096613
                      RE: Fwd: Read out of James Arbuthnot /
                      JFSA meeting, 9 October 2012

90.    POL00021430    Audit & Risk Committee Meeting Minutes,   POL-0018060
                      13 November 2012

91.    WITN00740129   Audit & Risk Committee Briefing Book Half VIS00013991
                      Year ended 23 September 2012

92.    POL00021510    Board Meeting Minutes, 23 January 2013    POL0000043

93.    POL00097588    Letter from James Arbuthnot MP to Alice POL-0097171
                      Perkins re Meeting with Second Sight, 7
                      March 2013

94.    POL00097589    MP Cases Review of Horizon Update, 11 POL-0097172
                      March 2013

95.    POL00097670    Email from Simon Baker to Alice Perkins, POL-0097253
                      RE Notes for James Arbuthnot / Alice
                      Perkins Pre-meeting, 19 March 2013

96.    POL00097723    Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice Perkins re: POL-0097306
                      James Arbuthnot and 2nd Sight, 19 March
                      2013

97.    WITN00740130   Letter from Alice Perkins to James        VIS00013992
                      Arbuthnot re attending MP meeting and
                      drawing conclusions relating to SS, 22
                      March 2013

98.    POL00097887    Alwen Lyons forwarding to Alice Perkins   POL-0097470
                      email from SS and James' annotation and
                      reply, 27 March 2013

99.    POL00098158    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennels, POL-0097741
                      JA meeting, 8 May 2013

100.   POL00021513    Board Meeting Minutes, 21 May 2013        POL0000046

101.   POL00021515    Board Meeting Minutes, 1 July 2013        POL0000048

102.   POL00098376    Paula Vennells forwarding emails to Alice POL-0097959
                      Perkins re weekly update with Alwen in the
                      run up to SS interim report, 24 May 2013



                                    239
                                                                                 W ITNO0740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




No.    URN           Document Description                     Control number

103.   POL00098798   Email chain between Martin Edwards and POL-0098381
                     Paula Vennells Re: next steps on Horizon
                     issues, 28 June 2013

104.   POL00098782   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice Perkins POL-0098365
                     re Fwd: JA?, 28 June 2013

105.   POL00098878   Notes for Board update on Second Sight   POL-0098461
                     Investigation, 1 July 2013

106.   POL00098817   Email chain from Paula Vennells to Theresa POL-0098400
                     Iles re Board Call and SS, 30 June 2013

107.   POL00098877   Email from Martin Edwards to Alice Perkins POL-0098460
                     re: Discussion notes for Board on Second
                     Sight , 1 July 2013

108.   POL00029649   Letter from Paula Vennells to James POL-0026131
                     Arbuthnot, MP re key points discussed in
                     the meeting on 3 July 2013 with Paula
                     Vennells, James Arbuthnot and Alice, 4 July
                     2013

109.   POL00098887   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells POL-0098470
                     re: Latest on SS, 2 July 2013

110.   POL00098921   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells POL-0098504
                     RE. Briefing for meeting with James
                     Arbuthnot. Email chain includes detailed
                     speaking notes, 3 July 2013

111.   POL00098990   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells, POL-0098573
                     re SS: The Future after Monday, 4 July 2013

112.   POL00099063   Signed Interim Report into alleged POL-0098646
                     problems with the Horizon system, 8 July
                     2013

113.   POL00029651   POL Commentary on Second Sight Interim POL-0026133
                     Report, 7 July 2013
114.   POL00168704   POL statement — working party — consider POL-BSFF-
                     all 47 cases brought by JFSA, and MPs    0029538

115.   POL00099026   Email from Paula Vennells to the Board on POL-0098607
                     developments with SS's review and
                     conversations with Alan Bates (JFSA), 6
                     July 2013

116.   POL00105633   JA statement at the House of Commons, POL-0120587
                     Interim report welcomed — a step along the
                     way, 8 July 2013



                                   240
                                                                                 W ITN00740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




No.    URN           Document Description                     Control number

117.   POL00021516   Board Meeting Minutes, 16 July 2013      POL0000049

118.   POL00099223   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice Perkins POL-0098806
                     re The case for independence in the Post
                     Office appeals system 14 July 2013

119.   POL00040001   Email from Susan Crichton to Andrew POL-0036483
                     Parsons, FW: Horizon Issues- draft Board
                     Update, 23 July 2013

120.   POL00040002   Update to POL Board- RE; Horizon Legal POL-0036484
                     Issues. Relates to review of prosecutions,
                     22 July 2013

121.   POL00039994   Letter from Sally Berlin, CCRC to Paula POL-0036476
                     Vennells, RE: Horizon Computer System,
                     12 July 2013

122.   POL00040012   Letter from Susan Crichton to Sally Berlin, POL-0036494
                     CCRC re Horizon Computer System, 24
                     July 2013

123.   POL00298004   Update on the work programme arising POL-BSFF-
                     from the Horizon report, 27 July 2013 0031025

124.   POL00192976   Email from Martin Edwards to Alasdair POL-BSFF-
                     Marnoch and Alwen Lyons cc Board re 0031039
                     board note on Horizon, 27 July 2013

125.   POL00118496   Email from Paula Vennells to Theresa Iles POL-0119613
                     CC Alice Perkins Re: File Note — SC, 26
                     July 2013

126.   POL00116114   Email chain from Alice Perkins to Martin POL-0117114
                     Edwards, Alwen Lyons and Alasdair
                     Marnoch re: Board note on Horizon, 31 July
                     2013

127.   POL00108058   Email from Paula Vennells to Theresa Illes POL-0110925
                     re SS costs and update from Susan, 2
                     August 2013

128.   POL00116123   Email chain from Paula Vennells to Alice POL-0117122
                     Perkins re Briefing Alasdair, 6 September
                     2013

129.   POL00027792   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice Perkins, POL-0024433
                     Neil McCausland, Virginia Holmes and
                     others RE: Board note from Paula as
                     promised, 28 August 2013




                                   241
                                                                                  W ITNO0740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                     Control number

130.   POL00099510    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells POL-0099093
                      Re: SS and costs, 29 August 2013

131.   POL00099513    Email from Alice Perkins to Chris Day, POL-0099096
                      Paula Vennells and Susan Crichton Re: SS
                      and Costs, 29 August 2013

132.   POL00066817    Seema Misra Case Study. Email chain from POL-0063296
                      Martin Smith to Susan Crichton RE: Note of
                      meeting with Sir Anthony Hooper, 26
                      September 2013

133.   POL00099711    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice Perkins POL-0099294
                      Re. Example Applications, 4 October 2013

134.   POL00099833    Email from Alice Perkins to Alwen Lyons cc: POL0000052
                      Paula Vennells re: brief for meeting with
                      James Arbuthnot, 29 October 2013

135.   POL00027136    POL — Chief Executive's Report, 31 POL-0023777
                      October 2013


136.   WITNO0740131   Audit    &   Risk   Committee  paper: VIS00014019
                      Prosecutions Policy prepared by Chris
                      Aujard, 13 November 2013

137.   WITNO0740132   Audit & Risk Committee Meeting Minutes, VIS00014022
                      19 November 2013

138.   POL00099940    Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice Perkins re: POL-0099523
                      Mediation Scheme Update - additional brief
                      for your meeting with Tony Hooper, 22
                      November 2013

139.   POL00099941    Alice Perkins meeting with Sir Anthony POL-0099524
                      Hooper - Baker Street (TBC), 25 November
                      2013

140.   POL00021520    Board Meeting Minutes, 27 November 2013 POL0000053

141.   POL00100193    Audit & Risk Committee — Prosecutions POL-0099776
                      Policy paper, 4 February 2014

142.   POL00027692    Email chain from Alwen Lyons to Paula POL-0024333
                      Vennells and Chris Aujard re: ARC
                      Teleconference, 8 February 2014

143.   POL00027687    Email from Susannah Storey to Alice POL-0024328
                      Perkins        re: 2014 02 11 ARC
                      teleconference, 10 February 2014



                                    242
                                                                                  W ITNO0740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




No.    URN           Document Description                      Control number

144.   POL00100224   Email from Chris Aujard to Neil POL-0099807
                     McCausland,     RE:   2014    11 ARC
                     Teleconference, 11 February 2014

145.   POL00100223   Email from Theresa Illes (on behalf of Paula POL-0099806
                     Vennells) to Alasdair Marnoc, RE: ARC
                     Prosecutions Paper, 11 February 2014

146.   POL00027337   Board Meeting Minutes, 26 February 2014   POL-0023978

147.   POL00116241   Briefing Note from Belinda Crowe to Paula POL-0117235
                     Vennells cc Chris Aujard, Hugh Flemington
                     'and others' re: Briefing for your 1-2-1 with
                     Alice, 6 January 2014

148.   POL00021521   Board Meeting Minutes, 21 January 2014    POL0000054

149.   POL00100321   Email chain from Belinda Crowe to Paula POL-0099904
                     Vennells; David Oliver; Chris Aujard; Martin
                     Edwards, re: Papers for tomorrow - our pre-
                     meeting, and meeting with Second Sight
                     and Tony Hooper, 23 February 2014

150.   POL00116313   Board Meeting - Speaking note for Paula, POL-0117306
                     26 February 2014

151.   POL00100124   Letter from Belinda Crowe to Chairman and POL-0099707
                     Chief Executive, POL cc Chris Aujard RE
                     Briefing for Meeting with RT Hon James
                     Arbuthnot MP, 26 February 2014

152.   POL00100129   Agenda for Meeting with RT Hon James POL-0099712
                     Arbuthnot MP, 28 January 2014

153.   POL00100128   Email from David Oliver to Alice Perkins, POL-0099711
                     Jorja Preston, Paula Vennells cc: Theresa
                     Lies, Martin Edwards, Sarah Paddison and
                     others re: Meeting with JA Tomorrow re:
                     Agenda for JA Meeting, 27 January 2014

154.   POL00116245   Email from David Oliver to Paula Vennells, POL-0117239
                     Alice Perkins and Martin Edwards RE:
                     Further briefing for tomorrow, 28 February
                     2014

155.   POL00116246   Agenda for the meeting between Alice POL-0117240
                     Perkins, Paula Vennells and David Oliver,
                     28 January 2014

156.   POL00116247   Letter from Alice Perkins and Paula POL-0117241
                     Vennells; Re: Further Briefing for James
                     Arbuthnot Meeting, 27 January 2014


                                   243
                                                                                  W ITNO0740100
                                                                                WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                      Control number


157.   POL00100142    Email from Chris Aujard to Angela Van- POL-0099725
                      Den- Bogerd cc: Paula Vennells re:
                      URGENT, 28 January 2014

158.   POLOO100141    Email thread from Martin Edwards to Paula POL-0099724
                      Vennells re: Further briefing for tomorrow,
                      28 January 2014

159.   POL00026743    Final Note by David Oliver of Meeting POL-0023384
                      between Post Office and James Arbuthnot
                      MP, 28 January 2014

160.   POLOO100210    Email from Belinda Crowe to Alice Perkins, POL-0099793
                      RE: Next steps following meeting with
                      James, 7 February 2014

161.   POL00030712    Initial Complaint Review and Mediation POL-0027970
                      Scheme by Belinda Crowe, 20 February
                      2014 from 26 February 2014 Board Pack

162.   POL00105552    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula Vennells, POL-0105119
                      Re: Sparrow, 10 March 2014

163.   UKG100002213   Email chain from Richard Callard to Peter UKG1013027-001
                      Batten re: Project Sparrow: Linklaters
                      scoping paper for Board Comment, 14
                      March 2014

164.   POL00107317    Legally privileged report prepared by POL-0105625
                      Linklaters on behalf of Post Office into initial
                      complaint review and mediation scheme
                      legal issues, 20 March 2014

165.   POL00021523    Board Meeting Minutes, 26 March 2014      POL0000056

166.   POL00105529    Initial Complaint and Mediation Scheme POL-0105096
                      review by Chris Aujard, 36 March 2014

167.   POL00022093    Outline of points produced by Linklaters to POL-0018572
                      explain Horizon and form a basis for a
                      report to respond to public criticism and
                      individual complaints by SPMs, 28 March
                      2014

168.   WITNO0740133   Audit & Risk Committee Meeting Minutes, 6 VIS00014028
                      March 2014

169.   POL00116439    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Meeting POL-0117423
                      ToR and Initial Complaint Review and
                      Mediation Scheme document, 9 April 2014



                                    244
                                                                                 W ITN00740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                     Control number

170.   POL00006565    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Meeting POL-0017844
                      Minutes, 9 April 2014

171.   POL00006571    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Meeting POL-0017847
                      Minutes, 6 June 2014

172.   WITN00740134   Initial Complaints Review and Mediation VIS00014023
                      Scheme:         Options     for       the
                      closure/accelerated completion of the
                      Scheme, prepared by Chris Aujard, 28 April
                      2014

173.   POL00116515    Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice Perkins, POL-0017447
                      Callard Richard, Alasdair Marnoch and
                      others re Letters from Jenny Willot & Alan
                      Bates, 28 April 2014

174.   POL00116516    Letter from Jenny Willott MP to Paula POL-0017448
                      Vennells re: letter from Alan Bates
                      regarding Initial Case Review and
                      Mediation Scheme, 28 April 2014

175.   POL00116517    Letter from Alan Bates to Jo Swinson MP re POL-0017449
                      Initial Case & Mediation Scheme, 16 April
                      2014

176.   POL00022125    Initial Complaint Review and Mediation POL-BSFF-
                      Scheme The role of Second Sight in 0041521
                      supporting the Scheme prepared by Chris
                      Aujard, 28 April 2014

177.   POL00006566    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Meeting POL-0017845
                      Minutes, 30 April 2014

178.   UKG100002308   Update for the Board Sub Committee POL-0117463
                      following working group, 1 May 2014

179.   POL00116572    Paula Vennells' note of meeting with POL-0117500
                      Anthony Hooper, 19 May 2014
180.   POL00117519    Email from Rodric Williams to Gareth POL-0115136
                      James, Copying in Belinda Crowe, Chris
                      Aujard and others. Re Strictly Private &
                      Confidential - Subject to Legal Privilege, 2
                      April 2014

181.   POL00105635    Deloitte Project Zebra - Phase 1 Report - POL-0104595
                      HNG-X: Review of Assurance Sources, 30
                      April 2014

182.   POL00021524    Board Meeting Minutes, 30 April 2014     POL0000057




                                     245
                                                                                 W ITN00740100
                                                                               WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                      Control number

183.   POL00021426    Audit & Risk Committee Meeting Minutes, POL0000057
                      15 May 2014

184.   POL00104259    Lessons Learned — Second Sight POL-BSFF-
                      investigation into Horizon noting paper, 25 0007289
                      April 2014

185.   POL00031391    Deloitte's HNG-X Review of Assurance POL-0028293
                      Sources : Phase 1- Board Update, 13 May
                      2014

186.   POL00021525    Board Meeting Minutes, 21 May 2014        POL0000058

187.   POL00028062    Deloitte Report: Horizon Desktop Review of POL-0023065
                      Assurance Sources and Key Control
                      Features - draft for discussion, 23 May 2014

188.   POL00031400    Email from Chris Aujard to Paula Vennells, POL-0028302
                      Martin Edwards, Alwen Lyons and others re
                      FW: Project Zebra, 29 May 2014

189.   POL00029733    Email from Alwen Lyons to Rodric Williams POL-0026215
                      Re: FWD -Deloitte Briefing - Message from
                      Chris Aujard and Lesley Sewell - Strictly
                      Private & Confidential - Subject to Legal
                      Privilege

190.   POL00028069    Deloitte Draft Board Briefing document POL-0023072
                      further to report on Horizon desktop review
                      of assurance sources and key control
                      features, 4 June 2014

191.   WITN00740135   Initial Complaints Review and Mediation   VIS00014020
                      Scheme:           Sub        Committee
                      Recommendation, 6 June 2014

192.   POL00108607    Chairman Briefing Session Sparrow - draft POL-0106700
                      not policy, 2 June 2014

193.   POL00022128    Initial Complaints Review and Mediation POL-0018607
                      Scheme: The Way Forward paper, 3 June
                      2014

194.   POL00021526    Board Meeting Minutes, 10 June 2014       POL0000059

195.   UKG100002392   POL Board - Initial Complaints Review and UKG1013206-001
                      Mediation Scheme: Update Paper, 18 June
                      2014

196.   UKGI00002397   Initial Complaints Review and Mediation   UKG1013211-001
                      Scheme: July Update Paper, 7 July 2014



                                    246
                                                                                   W ITNO0740100
                                                                                 WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                      Control number

197.   WITNO0740136   Initial Complaints Review and Mediation VIS00014030
                      Scheme: Update Paper, 17 September
                      2014

198.   POL00021528    Board Meeting Minutes, 25 September POL0000061
                      2014

199.   POL00004439    Initial Complaint Review and Mediation VIS00005507
                      Scheme - Briefing Report - Part One -
                      Prepared by Second Sight, 25 July 2014

200.   POL00030160    Initial Complaint Review and Mediation POL-0026642
                      Scheme Briefing Report - Part Two
                      prepared by Second Sight, 21 August 2014

201.   POL00002415    Initial Complaint Review and Mediation    VIS00003429
                      Scheme, Post Office Reply to Second
                      Sight's Briefing Report —Part Two, 22
                      September 2014

202.   WITNO0740137   Email from Alwen Lyons to the Board re    VIS00014025
                      update note from Paula, 16 August 2014

203.   POL00101477    Email from Avene O'Farrell to Belinda POL-0101060
                      Crowe, Tom Wechsler, Chris Aujard re: FW:
                      Post Office mediation process, 23 October
                      2014

204.   POL00101481    Email from Mark Davies to Alice Perkins, POL-0101064
                      co'd Chris Aujard, Paula Vennells and
                      others re: Re: Correspondence with James
                      Arbuthnot's office: a quick update and next
                      steps, 24 October 2014

205.   POL00116824    Speaking Note for Paula re Update for POL-0117685
                      Board/Alice following meeting with MPs, 25
                      November 2014

206.   POL00021530    Board Meeting Minutes of 26 November POL0000063
                      2014, 26 November 2014

207.   POLOO101690    Post Office Press Release from the office of POL-0101273
                      The Rt Hon James Arbuthnot, MP re: MPs
                      lose faith in Post Office mediation scheme,
                      8 December 2014

208.   POL00101596    Letter from Paula Vennells to James POL-0101179
                      Arbuthnot MP re Complaint and Mediation
                      Scheme, 26 November 2014

209.   POL00101606    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice Perkins POL-0101189
                      re: JA, 1 December 2013


                                    247
                                                                                    W ITNO0740100
                                                                                  WI TN00740100




No.    URN            Document Description                          Control number


210.   POLOO101700    Letter from The Rt Hon James Arbuthnot to POL-0101283
                      Paula Vennells re: Complaints and
                      Mediation Scheme, 8 December 2014

211.   POLOO101611    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice Perkins POL-0101194
                      forwarding exchange re mediation case, 2
                      December 2014

212.   WITNO0740138   Chris Aujard and Mark Davies paper on         VIS00014029
                      current status of the Mediation scheme, 8
                      January 2015

213.   POL00006575    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Meeting         POL-0017849
                      Minutes, 12 January 2015

214.   POL00101999    Email from Alice Perkins to Mark Davies, POL-0101582
                      Alasdair    Marnoch, Alwen Lyons and
                      others, re Sparrow, 16 January 2015

215.   POL00021531    Board Meeting Minutes, 28 January 2015        POL0000064

216.   POL00102169    Project Sparrow — Options Assumptions POL-0101752
                      and Constants Report, 17 February 2015

217.   POL00006574    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee Meeting         POL-0017848
                      Minutes, 18 February 2015

218.   UKGl00003789   Letter from Paula Vennells to Jo Swinson      UKG1014603-001
                      MP re Second Sight Mediation Scheme, 9
                      March 2015

219.   POL00027279    Board Meeting Minutes, 25 March 2015          POL-0023920

220.   WITNO0740139   Board Meeting Minutes, 2 July 2015            VIS00014024

221.   WITNO0740140   Board Meeting Minutes, 15 July 2015           VIS00014031

222.   WITNO0740141   Manuscript of Alice Perkins notebook entry    VIS00014021
                      on meeting with Shex re decision to resign,
                      October 2014

223.   POL00209785    Email from Belinda Crowe to Chris Aujard POL-BSFF-
                      forwarding Alice Perkins' email re 2nd Sight 0047848
                      TOR and review, 26 September 2014




                                     248
