                                                                                     WITNO6660100
                                                                                   WITNO6660100




                                                     Witness Name: Amandeep Singh
                                                     Statement No.: WITNO6660100
                                                     Exhibits: None
                                                     Dated: 13 January 2023


                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY


              FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF AMANDEEP SINGH




I, Amandeep Singh, will say as follows...



   1. I Amandeep Singh am an IT Consultant since graduating in 2003 with a BSc in

       Computing from University of Huddersfield. Since graduating I have worked

       for major Banks, Pharmaceuticals and Communications companies as an IT

       consultant. I worked on the Horizon helpdesk support desk, formerly ICL

       Epson support Desk. I was based in Wakefield, between October 2000 &

       September 2001. I Initially worked for ICL, then Fujitsu.



   2. The Support Desk was split into various Squads of around 10 to 14 individuals,

       working different shift patterns and I represented Squad A. Each squad

       functioned in the same way providing support to Postmasters.



   3. Prior to starting the role we received a few days' training. We got to look at the

       equipment and did some dummy transactions, before being given a booklet,

       similar to that given to the Postmasters. It was a basic how-to guide of

       transactions with screenshots of each stage of a transaction. This could be

       selling stamps, international money transfers, to balancing end of each week.

                                       Page 1 of 3
                                                                                   WITNO6660100
                                                                                WITN06660100




4. I wanted the Inquiry to know behind the scenes of supporting Horizon's

   systems and our daily experience. The support staff faced the initial challenge

   of basic training that was insufficient to fully support Postmasters and the full

   array of tasks that Horizon was setup for. As soon as the support desk opened,

   it was inundated with calls. It was soon apparent that many postmasters lacked

   the training needed to use the systems, some had never even used a PC.



5. The issues I wanted to raise were that many of my support colleagues who

   before provided Tech Support to IT savvy clients were now supporting quite

   the opposite people. Some Postmasters had never even owned a PC. They

   were now being asked to perform their entire day-to-day role through the

   EPOS terminals. For some, this was just too difficult, and we literally would

   have to describe the icons on the screen, as they would not know terms like

   "reboot" or "mouse". This in turn this caused many of the support colleagues to

   grow resentful of the role. They felt the prestige of supporting EPOS products

   and dealing with more complex IT related issues had gone. They were now

   supporting non-technical individuals, some were old and some were minorities

   with limited language skills, and this resentment grew over months.



6. The floor was quite a toxic place, and this manifested itself with colleagues

   openly mocking the role and complaining to management that the role was not
         E

   what they were initially hired for. Many were desperate to leave and as soon as

   an option came to support another client, many jumped at the chance. Many of

   these colleagues were frustrated supporting these Postmasters, the toughest

   day was on Wednesday when it came to reconcile the weeks accounts.
                                    Page 2 of 3
                                                                                     WITN06660100
                                                                                WITNO6660100




      Postmasters right from week one would be upset, crying frustrated as they

      struggled to reach equilibrium on the transactions. The floor on these days was

      most toxic with vocal characters in Squad A, unchallenged by managers who

      looked away as all Asians were called Patels, regardless of surname. Shouts

      across the floor could be heard, saying "I have another Patel scamming again".

      They mistrusted every Asian Postmaster. They mocked Scottish and Welsh

      Postmasters and pretended they could not understand them. They created a

      picture of Postmasters that suggested they were incompetent or fraudsters.


   7. As for their reconciling issues, when we could not help them with their

      accounts this would mean we spent a few hours on the phone going through

      each transaction and trying to figure out where the financial discrepancy was.

      We would eventually give up, and we were advised to write off the loss as a

      "discrepancy". This was a word you could hear from every agent's calls.

       Postmasters would really worry about these discrepancies, and some would

      say they are putting in their own money every week to avoid them. The long-

      term impact of these discrepancies was not really a thought for any agent. I

      can't honestly say if any of the advice given to the Postmasters was incorrect,

      as we all had headsets on during our working day and the calls were

       relentless. I can only say what was said of the calls, which was mainly mocking

       insulting about the role and the Postmasters.


Statement of Truth
I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed:   ' GRO
          ._._._._._._._._._..._._..._._._._._._._.l

Dated: 13/01/2023

                                                       Page 3 of 3
