WITNO7480100
WITNO7480100

Witness Name: Amanda Booth
Statement No.: WITNO7480100
Dated: 4th February 2023

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST STATEMENT OF AMANDA BOOTH

|, Amanda Booth, will say as follows...

INTRODUCTION

1. lama former employee of Post Office Limited and held the position of Capacity
Planning and Efficiency Manager.

2. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the
‘Inquiry’) with the matters set out in Rule 9 Request dated 3 January 2023 (the

‘Request’)

Page 1 of 3
WITNO7480100
WITNO7480100

BACKGROUND

3. | worked for Post Office Counters up to approximately May 2006 however, from
August 2005, | was on maternity leave. My role was Capacity Planning and
Efficiency Manager however | cannot remember when | commenced this role.

4. As far as | can remember | only received a basic overview of the Horizon system
with all other staff members (approx. 2/3 hours training in total). | am unable to
remember how, where or when this overview was given.

5. My role as Capacity Planning & Efficiency Manager was to ensure that there
were sufficient staff to deal with telephone enquiries based on previous call
volumes received at the NBSC Helpline. | was not (in my role) involved with
subpostmasters requests for support in relation to Horizon. | monitored staff
availability to man the telephones. As it is over 18 years since | carried out the
role of Capacity Planning & Efficiency Manager, | cannot remember my day to
day job description other than to ensure sufficient staff were available to handle
calls (including managing annual leave, sick leave, break entitlements for
NBSC Helpline staff). As far as | can remember my Line Manager was Jill
Camplejohn, now Kennedy, who was the NBSC Helpline Manager.

6. | was not responsible for any NBSC Helpline staff. The call handlers worked as
teams with each team having their own Team Leader who worked directly to
the NBSC Helpline Manager.

7. lam not aware of any specific requests for support or events that | consider to
be important to the Inquiry's terms of reference.

8. My role did not deal with calls and/or their resolution. | did not have any

resources to assist in resolving calls for support as my role did not require this.

Page 2 of 3
WITNO7480100
WITNO7480100

9. | monitored staff availability to man the telephones as my role required. | am
not aware of any attitude (positive or negative) of members of the NBSC to
subpostmasters as my role did not involve me working with the NBSC Helpline
call handlers.

10.As far as | remember, | attended a few NBSC/HSH Review Forums. | cannot
remember the purpose or frequency of these meetings or any discussions or
changes made as a result of the forum. My role within these forums was a
listening role and as far as | remember, my only contribution was to confirm the
anticipated call volumes, in order for me to ensure there were sufficient call
handlers at the NBSC Helpline.

11.As my role did not involve dealing with calls, | am unable to provide a view as
to whether adequate support was given to subpostmasters.

12.My role did not involve working with the Horizon System and therefore | was
unaware of any bugs, errors or defects with the system.

13.1 am not aware of any further information | can provide to the chair in relation to

the Horizon IT Project.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:

Dated:__4'" February 2023,

Page 3 of 3
WITNO7480100
WITNO7480100
