                                                                                         WI TNO8530100
                                                                                        WITNO8530100




                                                 Witness Name: CATHERINE OGLESBY

                                                           Statement No: WITNO8530100

                                                                       Dated: 4 June 2023




                         POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




             FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF CATHERINE OGLESBY




I, Catherine Oglesby will say as follows:

      1.      I am providing this statement following a request for information pursuant

       to Rule 9 of the Inquiry Rules 2006, regarding matters falling within Phase 4 of

       the Inquiry: action taken by Post Office Ltd against Subpostmasters, dated 18

      April 2023. The request contained 64 questions which I have addressed below.



      2.      I would like to flag that the questions are mainly centred around the case

       of Lee Castleton, the events of which happened over 20 years ago. Due to the

       passage of time, I have found it difficult at times to recall precise details.

      However, this statement is made to the best of my recollection and where I

       cannot remember something or have had to rely on a document provided, I

      have made this clear.




                                        Page 1 of 40
                                                                                        WITNO8530100
                                                                                       WITNO8530100




     3.      At the outset, I would like to offer my sympathy to all subpostmasters

     who were affected by Horizon related issues and in particular, to Lee

     Castleton. When the decision was made to terminate Mr Castleton's contract,

     this was based on an understanding that the Horizon system was working as

     it should. I would like to express my sincere sympathy in how this affected

     both Mr Castleton and his family and would like to express my support for the

     Horizon Inquiry and to offer my full co-operation to Sir Wyn Williams.




Background

     4.      I have been asked to set out a summary of my professional

     background. I started my career in the Post Office in February 1982, at the

     age of 16, working on the Selby Post Office Counter in North Yorkshire. I

     worked in this role for 5 years until 1987 when I gained a promotion to Selby

     Branch Manager. I was then promoted in 1991 to Branch Manager of the main

     Post Office in York. I also did a small secondment during this time to manage

     the Post Office in Hull, as Branch Manager. In September 1992 I took

     maternity leave for my first child and returned to work in April 1993. I then took

     maternity leave for my second child in October 1994 until April 1995. Both

     times I returned to the same role.



     5.      In July 1996 I went on maternity leave for my third child, returning to

     work in January 1997. I recall that I moved roles when I returned to work but I

     cannot recall whether my role was called Retail Network Manager' or Area

     Manager'. However, both of these roles are similar, with slightly different

     names. I continued in this role until there was a general reorganisation within

                                     Page 2 of 40
                                                                                  WITNO8530100
                                                                              WITNO8530100




the Post Office in approximately 2005 at which point I was promoted to Area

Manager for the Directly Managed Branches from Selby to Sunderland. I

continued in this role until approximately 2010 and during this period, I did a

secondment to the 'Service and Efficiency Team' for about 8 months. In

approximately 2010, I gained a promotion to Regional Performance Manager,

running a team of Area Managers and customer service colleagues promoting

financial services in the Directly Managed Branches East England, Northern

Ireland and Yorkshire.



6.      In approximately 2013, when the financial services were scaled down, I

became Regional Manager for the East Midlands Team. I then left the

business in 2015 and took time out until February 2016 when I started

working part-time at First Direct and Barlby and Osgodby Town Council. I

stopped working for First Direct in October 2017 but I still work around 9 hours

per week for Osgodby Town Council. In November 2017 I re-joined the Post

Office, working as an Area Manager for East and part of North Yorkshire. I am

still in this role today.



7.      The Inquiry have asked specifically about my time as a Retail Line

Manager at the Post Office. To confirm, I have had several Retail Line

Manager roles with the titles of the role changing from 'Retail Line Manager' to

'Retail Network Manager' to 'Area Sales Manager' to 'Area Manager'. As

detailed above, the dates of these roles were 1997 — 2005 in the Postmaster

Network, 2005-2010 in the Directly Managed Network and 2017 — present

day in the Postmaster Network.


                               Page 3 of 40
                                                                                    WITNO8530100
                                                                                 WITNO8530100




8.       All of these roles have been similar, and involved the following:



      a. to support a network of Postmasters and Strategic partner branches to

         grow their business by coaching and supporting the Postmaster and

         their staff on appropriate conversations with customers;

      b. to build product knowledge and confidence on products to enable an

         opportunity to be spotted and a conversation to take place;

      c. to ensure all point of sale and literature is up to date and matches the

         current campaigns;

      d. to discuss the whole business including the retail sales, displays and

         layout of the shop;

      e. to enable a Postmaster to maximise their business potential;

      f. to ensure that the Postmaster and staff are following the correct

         security procedures and maintaining the Branch standards;

      g. recruitment of new Postmasters, suspensions and termination of

         contracts.



9.       I would like to flag to the Inquiry that I understand that 'g' - suspensions

and terminations are now no long part of this role, but the responsibility of the

Contracts Team. However, it was within my role in 2003.



10.      I would also like to flag that a Retail Line Manager (and all of its various

titles) did not have the responsibility to physically check the cash and stock of

a Branch or to try and find a loss or a gain if the Postmaster had not balanced


                                  Page 4 of 40
                                                                                       WITNO8530100
                                                                                      WITNO8530100




       their stock. The roles were to support the Postmaster and to signpost them to

       the correct place to get support if needed, for example: Horizon Helpline,

       Business Support Centre, Giro Bank, Savings Bank and the Cash Centre.

Early involvement in relation to Marine Drive Post Office

Initial contact with Mr Castleton

       11.    The Inquiry have provided me with the following documents:

       P0L00069622, POL00083604 and POL00107117. I can confirm that I have

       reviewed these documents.

       12.    The Inquiry have asked me about my involvement with the Marine

       Drive Post Office ("Marine Drive") prior to Mr Castleton being appointed as its

       Subpostmaster (SPM). Marine Drive was a Branch in my area when I was

       Retail Line Manager for Hull and East Yorkshire and part of North Yorkshire.

       Prior to Mr Castleton taking over the Branch in July 2003, I would visit the

       previous Postmaster, whose name I cannot remember, and discuss the areas

       listed in 8(a) — (g) above. The branch was one of about 85 branches that I

       looked after and I cannot recall that there were any problems with it.



       13.    The Inquiry have asked me to describe the circumstances in which I

       first had contact with Mr Castleton. Although I cannot remember the date, I

       would have first met Mr Castleton at his Post Office interview for Marine Drive.

       Based on the information provided to me by the Inquiry, I note that he took

       over the branch in July of 2003. His interview would have been in

       approximately April 2003, 3 months prior to taking over the branch. Once Mr

       Castleton had taken over the branch, I would have visited him at least once


                                      Page5of40
                                                                                 WITNO8530100
                                                                             WITNO8530100




every other month to see how he was getting on, although I do not have my

diaries going back to this year to check the exact dates.



14.    The Inquiry have provided me with document LCAS0000699 "Marine

Drive Post Office Summary of Events". This gives a summary of the events at

Marine Drive Post Office when Mr Castleton was its SPM. I can confirm that I

wrote this document to capture a timeline of events and to keep a record of

what support had been given to try to find out why the branch was having

losses. If I was dealing with a situation which was complicated, I would often

make notes so that I could remember information if needed. As the situation

at Marine Drive was becoming so complicated, I took it upon myself to write

this narrative so that I would have a contemporaneous note to refer to. I was

not asked by anyone else to write it.



15.    I have been asked to explain when Mr Castleton first reported a

shortfall at Marine Drive and the discussion that I had about it. I have

refreshed my memory from reading document LCAS0000699 and understand

that Mr Castleton contacted me between Christmas and New Year 2003 to

report a loss of £1,100.00. We discussed where that loss might be from. The

most common errors for losses were due to Giro bank or National Savings,

which are banking errors, for example a withdrawal entered as a deposit. I

therefore asked Mr Castleton to contact both Giro Bank and National Savings

to see if there were any outstanding errors. Another common error was for

cheques to be entered as cash, which would cause a loss. I did not think that




                                Page 6of40
                                                                                WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITNO8530100




this loss was unusual as it was common for branches to have a loss of this

amount due to an error.



16.    When there was a loss, it was for the SPM to make that loss good. If

the SPM could not make the loss good than the usual procedure would be to

refer them to the Support Centre to obtain a hardship form. They could then

make an application to pay off the loss in smaller amounts on a monthly basis

and deductions would be made from their remuneration.



17.    1 therefore followed this procedure and asked Mr Castleton to make

good the loss_ I did not ask him to do anything that I would not have asked

another SPM to do. As the loss was over £1,000 I would have checked with

him that he was able to pay it and have discussed options for repayments if

he said that he could not.



18.    When Mr Castleton confirmed that he was able to make the loss good,

I did not make any further enquiries. We assumed that in a few months' time

he would get an error notice and get the amount back as was usual in this

kind of situation. It was common for SPMs to do their balance, make a loss

good and then the money would appear later on when the error was

discovered. I can see from my notes that I asked Mr Castleton to contact Giro

bank and National savings as these would be the most obvious places that a

loss could be that had left the Branch. If the loss was an error in counting

cash or stock, then he would find that himself the following week when he

balanced again.


                               Page 7 of 40
                                                                                    WITNO8530100
                                                                                WITNO8530100




19.    1 have been asked to describe my visit to Marine Drive on 16 January

2004 and any enquiries that I made about the shortfall. I cannot recall the visit

and therefore this is taken from my summary document (LCAS0000699).

From reading my notes this looks like one of my routine visits and I have

written that nothing had come to light regarding the loss, so I am presuming

that I discussed the loss of £1,100 with Mr Castleton_ Giro bank errors usually

took about 8 weeks to be returned at that point, so there was still a possibility

that the loss was a Giro bank error. 1 have noted that the three balances that

Mr Castleton had done between the initial loss of £1,100 and my visit of 16

January 2004 were all fine. As my visit was only 3 weeks after the initial loss,

there was still plenty of time for it to come to light and therefore, I would not

have made any other enquiries.



20     The Inquiry have asked me about what enquiries or investigations I

was involved with to determine the cause(s) of the shortfalls that Mr Castleton

reported between January 2004 and March 2004. I cannot recall this and

therefore this is all taken from my summary document (LCAS0000699). I

understand from reading my notes that the losses totalled £25,758.75 in

March 2004.



21.    From reading my notes 1 can see that I asked Mr Castleton to repeat

the calls to Giro bank and National savings to see if any documentation that

had left the branch was incorrect and to see if any error notices were pending.

I asked him to complete a snapshot each evening to check the cash and to


                                Page 8 of 40
                                                                                WITN08530100
                                                                              WITN08530100




ensure that the branch was balancing. By doing this, he would be able to see

daily if the balancing was short or over. I also asked about how the cash was

being kept secure and if he thought any of the staff may have taken the

money. This is never something that a SPM likes to think about but

unfortunately it does happen and I have known occasions when staff

members have taken or borrowed money. I also suggested individual till

balancing which would put tighter controls in place and narrow down to a

person where the losses were happening. I offered to help Mr Castleton set

this up but as far as I recall, he did not action any of these suggestions.



22.    In addition, I contacted the investigations team and, from reading my

note, I can see that I spoke to Paul Whitaker. I explained to Paul what had

happened over the last few weeks and asked for his advice. I was informed

that, as Mr Castleton had kept me informed of the losses, the investigations

team would not get involved. I would also have discussed the losses with my

line manager at the time, David Mellows-Facer, but I do not recall the

conversation after such a long time. I also completed an audit request to

assist Mr Castleton in finding the losses and to verify the cash and stock on

hand at the branch.



23.    Many of these actions were above and beyond my role but because of

my previous experience within the Post Office, I was familiar with how to

check cash and stock and where to look if you had a loss and I was trying to

use this experience to help Mr Castleton as much as possible. A lot of other

Retail Line Managers would not have had the same background and


                                Page 9 of 40
                                                                                WITN08530100
                                                                               WITN08530100




experience as me and therefore would not have known to take these actions.

The usual role of a Retail Line Manager when a SPM reported a loss was

limited to telling the SPM to ring the business support centre for advice.



24.    1 have been asked to consider the following documents:

P011-00069272, P0L00071243, LCAS0000710 and P0L00082391_025. I can

confirm that I have reviewed these documents.



25.    1 have been asked to describe my understanding of the frequency of Mr

Castleton's contact with the Horizon System Helpline ("HSH"), the National

Business Support Centre ("NBSC") and others in Post Office Ltd about the

issues he was experiencing. I can see from these documents that Mr

Castleton was having frequent calls to the NBSC, Horizon helpline and other

departments, seeking help and support to find the losses. The documents

also show that I was having contact with Chesterfield (the transaction

processing centre for the Post Office) and indirectly with Fujitsu, who were

saying that there was not a problem with the Horizon software or hardware.

My involvement was limited to signposting Mr Castleton to the most

appropriate people who I thought would be able to support him and to pass on

any information that I had received.



26.    The Inquiry have asked me whether 1 considered the issues that Mr

Castleton was reporting to be unusual and what I thought the cause might be.

I cannot remember my exact thoughts at the time, but this number of losses

and the amounts of money was unusual. It was normal for most branches to


                               Page 10 of 40
                                                                                  WITNO8530100
                                                                              WITNO8530100




have small losses and gains each week and to even have a large loss or gain

from time to time when an error had occurred. These would usually show up

with a corresponding error notice several weeks later. Some errors, for

example where a staff member had given an incorrect amount of money to a

customer or miss-counted a deposit, may never come to light. These losses

are the responsibility of the SPM to make good. However, there were no other

offices that I dealt with which were experiencing this level of loss. Therefore

although the first loss did not seem unusual, it was completely unusual for Mr

Castleton to be experiencing such high losses week after week.



27.    I did not know what the cause of the losses were and when I was trying

to assist Mr Castleton in finding the losses, I was just going on my experience

of what had happened in other branches over the years. There are a lot of

ways that a branch can make an error which would cause a loss or a gain and

it could have been caused by any number of different mistakes. I did not think

that the Horizon system could have been the cause of the issues and I had

never heard of this happening.



28.    The Inquiry have asked me to explain my understanding of Mr

Castleton's personal financial situation at the time and who was responsible

for considering any hardship form that he submitted. I cannot recall having a

conversation with Mr Castleton about his financial situation, although this

does not mean that I did not have one. I did ask if he was able to make the

losses good as was the procedure. When he said that he could not make the

losses good, we may have discussed his financial situation, but I cannot recall


                               Page 11 of 40
                                                                                       WITNO8530100
                                                                                    WITN08530100




      doing so. If a SPM said that they were unable to make the loss good, I would

      signpost them to get a hardship form and make an application to pay the loss

      in instalments. This was the usual process with any SPM who experienced a

      loss.

Audit of 23 March 2003

      29.     I have been asked to consider the report of the audit of Marine Drive on

      23 March 2023 at POL00082391 004. I can confirm that I have reviewed this

      document. I can recall the day of the audit and being in Hull at another

      branch, waiting for the call from the auditors at Marine Drive so that I would

      know the outcome of their audit. I remember being contacted by the auditors, I

      think in the afternoon, and making my way to Marine Drive to discuss their

      findings. I cannot remember exactly what was said by them but we would

      have discussed the findings of the audit. From reviewing the document, it

      does not confirm the reason for the losses but finds that two of the losses

      were put into the Suspense Account without authorisation.



      30.     In terms of what other enquiries were made to determine the cause of

      the shortfalls, before the audit was undertaken, the Horizon helpdesk had

      been contacted and asked for a system check and they had confirmed that

      everything was fine. Giro bank and savings bank had also been contacted

      and asked to check for errors and Chesterfield had been contacted and asked

      about any pending errors. I had also contacted the investigation team, who

      did not want to take on the case because there was no element of dishonesty

      as Mr Castleton had openly declared the losses. I also understand that Mr



                                     Page 12 of 40
                                                                                   WITNO8530100
                                                                                  WITN08530100




Castleton had contacted the NBSC and sent off some of his cash accounts to

be looked at to see if they could spot any errors.



31.    I was unable to contact Fujitsu directly myself but I asked for it to be

raised with them whether there were any issues with Horizon and the

message was passed back to me that nothing was wrong. I cannot recall who

it was that I raised it with or who passed back to me the message that nothing

was wrong. I can recall discussing the losses with my line manager, David

Mellows-Facer and felt that between us, we had exhausted all avenues of

where a usual loss or gain might occur and that no further enquiries were

necessary_



32.    After the audit I visited Marine Drive and although I do not recall the

exact conversation, from reading my notes I can see that I spoke to Mr

Castleton and, as a precautionary measure, I suspended him. As Mr

Castleton had continually blamed the Horizon system for the losses, I asked

for his permission to put a temporary Postmaster in the branch to see how the

branch would balance. I wanted to make sure that the Horizon equipment was

kept exactly the same and only the people were replaced so that I could

check whether it was the Horizon equipment which was at fault. Therefore, Mr

Castleton and his staff were not allowed into the Post Office area during the

time the temporary SPMs were working there.



33.    Mr Castleton did not provide any information as to how the losses had

occurred, except to say that it was a computer problem. I had made enquiries


                               Page 13 of 40
                                                                                 WITNO8530100
                                                                                WITN08530100




indirectly with Fujitsu, as well as with the Horizon helpline and it had been

confirmed that there were no issues and from my experience, I had never

heard of a computer changing amounts_ All of the physical documentation

provided (for example, daily Giro bank deposits and withdrawals, pension

dockets and green giros) matched with the summaries produced to the weekly

balance and I could not see any evidence of a figure that had changed. Had

Mr Castleton shown me any evidence that a figure had changed from the daily

total to the weekly total, or that the summary of Giro bank work, Green Giros

or Pension Dockets was different on the balance compared to their individual

summaries, I would have taken this very seriously.



34.    I have been asked to consider document POL00082391 002. I can

confirm that I have reviewed this document. I have been asked to describe

any involvement that I had in the decision to suspend Mr Castleton and what

alternative options were considered. I cannot remember doing so, but I am

confident that I would have discussed Mr Castleton's suspension with the

Contracts Manager, Lesley Joyce and my Line Manager, David Mellows-

Facer. Following these discussions, I would have then sent the two letters

dated 23 March 2004 and 26 April 2004 (POL00082391_002).



35.    As the amount of losses were increasing on a weekly basis, I would

have wanted to reduce the risk to Post Office funds of any more losses

occurring. Mr Castleton was upset and angry and I wanted to help and

support him as well. No errors had come to light to explain the losses but as

Mr Castleton was adamant that the losses were not down to anyone in the


                               Page 14 of 40
                                                                                       WITNO8530100
                                                                                      WITN08530100




     branch but to the computers, I thought that suspending him and putting in a

     temporary SPM in the branch would provide a good opportunity to see how

     the branch balanced with the same equipment but different people.



     36.    The only alternative to a temporary SPM was to either close the branch

     or let Mr Castleton carry on. I did not want to close the branch and I did not

     want to risk the losses increasing by letting Mr Castleton carry on without us

     having found the source of the issue. My role was to reduce the risk to Post

     Office funds and I was getting worried that the losses were ongoing week

     after week and therefore I thought there was too much risk of losing even

     more funds by letting Mr Castleton carry on.



     37.    1 asked Mr Castleton for his permission to put a temporary Postmaster

     into the branch and let him know my reasons for doing so and he agreed.

     Reading my notes, this is when Mr Castleton said that he "couldn't wait" until

     the temporary Postmaster balanced thousands of pounds short. I therefore

     think that in the circumstances he was pleased that we were able to get in a

     temporary Postmaster to try and get to the root of the problem. Ultimately, the

     decision to suspend Mr Castleton was mine, in conjunction with the Contracts

     Manager and Line Manager. I would have discussed my proposal with my line

     manager before implementing it.


Appointment of Temaorary SPMs


     38.    1 have been asked to describe any involvement that I had in the

     appointment and management of temporary SPMs at Marine Drive following

     Mr Castleton's suspension. When a SPM is suspended, it isn't easy to find

                                    Page 15 of 40
                                                                                   WITNO8530100
                                                                                WITNO8530100




someone to run a branch at short notice. Due to the problems Mr Castleton

had been having, I wanted an experienced individual who had a proven track

record of running a branch efficiently and with a good balancing record. It is

not common to appoint temporary SPMs and sometimes the Contract

Manager will offer names but at the time, I was managing approximately 85

branches and so I had all of those SPMs in my area to consider.



39.    The first individual that I considered was a Postmaster in Bridlington

called David Earnshaw. However, he only had a small amount of staff and I

was also conscious that he was in the same town as Mr Castleton's branch

and therefore I did not think that it was appropriate for him to get involved. I

therefore asked Ruth Simpson, who was an experienced Postmaster at First

Lane in Hull and she agreed to step in with a part-time member of staff to

support her. I would have discussed this appointment with the Contracts

Manager as well, as they would have to arrange remuneration payments to

her.



40.    My recollection and understanding is I told Ms Simpson that she was

stepping in because Mr Castleton was experiencing unexplained losses. I

told her that that Mr Castleton thought that the Horizon system was to blame

for these losses. I therefore ensured that all of the same Horizon equipment

was used by Ms Simpson and no changes were made to it so that we could

have an accurate picture of how the branch balanced with a new SPM.




                                Page 16 of 40
                                                                                 WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITNO8530100




41.    1 asked Ms Simpson to operate the Horizon system at Marine Drive in

the same way as she operated it at her own branch. She was responsible for

her own losses and gains while in the post_ No independent analysis was

made of her accounting but an audit was conducted by Helen Rose before the

changeover from Mr Castleton to Ms Simpson to verify the cash and stock on

hand and to ensure that the cash and stock figures were accurate on the

transfer to the subsequent temps.



42.    1 cannot recall whether it was via a text message or phone call but I

remember asking Ms Simpson how her first day had gone and she let me

know that she was £2.14 short. I think that I was relieved that there had not

been a large loss



43.   Ms Simpson then reported a loss of £100 the following Monday.

However, she put this down to a part time member of staff who she had

brought with her making a common mistake which had also been made at Ms

Simpson's branch at First Lane. I believe that the member of staff had left an

amount in the "stack" and paid this amount out again to the next customer.

From my notes (LCAS0000699), I can see that Ms Simpson was £19.38 over

and £10.76 short on the next two balances.



44.   There isn't a date for the call, but my notes tell me that I telephoned Mr

Castleton and from reading the notes, it looks like it was after Ms Simpson's

first week, when she would have been £100 short, due to the staff error. Mr

Castleton had a few concerns, including queues out of the door and unhappy


                              Page 17 of 40
                                                                                  WITNO8530100
                                                                                WITN08530100




customers, as well as the £100 misbalance. He was also concerned that Ms

Simpson was not using both of the Horizon computers.



45.    I spoke with Ms Simpson to address Mr Castleton's concerns. She

confirmed that she was serving with two staff on Monday and therefore both

of the computers were being used. On the days when she was serving by

herself, she confirmed that she would log onto both computers with different

log-in details and perform different tasks on each. This was common and at

the time, individuals would often have two user IDs so that they could use

both computers at the same time according to service needs. I remember

stressing that the equipment and kit should not be changed at all. The only

difference was that Ms Simpson had a limited number of staff to run both her

own branch and Marine Driver and so unfortunately the staffing levels were

not as high as when Mr Castleton was running the branch. However, I

considered that it was better to have low staffing levels than to have to close

the branch.



46.    Ms Simpson was only able to step in for a few weeks due to her own

commitments and therefore finished on 21 April. I told Mr Castleton that I

wanted more time and more balance results and with his agreement, Greg

Booth stepped in as the second temporary SPM from 21 April to takeover. Mr

Booth was the SPM at a small branch just outside of Scarborough. I cannot

recall the precise details but I think that his branch had closed, making him

available to step in as a temp. On Mr Booth's first week, he reported a gain of

£14. I cannot recall the other amounts but I recall and also understand from


                               Page 18 of 40
                                                                              WITNO8530100
                                                                             WITN08530100




my notes neither Ruth Simpson nor Greg Booth experienced any significant

gains or losses. The losses that were found were so small that they would not

have triggered an investigation and were within what a branch would normally

balance.



47.    The Inquiry have also asked me about temporary SPM, Dorothy Day. I

cannot recall anything about her beyond recognising her name_ I assume that

she was a temporary SMP at Marine Drive after Mr Booth but I am unable to

confirm. However, I can recall that no temporary SPMs experienced any

significant gains or losses.



48.    The Inquiry have asked me about what investigations took place in

relation to the Suspense Account at Marine Drive Post Office. I have

refreshed my memory using my notes (LCAS0000699) which confirm that Mr

Castleton contacted me on 4 May 2004 to say that he had found £15,000 of

losses and that it was the suspense account that was doubling the figures. He

therefore asked for the Suspense Account software to be checked and so I

phoned the NBSC and requested that this was done. The request was

forwarded to Richard Benton in the Problem Management Department and he

sent the request on to Fujitsu.



49.    Whilst we were waiting to hear back from Fujitsu, I thought that I would

ask the temporary SPM at the time, Mr Booth, to put a fictitious amount of

£100 into the Suspense Account to see how it affected the cash figure, and

then to balance. Once he had completed the balance, I asked him to remove


                                  Page 19 of 40
                                                                                      WITNO8530100
                                                                                 WITNO8530100




    the suspense account figure to see if it worked in the opposite way. The

    notes I made at the time show that the Suspense Account worked in a way

    that it should and was not doubling figures.



    50.      The Inquiry have asked whether the experience of the temporary SPMs

    to Marine Drive influenced the Post Office's approach to action taken in

    relation to Mr Castleton_ I would say that it did because they did not have any

    unexplained losses during their time at the Branch and this would have been

    taken into consideration when the decision was made to terminate Mr

    Castleton's contract.

n     I




    51.      I have been asked to consider documents POL00082263 at pp.7-9 and

    POL00082391 006. I can confirm that I have read both of these. The first

    document (POL00082263), is a letter written from Mr Castleton to Mrs Joyce

    and myself dated 28 April 2004 which requests 10 pieces of information. I

    cannot recall what I sent Mr Castleton but based on the documents contained

    in POL00082263, I sent all him all of the information that I was able to obtain

    as follows:



          a. Copy of — Suspension letter — dated 23.03.04

          b. Copy of — Reasons to urge letter — dated 26.04.04

          c. Copy of e-mail from Fujitsu and logs of calls to Network Business

             Support Centre and HSH

          d. Copy of e-mail from Andrew Price



                                    Page 20 of 40
                                                                                   WITNO8530100
                                                                                  WITN08530100




      e. Copy of Horizon System User Guide, Office Administration, System

         failure Subsections 12 and 13

      f. Copy of Audit report



52.      With the benefit of hindsight, unfortunately I do not think that the

information that I provided addressed all of Mr Castleton's concerns as his

primary concern was to obtain evidence that the Horizon system was causing

the losses which I was unable to give him. I tried to the best of my ability to

answer his questions and obtain the information that he asked for but I was

reliant on other people and could not physically get him all of the information

about Horizon.



53.      On reflection, I do not think that we addressed all of Mr Castleton's

concerns as we could not get hold of software checks and what updates had

been done to Horizon which he was asking for. This was not through want of

trying as I did ask for them but they were beyond my capacity to personally

obtain. I asked Richard Benton to ask Fujitsu to provide me with this

information and they just came back with a statement saying that everything

was okay and there were no problems which I passed on to Mr Castleton.



54.      I have been asked to consider documents POL00082391 007 and

POL00082391 003. I can confirm that I have reviewed both of these

documents. The first document (POL00082391_007) is a letter from me to Mr

Castleton dated 14 May 2004. At the interview on 10th May, Mr Castleton

asked me to explain the discrepancies shown at the top of the snapshots


                                 Page 21 of 40
                                                                                WITNO8530100
                                                                              WITN08530100




which we were discussing. I told Mr Castleton in the interview that I would

provide an explanation of these discrepancies and so I asked Liz Morgan and

Davlyn Cumberland for an explanation and the letter dated 14 May 2004 is

that explanation.



55.   The second document (POL00082391_003) is interview notes from the

interview with Mr Castleton on 10 May 2004. From this document, I can see

that Mr Castleton asked to see the cash accounts for weeks 1, 2, 3 and 4. I

can see that I provided these to him and also confirmed that he could have

copies. These would have been the cash accounts for while the temporary

SPMs were running the branch as, although the exact dates are not

mentioned, week 1 is the new financial year and so in late March or early April

which is when Ms Simpson started. Each cash account has the loss or gain

declared so Mr Castleton would have been able to see the discrepancies that

she and Mr Booth experienced. I can also recall that we discussed the losses

and gains that Ms Simpson and Mr Booth experienced at the time they were

running the branch.



56.   At the end of the interview on 10 May 2004 the note says that I told Mr

Castleton that I was still waiting on a response from Horizon regarding the

checks on the software and, as soon as they were available, I would let him

know the outcome. From what I recall and as far as I can make out from my

notes at the time, I am referring here to the Horizon system checks that

Richard Benton was requesting from Fujitsu.




                              Page 22 of 40
                                                                               WITNO8530100
                                                                            WITN08530100




57.    1 have been asked to consider POL00082391_002, POL00071234 and

POL00082391 009. I can confirm that I have reviewed these documents. I

have been asked to explain the decision-making process in relation to Mr

Castleton's dismissal and the sources of information I considered in making

that decision. The normal procedure for dismissal would be for myself, as

Retail Line Manager to discuss the dismissal with the Contract Manager,

including discussing what happened at the interview and consider the reasons

put forward by the SPM as to why their contract should not be terminated.

This would have involved discussing the reasons that Mr Castleton put

forward for the losses, which were that there was a computer problem, but

discussing that this was not substantiated by any evidence besides his word. I

would have then discussed this, along with any investigations that we had

made, with my line manager and we would have decided to terminate his

contract.



58.    The losses were very high by this point, over £25,000, and Mr

Castleton was unable to make them good or provide any explanation which

was supported by evidence as to why they were occurring. From what I recall,

this was my first termination of a contract for losses and so I would have taken

a lot of advice to make sure that 1 was doing everything correctly.



59.   At paragraph 45 of my witness statement (LCAS0000609) I state "Mr

Castleton did not provide any evidence of a computer problem" and that...

"there was an actual loss, rather than a computer problem." In terms of what


                               Page 23 of 40
                                                                                   WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITN08530100




evidence he could have provided, Mr Castleton was adamant that the

computer was changing his figures and therefore I wanted to see any

evidence that could prove this. For example, if he could show that his daily

Giro bank summaries did not reconcile with the weekly total, which would

have shown that the figure had been changed. Another example would be to

show where an item, such as a pension figure, had been entered into the

transaction logs which then didn't follow through to the daily or weekly

accounting.



60.    Mr Castleton was saying that the figures changed when he remmed in

stock. I therefore asked him to wait until the end of the day, declare the cash,

produce a snapshot and then rem in the stock and re-declare the snapshot.

By doing this, we would be able to see if the figures were correct or if they had

been changed. However, Mr Castleton said that he did not have the time to do

this. I was getting anxious as he said that he was looking through the

balances all night but he was not actioning any of my suggestions or providing

any evidence that he had attempted to do them. These were all normal things

that I asked other people to do and the fact that he was not doing them put

doubt in my mind as to whether we would find a reason for the losses.



61.    1 have been asked to consider POL00069523 and POL00071200. I can

confirm that 1 have reviewed these documents. I have been asked to describe

any involved I had in Mr Castleton's appeal against his dismissal. From

reading these documents I can see that I was asked a number of questions by

John Jones who was to hear Mr Castleton's appeal. Document POL00071200


                               Page 24 of 40
                                                                                    WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITN08530100




shows Mr Jones asking me three questions to which I responded but I cannot

recall anything beyond what is provided in these documents. I can recall that I

spoke to John on the phone about Mr Castleton's appeal but I cannot

remember precisely what we spoke about.



62.    The Inquiry have flagged page 6 of document POL00070516 where Mr

Castleton says that he received no support from me from the start of his

issues. I am really sorry that he feels this way as I tried my best to support Mr

Castleton both personally and through signposting him to be able to get the

help that he needed. It was not part of the role of Retail Line Manager to

check cash or stock or even get involved with misbalances, their role is limited

to supporting the SPM by directing them to the NBSC for help and assistance.

However, as I did have knowledge of running Directly Managed Branches and

balancing stock units, I was able to offer more practical help, such as give

suggestions to Mr Castleton as to ways he in which he could narrow down

who was making the losses, through individual balancing and daily snapshots.

As he did not implement anything I suggested it was a really difficult situation

and it was quite unnerving for me to have so many losses in a branch I was

responsible for with no explanation.



63.    I wasn't able to investigate the Hardware or Software myself so I

contacted all the available help that I could get to gain the information that Mr

Castleton was requesting. This included asking Richard Benton, Paul

Whitaker, Lesley Joyce, the audit team, my line manager David Mellows-




                               Page 25 of 40
                                                                                   WITNO8530100
                                                                                  WITN08530100




Facer, Davlyn Cumberland, Liz Morgan and the Chesterfield error notice

department



64.    I also brought in temporary SPMs to see if they could find the source of

the problem and whether the losses continued or stopped when new people

were brought in using the same equipment. When Mr Castleton said that it

was the suspense account which was changing the figures, I asked Mr Booth

to run checks so that I could verify whether this was correct. I thought that I

had exhausted all avenues to help Mr Castleton and I tried to work with him

and offer advice. I feel really sorry that he did not feel like I supported him as I

felt like I was doing as much as I could.



65.    1 was asking and being reassured that there was nothing wrong with

Horizon and so I was coming from that standpoint, whereas he was saying

that there was something wrong with the computer but providing me with no

evidence to support that statement or actioning any of my suggestions with

how he could go about providing evidence.



66.    I can't recall what involvement I had with Mr Castleton's case after he

was dismissed but before proceedings were commenced against him by the

Post Office. I also think that at that point, I had moved roles and therefore

would not have had any involvement.



67.    Throughout the situation I was concerned about the wellbeing of Mr

Castleton and Chrissie as I could see how angry and upset they both were


                                Page 26 of 40
                                                                                      WITNO8530100
                                                                                   WITN08530100




      which is why I tried to do everything I could. I know that now there is a

      process where an individual is concerned about the wellbeing of a SPM, for

      example being able to direct them to counselling services, but I do not think

      that this was available at the time.


Post Office Ltd v Lee Castleton


      68.    Besides this case, I have not been involved in any proceedings against

      SPMs involving the Horizon IT system.



      69.    I provided a witness statement for this case (POL00070760) but I

      cannot recall who asked me to provide it.



      70.    At the time, my understanding of the case against Mr Castleton was

      that the Post Office were trying to get the unexplained losses recovered from

      him.



      71.    The Inquiry have asked me about document LCAS0000699. I have

      explained this document at paragraph 14 above. I can confirm that I wrote the

      document to capture the timeline of events and to keep a record of the losses

      at the branch and what support had been given.



      72.    I have been asked to consider documents P0L00069524,

      POL00070727 and POL00071011. I can confirm that I have reviewed these

      documents. I have been asked to set out the individuals that I had contact

      with during the drafting of my witness statement and the nature of any

      discussions I had with them. Looking at these documents, I dealt with

                                     Page 27 of 40
                                                                                 WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITN08530100




Stephen Dilley (Solicitor at Bond Pearce LLP) who supported me in the

drafting of my witness statement. I could not recall him before this document

prompted me but I recall going down to London and discussing the case with

him and Counsel.



73.     1 have been asked to consider POL00069608. I can see from this

email that I had a meeting with Counsel to discuss my witness statement. This

was the trip to London referred to at paragraph 72 above. I can remember

going through questions but I cannot recall whether this was before or after I

signed by witness statement. My understanding of my role was that I was a

witness in the case that the Post Office was bringing against Mr Castleton and

therefore I needed to provide facts and explain from my point of view what

had happened.



74.    I have been asked to consider POL00070841 and P0L00070477. I

cannot recall if I was made aware of Mr Castleton's defence and counterclaim

at the time and cannot remember any discussions about it. My role was

limited to being a witness and therefore I cannot recall what my view of it was.



75.    I have been asked to consider document LCAS0000945. This contains

correspondence between Mr Castleton's and The Post Office's solicitors,

enclosing the expert opinion of Mr Hine of Bentley Jennison as to whether the

alleged shortfalls were, at least in part, attributable to problems with the

Horizon system. I may or may not have seen this before but I cannot recall

having done so. I have been asked for my opinion of the views expressed in


                                Page 28 of 40
                                                                                WITNO8530100
                                                                             WITN08530100




the report and, although I am unable to comment on the technical aspects of

it, I understand that the report concluded that Mr Castleton would benefit from

receiving daily balance snapshots which were not yet disclosed_ I do not know

what these snapshots are that he is referring to. As far as I recall, all

snapshots taken were discussed with Mr Castleton at the meeting on 10 May

2004 and he received copies of them. It should be noted that snapshots may

not be available for every day unless they are taken at that time. You cannot

take a snapshot of a day or time retrospectively and so there may be gaps in

the snapshots. For example, there may be several for one day and none for

the next week. All of the snapshots which I held, I had given to the Post Office

for Mr Castleton's appeal against his dismissal.



76.    1 have been asked to consider document P0L00069955. The is a draft

report dated 29 November 2006, written by expert Geoffrey Porter of Stoy

Hayward LLP who I understand was instructed by the Post Office to

investigate Mr Castleton's losses. Again, I cannot recall whether or not I have

seen this document before.



77.    I have been asked for my opinion of the views expressed in the report.

I found it difficult to follow as I am not technically minded but from my

understanding, the report seems to conclude that there is no indication of

computer problems which would cause the large amounts of losses that Mr

Castleton experienced but that these were most likely caused by human error,

such as cash not being input correctly.




                                Page 29 of 40
                                                                                  WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITNO8530100




78.    1 have been asked to consider documents POL00071137 and

P0L00071145. I can confirm that I have reviewed these documents. I have

been asked to explain any involvement I had in the disclosure process during

the proceedings. I cannot recall specifically being involved in the disclosure

process but before the case went to Court, I handed all of the documents that

I held to John Jones at the Post Office who was reviewing Mr Castleton's

internal appeal against his termination.



79.    1 have been asked to consider documents P0L00070518,

LCAS0000441, P01-00070520, P01-00107420, P0L00070746 and

P0L00071158. I can confirm that I have reviewed these. I have been asked to

confirm what documents I removed from Marine Drive when Mr Castleton was

suspended.



80.    Document POL00070520 refers to a request for documents that were

removed from Marine Drive when I attended, after the audit. From reviewing

document POL00071158, I can see that I stated "all the cash accounts and

any snapshots that I removed from Marine Drive were kept together in the

folder that I believe you have, I did not make a list of the snapshots that / took,

so cannot say for sure which are there now, but / have not done anything else

with the documents. I have nothing more. " 1 removed them to ensure that they

were kept safe and not destroyed as some had handwritten notes on them by

either Mr Castleton or his staff. These notes were regarding the cash

declarations and looked to show that they were maybe not recording their

cash accurately. It looked as though the branch had a gain on one of the


                               Page 30 of 40
                                                                                 WITNO8530100
                                                                                WITNO8530100




weeks up until the balance day and then the gain disappeared and so I

wanted to preserve this and ask Mr Castleton about it at interview. I can see

from the interview notes of 10th May (POL00082391_003) that we discussed

balances, error notices, losses etc. with Mr Castleton and provided him with

snapshots and declared cash. I understand that the evidence provided

included the documents which I removed and I can see from the interview

notes that copies of these were given to Mr Castleton.



81.    All of the documents that were removed were kept safely in a file until

after Mr Castleton had had his contract for services terminated. When Mr

Castleton appealed against that decision, all of the documents were passed to

the appeal manager.



82.    1 have been asked to consider the transcript of my evidence given at

the trial in the Castleton case at page 39 of document POL00070183. I can

confirm that I have reviewed this document. In this transcript I make the

statement "I don't know the working of the Horizon system". I have re-read the

transcript and understand that I was referring to the balancing procedure and

sequence of events when balancing at a branch. I had not performed this

myself for several years at this point and so I was not familiar with the

systems. I was also not familiar with the figures at the top of the snapshots

and final balances, which is why I asked others to explain them before

providing an explanation to Mr Castleton (POL00082391_007).




                               Page 31 of 40
                                                                                       WITNO8530100
                                                                                      WITNO8530100




     83.    1 had never been to a court case before and so this was my first

     experience of being a witness. From my point of view, the Post Office were

     following their due process and wanted to recover their losses. My role was

     limited to that of a witness and as a witness, I was not able to watch most of

     the proceedings. Mr Castleton cross-examined me himself.



     84.    With hindsight, I still do not feel able to comment as to whether

     anything should have been done differently in relation to how the proceedings

     were conducted as this was the only time that I have ever been involved in a

     court case and I do not know how proceedings are meant to be conducted. I

     do, however, extend my deepest sympathies to all SPMs who were affected

     by Horizon. I had no idea at the time that there was anything wrong with it and

     was not aware that any other SPMs were having problems with balancing.


Subsequent Events


     85.    1 have been asked to consider POL00082391 051. I can confirm that I

     have reviewed this. I have been asked to describe my involvement in the

     advertisement for sale of Marine Drive Post Office. I was not involved in the

     actual advertisement, it would have just been my job to send out the chaser

     letter to the SPM to sell the business. This document is a templated letter and

     I cannot recall sending it. I would have just been following the process. If a

     SPM has had his contract terminated then there is only a limited amount of

     time that a temporary SPM can step in and so there is a need to sell it in a

     reasonable amount of time. I should note that the SPM does not have to sell

     his business, he can choose to sell the whole business or keep the retail



                                    Page 32 of 40
                                                                                       WITNO8530100
                                                                                      WITN08530100




      business and the Post Office will look for other premises and a different

      operator to run the Post Office.



      86.      Beyond this letter, I cannot recall any discussion with Mr Castleton

      about selling the Post Office or anything about the sale of the branch at all

      and so I do not feel that I am able to comment the circumstances around the

      sale of the branch or the property.



      87.      1 have been asked to consider document POL00069976 and asked

      about what my reaction was when I was informed of the outcome of the case.

      I have reviewed this document and do not think that it is relevant to the

      question. In terms of my reaction as to when I was informed of the outcome of

      the case, I think that I was probably pleased as I had spent over 3 hours

      giving evidence and I was relieved that the judge had found me a credible

      witness. I also found it reassuring as, at the time, it confirmed that my

      decisions were correct and I had not made a mistake and that the Court had

      come to the same conclusions as I did when presented with the same

      evidence.

Other civil and criminal cases

      88.      I have been asked about what (if any) recollections I have of the

      following criminal cases:



            a. Nichola Arch

            b. Susan Hazzleton

            c. Lisa Brennan

                                      Page 33 of 40
                                                                             WITNO8530100
                                                                           WITN08530100




      d. David Yates

      e. Carl Page

      f. David Blakey

      g. Tahir Mahmood

      h. Oyeteju Adedayo

      i. Hughie Thomas

      j. Suzanne Palmer

      k. Janet Skinner

      I. Jo Hamilton

      m. Pauline Stonehouse

      n. Susan Rudkin

      o. Julian Wilson

      p. Peter Holmes

      q. Seema Misra

      r. Allison Henderson

      s. Alison Hall

      t. Lynette Hutchings

      u. Grant Allen

      v. Khayyam Ishaq

      w. Angela Sefton and Ann Neild



89.      1 do not have any recollection of any of these cases although I

recognise the name K. Janet Skinner'. She was a lady who used to work in a

branch in Hull when I was Area Manager there but her case was not ongoing

when I was there and I had nothing to do with her criminal proceedings.


                                Page 34 of 40
                                                                                  WITNO8530100
                                                                                 WITN08530100




90.      I can confirm that I was not involved in any prosecutions / criminal

cases.



91.      I have been asked what (if any) recollections I have of the following

civil cases:



      a. Aslam Ramtoola

      b. Anonymity Order

      c. Kevin Palmer

      d. Rachel Williams

      e. Frank Holt

      f. Susan McKnight

      g. Tracey Etheridge

      h. Katherine Mc Alerny

      i. Keith Macaldowie

      j. Julie Wolstenhome



92.      I do not recognise any of these names and have no recollection of any

of the civil cases.



93.      I can confirm that I was not involved in any civil actions besides Mr

Castleton's case.




                                 Page 35 of 40
                                                                                                WITNO8530100
                                                                                              WITN08530100




Knowledge of bugs, errors and defects in the Horizon system

          94.    1 did not have, and was not aware of, any concerns regarding the

          robustness of the Horizon IT system during my time working for the Post

          Office. I was reassured that it was robust and properly working and the only

          individual I came across who suggested that it was not robust was Mr

          Castleton but he was unable to provide me with any evidence to substantiate

          this claim.




Other matters

          95.    There are no other matters that I wish to bring to the attention of the Chair of

          the Inquiry but I would like to reiterate my sympathies to Mr Castleton and his family.




Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.



Signed!         GRO
Dated




                                           Page 36 of 40
                                                                                     WITNO8530100
                                                                                    WITNO8530100




Index to First Witness Statement of Cath Oglesby


No         URN               Document Description                 Control Number

     1.    POL00069622       Stephen Dilley Personal              POL-0066185
                             attendance note re Lee Castleton
                             case, 11.09.06. Attending: Richard
                             Morgan and Tom Beezer re
                             meeting four key witnesses (Cath
                             Ogelsby, John Jones, Andrew
                             Wise and Mandy Talbot)
     2.    POLOO107117       Witness statement of Catherine
                             Oglesby re: Post Office Ltd v Lee    POL-0105425
                             Castleton signed 19.10.2006


     3.    POL00083604       Exhibits of witness statement of     POL-0080167
                             Catherine Oglesby in Office
                             Limited v Lee Castleton
     4.    LCAS0000699       Catherine Oglesby's Summary of       VIS00010939
                             events (01.01.2006)

     5.    POL00069272       LC Calls from 28/01/04 to            POL-0065835
                             26/04/04 (27.04.2004)

     6.    POL00071243       Email chain from Richard to Cath     POL-0067806
                             Oglesby re: Horizon system
                             (Marine Drive branch)
                             (31.10.2005)

     7.    LCAS0000710       Marine Drive branch - various        VIS00010950
                             records of Giro Deposits
                             withdrawals, miscellaneous
                             transaction and sales report
                             between 19/02/2004 - 25/02/2004
                             (25.04.2004)

     8.    POL00082391_025   Un-dated copy of email from          POL-0078954_193
                             Andrew Price to Cath Oglesby re
                             errors at Marine Drive
                             (01.04.2004)

     9.    POL00082391_004   Marine Drive - audit report          POL-0078954_172
                             (25.03.2004)

     10.   POL00082391_002   1. 23.03.04 Letter from Lesley       POL-0078954_170
                             Joyce to Lee Castleton -
                             suspension. 2. 26.04.04 Letter
                             from Cath Oglesby to Lee
                             Castleton - considering
                             termination (23.03.2004)

     11.   POL00082263       Exhibit to first witness statement   POL-0078826
                             of Catherine Oglesby - Post Office
                             Limited v Lee Castleton
                             (21.01.2006)

     12.   POL00082391 006   Letter from Cath Oglesby to Lee      POL-0078954 174

                                       Page 37 of 40
                                                                                 WITNO8530100
                                                                               WITN08530100




                        Castleton re suspension
                        documents (06.05.2004)

13.   POL00082391_007   Letter from Cath Oglesby to Lee      POL-0078954_175
                        Castleton re final balance entries
                        (14.05.2004)

14.   POL00082391_003   Note of interview of Lee Castleton   POL-0078954_171
                        by Cath Oglesby & Lesley Joyce,
                        Christine Train also present
                        (10.05.2004)

15.   POL00071234       Agent Case Summary: Appeal           POL-0067797
                        against summary termination of
                        contract, Mr Lee Castleton
                        (07.06.2004)

16.   POL00082391_009   Letter from Cath Oglesby to Lee      POL-0078954_177
                        Castleton re summary termination
                        of contract (17.05.2004)

17.   LCAS0000609       First Witness Statement of           VIS00010849
                        Catherine Oglesby (21.01.2006)

18.   POL00069523       Email from Cath Oglesby to           POL-0066086
                        Stephen Dilley re Marine Drive
                        Appeal (01.10.2006)

19.   POL00071200       Email chain between John J Jones     POL-0067763
                        and Cath Oglesby Re: Marine
                        Drive Appeal (25.06.2004)

20.   POL00070516       POL Note - Appeal against            POL-0067079
                        Summary Termination of Contract
                        - Lee Castleton (01.07.2004)

21.   POL00070760       Draft witness statement of           POL-0067323
                        Catherine Oglesby in POL v Lee
                        Castleton Claim No: HQ05X02706
                        (06.12.2005)

22.   POL00069524       Email from Cath Oglesby to           POL-0066087
                        Stephen Dilley re Re-revised
                        second statement (01.10.2006)

23.   POL00070727       Email from Stephen Dilley to         POL-0067290
                        Mandy Talbot & others re Post
                        Office v Lee Castleton - re
                        changes to Cath Oglesby
                        statement (07.12.2005)

24.   POL00071011       Email from Julian Summerhayes to     POL-0067574
                        Mandy Talbot re: Post Office v
                        Castleton (21.12.2005)

25.   POL00069608       Castleton: E-mail trail between      POL-0066171
                        Oglesby and Dilley concerning
                        witness timetable (07.09.2006)



                                  Page 38 of 40
                                                                           WITNO8530100
                                                                         WITN08530100




26.   POL00070841   Email from Stephen Dilley to          POL-0067404
                    Mandy Talbot, Tony Utting, John
                    Jones, RE: Post Office Ltd v Mr L
                    Castleton (13.04.2006)

27.   POL00070477   Email from Julian Summerhayes to      POL-0067040
                    Stephen Dilley regarding the Post
                    office v Lee Castleton (Marine
                    Drive Post Office, Bridlington)
                    (24.11.2005)

28.   LCAS0000945   Letter from Rowe Cohen to Bond        VIS0001 1185
                    Pearce enclosing the report from
                    their expert accounting witness on
                    a without prejudice basis (includes
                    enclosures) (30.09.2005)

29.   POL00069955   Draft Expert Report by Geoffrey W     POL-0066518
                    Porter from BDO Stoy Hayward
                    LLP in the case of Post Office v
                    Lee Castleton (29.11.2006)

30.   POL00071137   Email from Stephen Dilley to          POL-0067700
                    Mandy Talbot re: Post Office -v-
                    Castleton: Disclosure (27.06.2006)

31.   POL00071145   Email from Stephen Dilley to          POL-0067708
                    Mandy Talbot re: Post Office -v-
                    Castleton: Disclosure (21.06.2006)

32.   POL00070518   Fax Cover Letter from Mark Turner     POL-0067081
                    to Stephen Dilley - Bond Pearce
                    re: The Post Office/Lee Castleton
                    (17.11.2005)

33.   LCAS0000441   Letter Bond Pearce to Rowe            VIS00010681
                    Cohen in preparation for civil
                    proceedings. (21.04.2005)

34.   POL00070520   Email from Stephen Dilley to Cath     POL-0067083
                    Oglesby re Castleton (17.11.2005)

35.   POL00107420   Letter from Rowe Cohen to Cheryl      POL-0105728
                    Woodward, Re: Lee Castleton
                    (10.05.2005)

36.   POL00070746   Email from Vicky Harrison to          POL-0067309
                    Stephen Dilley re the Post Office v
                    Lee Castleton, Marine Drive Post
                    Office, Bridlington (07.12.2005)

37.   POL00071158   Email from Cath Oglesby to            POL-0067721
                    Stephen Dilley re: Post Office Ltd
                    v Mr L Castleton (11.06.2006)

38.   POL00070183   Official Transcript of Evidence of    POL-0066746
                    Helen Rose and others in The
                    Post Office v Lee Castleton
                    (11.12.2006)


                              Page 39 of 40
                                                                                WITN08530100
                                                                              WITN08530100




39.   POL00082391_051   Letter from Cath Oglesby to Lee     POL-0078954_219
                        Castleton re sale of Marine Drive
                        (21.02.2005)

40.   POL00069976       Castleton: Email trail between      POL-0066539
                        Stephen Dilley and others
                        concerning witness requirements
                        and updates (28.11.2006)




                                 Page 40 of 40
