                                                                                  WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITNO8150100




                                              Witness Name: GERALD HARBINSON

                                                     Statement No: WITNO8150100

                                                           Dated: 17 October 2023




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




            FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF GERALD HARBINSON




I, Gerald Harbinson, will say as follows:

    1. I am a former employee of the Post Office Limited (the "POL") and I worked

       within the organisation for approximately 12 years. During this period I held

       various positions, including a TV Enquiry Officer, Criminal Investigations

       Manager, Compliance Manager, Financial Investigator and Financial

       Investigation Unit Manager.




    2. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon Inquiry (the

       "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 8 September

       2023 (the "Request"). The Request contains 92 questions, which I have

       addressed below. I would like to make the Inquiry aware that I have received

       legal assistance to produce this statement from my solicitor, Mr Ian Manners



                                      Page 1 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITN08150100




   of Ashfords LLP. When seeking to obtain assistance from Ashfords LLP, I was

   assisted by the POL with the initial stage of confirming the availability of

   insurance coverage, to cover the associated legal costs.




3. The Request relates to matters that occurred many years ago and some of the

   documents that have been provided to me are over 20 years old. Due to this

   passage of time, I have found it difficult to recall precise details on occasion.

   Nevertheless, what I include in this statement is to the best of my recollection

   and I where I cannot recall something or I have had to rely on a document

   provided, I have ensured to state this clearly.



  Relevant backaround




4. I joined the Post Office at some point in 1998 and left in April 2010, when I left

   to join Royal Mail.




5. When I first joined in 1998 I was employed as a TV Enquiry Officer. I transferred

   from this role at some point in 2000, when I was internally recruited into the Post

   Office Security Team as an Investigation Manager. This role was based within

   Croydon, London.




6. I would like to flag that whilst this job title contained the word `Manager', this

   did not mean that I held a managing position - all other individuals in the same

   role were also referred to as an `Investigation Manager.'


                                  Page 2 of 78
                                                                                   WITN08150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




7. I can recall that there was a big intake of around 15 to 20 people into the

   Security Team at the time when I was recruited in 2000. I went into the

   Investigatory side of the Security Team. There was also a Property side of the

   team, who I believe dealt with issues relating to locks and security doors at

   branches, and a Case Management side, who were the central hub that

   assisted with the processing of matters.




8. I do not recall needing any specific school or higher education qualifications to

   be hired as an Investigation Manager. I think that everyone who was successful

   in achieving the role was hired internally. As such, I imagine that some

   experience working under the POL was desired. I do remember that during the

   interview stage I had to travel to Birmingham to take part in an assessment

   day. I assume that in order to achieve the role you had to pass the

   assessments assigned on the day.



9. In terms of training for the role of an Investigation Manager, I was required to

   attend a college in Milton Keynes, where a programme of relevant training was

   delivered by experienced employees of the Security Team. I cannot remember

   exactly when the training was delivered, but I remember it being early on in my

   career and it took place over a few weeks. The training related to various

   matters relevant to the role, which I deal with in more detail under the sub-

   heading ' Training, instructions and guidance to investigators within the Security

   Team' below. Once the training was complete, we were examinedon



                                 Page 3 of 78
                                                                                   WITN08150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




   our learning and we could only continue in our role if we passed. I recall that I

   passed all the prescribed training and examinations.



10. We also received training in the form of shadowing. When I initially became an

   Investigation Manager I would assist a more experienced colleague in carrying

   out an investigation. I did this until I became experienced enough to lead an

   investigation of my own. When I was experienced enough to lead an

   investigation, I would often have Investigation Managers who were newer to

   the role shadow and assist me.



11. We had team leaders. I initially had Tony Utting and later Paul Dawkins, who

   would allocate individual cases out to Investigation Managers when they came

   in from the Case Management Team. If the case was allocated to you, you

   would then be responsible for running and managing the investigation of that

   case. Essentially, this involved investigating instances of suspected theft or

   fraud. For example, I carried out investigations in relation to potential pension

   allowance fraud, to help identify whether such fraud was committed internally

   at the POL, or externally. We would usually be referred these cases after

   anomalies were found in pension documentation, following a review held by a

   team at a central site in Northern Ireland. I cannot remember the name of the

   site, but I do I believe that all pension documentation for the POL was handled

   and reviewed there.



12. 1 also investigated cases where there was a discovery of a cash shortfall at a

   Post Office branch following an audit. In that situation, the Auditor would report

                                  Page 4 of 78
                                                                                 WITNO8150100
                                                                               WITN08150100




   the shortage to the Security Team. If the matter was then allocated to me by

   my Team Leader, I would be sent to attend the branch that same day to begin

   an investigation.



13. When carrying out an investigation I would collate the necessary records and

   documents (such as reports that the Auditor had printed from the Horizon

   System on the day), take witness statements from relevant persons and

   conduct interviews under caution with the relevant persons (for example, the

   SPM).



14. Following this I would write up a report of findings and open a case file. Once

   a case file was fully prepared, I would forward it over to my Team Leader for

   review, who would eventually forward it to casework management to check it

   over from a procedural standpoint, and they would then arrange for it be sent

   to the head of the Security Team. I believe Phil Gerrish was the head of the

   Security Team when I first started. At some point Tony Utting became head of

   the Security Team, followed by John Scott. However, I cannot remember

   precisely when these position changes took place.



15.Once the case file was with the head of the Security Team, it is my

   understanding that they would then liaise with Case Management to get it

   passed on to the Criminal Law Team in the POL. I do not know if there were

   any specific factors considered to determine whether to pass it on or not, or

   whether all case files were passed on in any event. Other than on an evidential

   basis (which I deal with in paragraphs 18 and 19 below), I do not believe that I

                                 Page 5 of 78
                                                                                  WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITN08150100




   had any involvement with liaising directly with any other POL department

   during my role as an Investigation Manager. I believe that any other necessary

   cross department liaison was dealt with by colleagues in a more senior position

   to me or with casework management.



16. 1 believe that it was always the decision of the Criminal Law Team whetherto

   pursue a criminal prosecution or not. I do not recall that decision ever being

   made by anyone in the Security Team, although, potential offences would be

   listed in the offender report produced by Investigation Managers as part of their

   investigation. The offender report would have formed part of the case file

   passed to the Criminal Law Team.



17. Once a case file was passed on to the Criminal Law Team, I believe that the

   matter would have been allocated to a particular lawyer within that team. I do

   not know how this allocation was made.



18. In the event that an incident I had investigated was being prosecuted, I would

   continue to assist the Criminal Law team on an evidential basis. For example,

   if the Criminal Law Team required additional evidence, the criminal Law Team

   or my Team Leader would inform me and I 'd carry out additional work to obtain

   such evidence (for example, taking an additional witness statement). Due to

   the passage of time, I am unable recall any specific examples of this occurring.



19. We also had to assist the Criminal Law Team with meeting any disclosure

   obligations. This involved compiling a list of all used and unused evidence in

                                 Page 6 of 78
                                                                                  WITN08150100
                                                                                WITNO8150100




   the investigation, and collating those documents into a bundle. The Criminal

   Law Team would then deal with any related filing and serving requirements

   directed by the court.



20. At some point in early 2005 I was internally promoted to the role of Compliance

   Manager. In this role I reported to David Pardoe, who was my direct line

   manager. I do not recall needing any minimum qualifications or experience to

   secure this role, but I do remember having to apply for it and being interviewed.

   I assume that my previous experience working under the POL umbrella would

   have been desirable, as the knowledge of processes and procedures I had

   already gained would have been relevant to the role of a Compliance Manager.



21. My Compliance Manager role was also based in the Croydon area and it

   involved monitoring how casefiles were being processed through the business,

   ensuring that the correct steps were being followed from a procedural

   standpoint. It did not entail any involvement in the actual substance of an

   investigation. For example, I would check that timescales on matters were

   being met to help prevent progress from falling behind. If evidence in a case

   file referred to exhibits, I would double check that the exhibits were labelled

   and attached in the correct place. I would also ensure that all offender reports

   were marked with the required red label if required so that the case file could

   be processed quicker when sent to the Criminal Law Team. I only briefly

   remained in this position because later in 2005 I became a Financial

   Investigator for POL.




                                 Page 7 of 78
                                                                                 WITNO8150100
                                                                               WITN08150100




22. Myself and another colleague, Mick Matthews, were both put forward for the

   role of Financial Investigator by David Pardoe, which was essentially a new

   role set up within the Security Team, campaigned by David Pardoe. Unlike my

   previous positions based in Croydon, the Financial Investigator role had a

   national remit and myself and Mick Matthews would manage a case load

   covering all areas of the UK.



23. I do not recall needing any minimum qualifications or experience to secure the

   role of a Financial Investigator— I can only assume that my experience to date

   of being an Investigation Manager and a Compliance Manager had provided

   me with the relevant transferable skills in the eyes of David Pardoe.



24. All training for my Financial Investigator role was provided under the Asset

   Recovery Agency (ARA), who at that time were the Government department

   established under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 ("POCA") to take action

   against those benefitting from crime. As far as I am aware, the Financial

   Investigation Unit within POL were one of the first non-police bodies who

   applied to exercise powers of recovery under POCA. The ARA took the lead in

   delivering the relevant training to myself and Mick Matthews in order for us to

   become Accredited Financial Investigators. In doing so, they provided us with

   a mentor, Elaine Blewitt, who was an experienced Accredited Financial

   Investigator in the police. Initially, we received mentoring from Elaine Blewitt

   and carried out our work under her supervision and accreditation. This

   continued until we passed the necessary exams in place to become accredited

   ourselves. I cannot recall what the specific exams were, but I remember them


                                   Page 8 of 78
                                                                                  WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITN08150100




   being very difficult and requiring a lot of preparation and application of the

   knowledge we had gained from our mentoring and experience so far. I was

   qualified in POCA parts 2,4 and 8.




25. Once we passed our exams and became accredited, we were able to carry out

   our duties as an Accredited Financial Investigator independently. Wereported

   to our Senior Authorising Officer, David Pardoe, who would review and

   approve any work we had done where necessary, in line with ARA Guidance.

   Later on in my career, I undertook further training provided by the ARA in order

   to become a Senior Authorising Officer myself.




26. My Role as a Financial Investigator essentially involved the recovery of

   financial loss suffered by the POL following a conviction for crimes such as

   theft of POL assets and false accounting. This involved investigating what

   assets were held by the convicted individual and how they could potentially

   cover the loss suffered, and the likelihood of recovery. In some cases it also

   involved making a case for restraint over particular assets found, in order to

   stop them from being dissipated prior to any application for a confiscation order

   being awarded following a conviction. Any restraint considered would not be

   done without the approval of my Senior Authorising Officer (David Pardoe),

   and ultimately the approval of the Criminal Law Team.




27. I would also put together an application to the court for a confiscation order.

   In doing so, I would produce a Section 16 Statement, completed on a pro-


                                 Page 9 of 78
                                                                                   WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




   forma available from the ARA. Such statement would attach and address all

   the evidence obtained during my financial investigation against the convicted

   individual and attempt to logically set out my reasoning, aims and objectives

   around obtaining a confiscation order, for the judge to consider. It would be

   passed on to the Criminal Law Team to review and approve. If app roved, they

   would then arrange for it to be served on the Defendant's solicitor and filed at

   court.




28. In circumstances where the court proceeded to grant a confiscation order, it

   would always be requested that a compensation order was attached for the

   same amount. I deal with the reasons for this in detail in paragraph 115 below.




29. Once a confiscation order was obtained, the Financial Investigation Unit did

   not then take steps to ensure the order was fulfilled. I believe that there were

   departments around the country who formed part of the ARA, who would do

   the work required to enforce the confiscation order. I also believe that they

   would approach the courts to bring about the enforcement of a confiscation

   order, if necessary. The Financial Investigation Unit would only monitor the

   progress of the order being enforced, so that we were updated from a recovery

   standpoint.




30. Whilst a report relating to the investigation in any criminal proceedings was

   available to us to understand the context of the crime, the Financial Investigator

   role did not play any part in investigating the potential criminal incident. Our



                                 Page 10 of 78
                                                                                 WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITN08150100




   input did not usually occur until post-conviction. On the rare occasion where

   an SPM had admitted to actions of theft or false accounting from the outset, a

   Financial Investigator could start the recovery process earlier than after

   conviction, however, they would have needed to have a clear rational

   explained before a judge to obtain any POCA orders pre-conviction. Due to the

   passage of time, I cannot remember any specific examples of where this was

   done.




31. In late 2006 or early 2007 Mick Matthews left the Post Office, which left me

   with the entire Financial Investigation case load. Due to the large amount of

   recovery work that existed nationally, 2 more people were brought in to the

   team to help manage it — Paul Southin and Graham Ward. We were all the

   same grade in terms of pay, but at some point after they joined, although I do

   not recall exactly when, I was allocated the role of Financial Investigator Unit

   Manager, I assume as a result of my experience to date.




32.As a Financial Investigator Unit Manager, I had to train Paul and Graham to

   manage their own recovery cases. Later I was also their Senior Authorising

   Officer. I initially supervised them on caseloads until they were experienced

   enough themselves. I also held 1-1 training and review sessions with them on

   any work I had allocated to them. Whilst taking on these new management

   responsibilities, I continued to hold down a recovery case load of my own.




                                Page 11 of 78
                                                                                   WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITN08150100




33. Unlike my role as an Investigation Manager, I did have slightly more direct

   interaction with the Criminal Law Team when I formed part of the Financial

   Investigation Unit. For example, on occasion I was consulted in relation to my

   views on the best mode for recovery and the prospects of a confiscation order

   being achieved, to assist the Criminal Law Team with making the decision

   whether to pursue an application for confiscation or not. I would provide my

   opinion on this in line with training and mentoring from the ARA I had received,

   and my past experience in the role.




34. In all of my roles in the Security Team, I have only ever been involved in

   matters relating to criminal proceedings. I do not recall ever assisting in civil

   matters or proceedings. Of course, not all matters I investigated when I was an

   Investigation Manager ended up in criminal proceedings. Some would result in

   no further action, or potentially go down an alternative route. I do not recall

   what these other routes specially were, however, if it was civil proceedings I

   did not ever assist further. As for my roles in the Financial Investigation Unit,

   these always related to criminal proceedings, because as explained above,

   usually our input only came into play following the conviction of a criminal

   offence, to assist in recovering the proceeds of such crime.




35. I have been asked what role I may have had in any litigation case strategy.

   During my time as an Investigation Manager, however, I do not believe I played

   any part in the litigation case strategy of any matters. As far as I am aware this

   was a consideration for the Criminal Law team only. As explained earlier in this



                                 Page 12 of 78
                                                                                     WITN08150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




       statement, when I was in the Financial Investigation Unit I would provide my

       opinion to the Criminal Law Team in relation to the best mode of recovery and

       prospects of confiscation, however, I do not believe this that can be considered

       as litigation case strategy as such. I was simply providing an opinion — I was

       not mandating that the Criminal Law Team should carry out any specific

       actions. It was ultimately up to them as to whether they wanted to take on board

       my opinion.




   36. 1 have also been asked to provide my views on the competence and

       professionalism of my colleagues and managers. I have always believed that

       in all of my roles in the Post Office, my colleagues and managers were very

       professional, competent and hard working. My managers and team leaders in

       particular were extremely good at theirjobs and I aspired to be like them. They

       taught me a lot and it was because of them I was able to progress and achieve

       more senior roles within the POL myself.




The Financial Investigation Unit's role in relation to criminal investigations and

prosecutions


   37. I confirm that I have considered the following documents:


       i.   "Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal Investigation and Prosecution Policy" (1

            December 2007) ([POL00030578], which appears to be substantially the

            same as the policy of the same date with a variation on the title at

            [POL00104812]) (see, in particular, section 3);



                                    Page 13 of 78
                                                                              WITN08150100
                                                                            WITNO8150100




ii.    "Royal Mail Group Security — Procedures & Standards — Standards of

       Behaviour and Complaints Procedure" (version 2, October 2007)

       ([POL00104806]);

iii.   "Royal Mail Group Crime and Investigation (S2)" (version 3.0, September

       2008) ([POL00031004]);

iv.    "Royal Mail Group Crime and Investigation Policy" (version 1.1, October

       2009) ([POL00031003]);

v.     "Former Subpostmaster End to End Debt review" (December 2009)

       ([POL00084977]);

vi.    "Post Office Ltd — Security Policy — Fraud Investigation and Prosecution

       Policy" (version 2, 4 April 2010) ([POL00030580]);

vii. "Post    Office Ltd Financial Investigation Policy" (4        May 2010)

       ([POL00030579]);

viii. "Royal Mail Group Security - Procedures & Standards — The Proceeds of

       Crime Act 2002 & Financial Investigations" (version 1, September 2010)

       ([POL00026573]);

ix.    "Royal Mail Group Security - Procedures & Standards — Initiating

       Investigations" (September 2010) ([POL00104857]);

x.     "Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal Investigation and Prosecution Policy"

       (version 1.1, November 2010) ([POL00031008]);

xi.    Post Office Ltd Financial Investigation Policy (version 2, February 2011)

       ([POL00104853]);



                              Page 14 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




      xii. Post Office Ltd Anti-Fraud Policy (February 2011) ([POL00104855]);


      xiii. "Royal Mail Group Policy Crime and Investigation S2" (version 3.0, April

          2011) ([POL00030786]);


      xiv. "Post Office Limited: Internal Protocol for Criminal Investigation and

          Enforcement (with flowchart)", (October 2012) ([POL00104929]);


      xv. "Undated Appendix 1 - POL Criminal Investigations and Enforcement

          Procedure (flowchart)", (October 2012) ([POL00105226]);


      xvi. Draft "Post Office Limited: Criminal Enforcement and Prosecution Policy"

          (November 2012) ([POL00030602]);


      xvii. "Conduct of Criminal Investigations Policy" (version 0.2, 29 August 2013)

          ([POL00031005]);


      xviii."Conduct of Criminal Investigations Policy" (version 3, 10 February 2014)

          ([POL00027863]);


      xix. "Conduct   of   Criminal   Investigations   Policy"   (September     2018)

          ([POL00030902]);


      xx. "Security & Investigation Financial Investigation Unit Criminal Debt

          Recovery Process" (in which you are referred to as the FIU Manager)

          (undated) ([POL00084989]).




38.    Following a review, I can see that apart from the first 6 documents in the list

       (P0L00030578),      (P0L00104812),      (POL00104806),       (POL00031004),

       (POL00031003) and (POL00084977) and the final undated document



                                   Page 15 of 78
                                                                                  WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITNO8150100




      (POL00084989), all other documents appear to postdate my time as an

      employee of POL. I am therefore unable to comment on those, as I would

      not have had sight of them.




39.   In terms of the first 6 documents in the list, they all seem to relate to

      overarching polices in place at both Post Office Limited and Royal Mail. I do

      not believe I was involved in the development or management of any of

      these documents. Where they are dated within the period I spent working

      at POL, it is likely that I did have sight of the documents when they were

      circulated, but with the amount of time that has passed I have no direct

      recollection of seeing them.



40.   Given that it is undated, document (POL00084989) seems to be an early

      attempt of a process map relating to the work undertaken by the Financial

      Investigation Team, in line with the policies and guidance put in place by

      the ARA. I suspect myself, Paul and Graham may have been consulted on

      what to include in the document, but unfortunately I have no recollection of

      this and I cannot remember ever seeing this document.



41.   I note that I am referred to as the Financial Investigations Unit Manager in

      document (POL00084989). This indicates that it must have been created at

      some point from 2007 onwards, however, I do not recall writing or creating

      it. It is more likely to have been created some time in 2009, as it refers to

      the Joint Asset Recovery Database ("JARD"). JARD was a system

      maintained by the ARA to log the actions taken ina Financial Investigation,


                                 Page 16 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITN08150100




      and was implemented later on in my career. I believe that the Financial

      Investigation Unit at the POL only started using JARD from 2009 onwards.

      We could not access this system internally. We would have to attend a

      police station computer suite to access it.



42.   I have been asked to explain the organisational structure of the Security

      Team and where the Financial Investigation Unit sat within it. As set out

      earlier in this statement, the Security Team essentially had 3 distinct arms

      - Investigatory, Property and Case Management. There were of course

      individuals who held senior management roles within those arms, such as

      Team Leaders and Direct Line Managers. We also had the head of the

      Security Team, who as explained earlier in this statement, changed over

      time. The Financial Investigation Unit sat within the Investigatory arm of the

      Security Team. However, as alluded to above they were distinct from

      Investigation Managers.



43.   As far as I am aware, there were no changes to the organisational structure

      of the Security Team. The only major changes that occurred related to a

      change in those who held senior positions. For example, as mentioned

      earlier in my statement, Phil Gerrish was head of the Security Team when I

      first joined, but this role was eventually taken over by Tony Utting, and later

      by John Scott.



44.   As described earlier in this statement, those who held an Investigation

      Manager role within the Security team would carry out criminal

      investigations to assist with the potential prosecution of the accused

                                  Page 17 of 78
                                                                                   WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITN08150100




      individual. The Financial Investigation Unit did not become involved in any

      aspect of this investigation. They only usually became involved in a matter

      post-conviction, in order to assist with debt recovery to replace the loss

      faced by the POL as a result of the crime in question. Once a conviction

      was obtained, the Financial Investigation Unit would receive the

      Investigation Manager's report of findings following their investigation into

      the matter, but this was solely to help with understanding the background of

      a case, to know which section of POCA to address. Such understanding

      would also assist with formulating a Section 16 statement made in relation

      to an application for restraint or confiscation of assets.



45.   I have been asked to set out the legislation, policies and / or guidance that

      governed the conduct of criminal and financial investigations during the

      period I worked within the Security Team. When I worked as an

      Investigation Manager within the Security Team, I do not remember any

      particular internal policies or guidance that governed the work I carried out.

      I believe that polices were created and introduced over time but I am unable

      to pinpoint when or what they related to. I can only rely on the polices

      provided to me with the Request, and as explained above, most of those

      polices post-date my time at the POL. However, as I was investigating

      incidents that may have a potential criminal element, which involved

      carrying out interviews under caution and taking witness statements during

      an investigation, I was of course required to understand and adhere to The

      Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, and the PACE Codes of Practice.

      There were other acts that I had to refer to and whilst I would not be able to



                                  Page 18 of 78
                                                                                  WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITNO8150100




      reference these from direct memory, I believe that it would have been all

      the legislation listed in section 3.15 of document (POL00030580). When I

      was recruited in to Security Team as an Investigation Manger, I remember

      receiving training on this legislation early on to ensure that we understood

      what was legally required of us.




46.   Again, when I joined the Financial Investigation Unit, I believe there were

      no internal policies or guidance to govern our practice in place. We were a

      new subsection within the Security Team, therefore, internal policies and

      guidance documents were yet to be created. We relied on the polices and

      guidance put in place by the ARA, which our police mentor, Elaine Blewitt,

      would have made us aware of. Unfortunately I cannot recall what those

      specific policy or guidance documents were, especially as they evolved

      continuously in line with developments to POCA and changes within the

      ARA itself. For example, I believe the introduction of using the JARD system

      in financial investigations would have instigated a change to ARA policies

      and practices, but due to the amount of time that has passed, I am unable

      to recall when those specific policy changes would have occurred.




47.   As well as following ARA polices and guidance in place, we would have

      relied heavily on POCA itself to ensure we were carrying out our practice

      appropriately, as this was the central piece of legislation that governed the

      activities we carried out as a Financial Investigator.




                                  Page 19 of 78
                                                                                     WITN08150100
                                                                                   WITN08150100




 48.   It is clear from document (POL00084989) that there was an attempt to put

       in place an internal policy document to govern the actions carried out in a

       Financial Investigation, based on POCA and the ARA polices and guidance

       in place. However, as already stated I have no direct recollection of seeing

       this document and due to it being undated, it appears to be an early draft,

       probably put together some time in 2009.




 49.   As far as I am aware, the practices in place regarding criminal investigations

       and financial investigations brought against Crown Office employees and

       SPMs, managers and assistants in regular branches were the same. I don't

       recall having to follow any polices that were distinct to each. I believe there

       may have been a point where Crown Office employees were not

       contractually required to make good any loss discovered in a stock unit,

       whereas SPMs were, however, I cannot confirm for certain if this difference

       did exist or when. I am unable to comment on whether there was any

       difference to the policies and practices from an enforcement perspective,

       as enforcement was dealt with by the POL Criminal Law Team.



Decisions about prosecution and criminal enforcement proceedings



 50.   As explained earlier in this statement, once I had carried out an initial

       investigation relating to potential criminal proceedings, I had no further

       involvement as an Investigation Manager in deciding whether a SPM, their

       manager(s) and / or assistant(s) or a Crown Office employee should be


                                   Page 20 of 78
                                                                                   WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITN08150100




      prosecuted by the POL. I am therefore unable to comment on what

      considerations determined whether a prosecution was brought or not. It was

      my understanding that it was ultimately the Criminal Law Team who decided

      to pursue a criminal prosecution, although, I am unsure if the Head of the

      Security Team also had some influence on the decision, given that all case

      files were reviewed by them before they were sent off to the Criminal Law

      Team. The only time I had any further involvement following the initial

      investigation is where additional evidence was required by the Criminal Law

      Team, or when I had to assist with providing documents for disclosure, after

      a decision to prosecute had been made.




51.   I do not know what test was applied by those making prosecution and

      charging decisions and I am not aware of the factors that were considered

      at the evidential and the public interest stage. This was not an area dealt

      with by Investigation Managers in the Security Team. I believe the Criminal

      Law Team would have been responsible for carrying out these actions and

      they did not liaise with us in relation to this.




52.   I also do not know what advice legal or otherwise, was provided to those

      making decisions about whether to prosecute and what charges to bring. I

      simply completed my investigation and passed my findings on.




53.   Relevant only to my roles within the Financial Investigation Unit, I have been

      asked in what circumstances were steps to restrain a suspect's assets by


                                   Page 21 of 78
                                                                                   WITN08150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




      criminal   enforcement     methods   such    as   confiscation   proceedings

      considered. There is no straight forward answer to this, as the

      circumstances these steps were taken in depended on various factors,

      including the extent of the financial loss suffered by the POL, assets of the

      convicted individual which you have been able to identify, the likelihood that

      such assets may be disposed of and the need of the defendant to survive

      on a day to day basis.



54.   The decision to put forward a case for enforcement methods such as

      restraint and confiscation to achieve debt recovery was never taken lightly.

      You had to take a measured approach with these factors in mind and it

      always had to be in line with ARA guidance and policies in place and of

      course, POCA.



55.   For example, a restraint or confiscation of assets could not result in a

      convicted individual struggling to afford to live day to day. Restraint and

      confiscation also had to be proportionate - you could not propose an

      application for restraint or a confiscation order against a savings account

      containing £100,000, where the total recovery required for the Post Office

      only equated to £10,000.



56.   In coming to the consideration that restraint was necessary, another

      particular consideration was the risk of the convicted individual entering in

      to receivership with third party organisations to whom the branch owed

      outstanding money to, as if they entered in to receivership beforehand, a

      restraint could no longer be issued of their assets.

                                  Page 22 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITN08150100




57.   When putting a case forward for the best mode of recovery, you would have

      to logically set out in a thought process log the reasons for why you believed

      restraint and confiscation would be an appropriate avenue. Your reasoning

      would need to be checked by a Senior Authorising Officer and if they

      agreed, then your considerations would be forwarded to the Criminal Law

      Team. When I was a Senior Authorising Officer, and also Financial

      Investigation Unit Manager, Paul and Graham would come to me to setout

      their thought processes on their caseload, before passing on the

      considerations to the legal team.



58.   Although not impossible, it was a lot harder to justify a case for confiscation

      where a person had been convicted for false accounting. This is because

      confiscation essentially relates to removing the convicted person's benefit

      they received as a result of criminal conduct, in order to recover the losses

      faced by the POL. It could be extremely difficult to work out what the benefit

      received actually was in a false accounting case.



59.   As alluded to earlier, although Financial Investigators would provide an

      opinion on the best mode of recovery, we never made the ultimate decision

      whether criminal enforcement proceedings should be pursued. This

      decision would have come from the Criminal Law Team, potentially in

      conjunction with the head of the Security Team too, although I am not

      certain on this. Therefore I am unable to describe what factors were

      considered when making decisions around this. I imagine that any opinion

      received from the Financial Investigators in relation to the best mode of

                                  Page 23 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




       recovery would have formed part of the considerations, but I do not think it

       solely determined the decisions that were taken to pursue criminal

       enforcement proceedings.



 60.   Even when I was promoted to the Financial Investigation Unit Manager in

       2007, I still had no involvement in the decision of whether to pursue criminal

       enforcement proceedings.




Training, instructions and guidance to investigators within the Security Team



 61.   When I first joined the Security Team as an Investigation Manager, very

       early on I was required to attend a formal training course at a college in

       Milton Keynes, which was led by 2 or 3 senior members of the Security

       Team. I recall that Mick Matthews was one of the trainers and I remember

       he was very thorough in his teaching. Whilst I cannot remember all the

       modules we were required to learn, I believe that they did cover the following

       - the duties of investigators to conduct full and thorough investigations,

       taking witness statements in the course of an investigation, conducting

       interviews under caution, obtaining evidence in the course of an

       investigation, seeking evidence from third parties who might hold relevant

       evidence and drafting investigation reports and the legislation relevant to

       our role. In order to continue in the role of an Investigation Manager you had

       to pass an exam at the end of the course. I cannot remember the specific

       details of that exam, but I do recall passing it.



                                    Page 24 of 78
                                                                                     WITN08150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




62.   We also learned the processes of an investigation through shadowing more

      experienced Investigation Managers, as I have touched upon in paragraph

      10 above.




63.   I do also recall receiving training in relation to other topics such as Health

      and Safety in the work place, as well as refresher training. For example, I

      remember going on a search course led by senior members of the Security

      Team in conjunction with the police, which covered necessary steps to

      follow when attending a premises and searching it. I cannot recall the

      specific dates as to when this course took place, but refresher training was

      provided throughout in relation to various aspects of the role.




64.   In relation to training about obtaining information from third parties,

      particularly Fujitsu, I do recall receiving training on the processes to follow,

      however, I cannot recall when and how this training was delivered. I deal

      further with such processes under the sub-heading `Analysing Horizon data

      and requesting ARQ data from Fujitsu' below.




65.   I have reviewed (POL00121639) and (POL00121640). I would like to flag

      that document (POL00121640) is from 2019, therefore, I would never have

      had sight of this. Whilst document (POL00121639) has my name on it, I do

      not remember the presentation contained within it or ever delivering such

      presentation. Over the years the Financial Investigation Unit produced and

                                  Page 25 of 78
                                                                                    WITN08150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




      delivered training to the Security Team on various occasions. Due to the

      passage of time, I cannot recall what specific training was given.



66.   From reviewing the presentation slides within (POL00121639), this

      particular training appears to be an attempt to raise the understanding and

      the profile of recovery through POCA and the role of the Financial

      Investigation Unit within the POL. As the Financial Investigation Unit were

      not involved in carrying out criminal investigations, I do vaguely remember

      wanting to get Investigation Managers thinking about the role of Financial

      Investigators from the outset, so that they could flag anything relevant in the

      event that the Financial Investigation Unit took on the matter from a recovery

      standpoint in the future. For example, if during an audit shortage the

      investigation team attended a home branch and saw that the SPM had a

      motorhome on the drive, this would be useful information to note down as it

      illustrates an asset potentially held by the SPM, and such information would

      assist in carrying out investigations into the SPM's financial affairs.



67.   I confirm that I have reviewed the following documents:



             i)     The Casework Management document at [POL00104747]

                    (version 1.0, March 2000) and [POL00104777] (version 4.0,

                    October 2002);

             ii)    The Guide to the Preparation and Layout of Investigation Red

                    Label Case Files, Offender reports and Discipline reports

                    (undated), which appears to have been prepared by you

                    ([POL00121569]);

                                  Page 26 of 78
                                                                                   WITN08150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




             iii)   The Guide to the Preparation and Layout of Investigation Red

                    Label Case Files, File construction and Appendices A, B & C

                    (dated around September 2005), which appears to have been

                    prepared by you ([POL00121570]);

             iv)    The Guide to the Preparation and Layout of Investigation Non-

                    Red Label Case Files, File construction and Appendix (dated

                    around September 2005), which appears to have been

                    prepared by you ([POL00121582]);

             v)     The Guide to the Preparation and Layout of Investigation Red

                    Label Case Files, Case File Reports and Case Closure Report

                    (undated), which appears to have been prepared by you

                    ([POL00121581]);

             vi)    The      document        entitled     "Identification    Codes"

                    ([POL00118104]).




68.   I have no direct memory of either the 2000 or 2002 version of the Casework

      Management documents at (POL00104747) and (POL00104777) and

      cannot recall if I was provided with these during my roles within the Security

      Team. In any event, it seems they were directed towards the Casework

      Management team, which I was not ever part of. However, in terms of the

      second, third and fourth bullet points on page 2 of the 2000 version and the

      first, second and third bullet points on page 2 of the 2002 version, I did

      understand this to be relevant to disclosure obligations. From review of the

      wording of such bullet points, it appears that information about Horizon



                                 Page 27 of 78
                                                                                  WITN08150100
                                                                                WITNO8150100




      bugs, errors and defects would fall into such disclosure obligations. Had I

      ever been made aware of Horizon bugs, errors and defects I certainly would

      have reported this. However, as will be explained in further detail below, at

      no point in my career as an Investigation Manager was I informed of any

      Horizon bugs, errors and defects.




69.   All investigations were subject to compliance checks, carried out by

      Compliance Officers/Managers. The purpose of such checks were to simply

      deal with how casefiles were being processed through the business,

      ensuring that the correct steps were being followed from a procedural

      standpoint. I have described this in detail under the sub-heading Relevant

      background' above.




70.   I note that the following documents appear to have been prepared by me

      and all relate to how case files should be presented: (POL00121570),

      (POL00121582) and (POL00121581). From a review of these documents I

      believe that during my role as a Compliance Manager, my direct Manager

      (David Pardoe) asked me to update previous versions of the documents

      that had been created by Brian Sharkey and Ray Platt, who had left. This

      was simply a case of copying and pasting the previous version into a new

      document and adding the amendments requested by David Pardoe.

      Unfortunately, I cannot remember what the specific amendments were.




71.   I have reviewed paragraph 2.15 of the Guide to the Preparation and Layout


                                 Page 28 of 78
                                                                                      WITNO8150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




      of Investigation Red Label Case Files, Offender reports & Discipline reports

      at (POL00121569). I believe that the rationale behind this was to ensure

      that all lines of enquiry were followed in an investigation and failures relating

      to security, supervision and product integrity were reported accordingly. I

      believe that the wording of such section would encapsulate any failures

      relating to the Horizon IT system (however, as touched upon above, I never

      came across any failings with Horizon). Such paragraph confirms my

      understanding that failings of this sort were to be contained in the

      confidential offender report. The discipline report was separate to this and

      was available to the potential discipline offender, so such information would

      not be included within it as it could negatively impact any ongoing

      investigations. My understanding in relation to disclosure of such

      information is that should a case pursue to criminal proceedings after an

      investigation, then such information would be disclosed by the Criminal Law

      Team, with the assistance of the Investigation Manager in gathering all

      disclosable information.




72.   I note that the Inquiry has requested that I comment on the rationale behind

      paragraphs 1.8, 2.4 and 2.5 in (POL00121581) and my understanding of its

      relevance to disclosure obligations. The Inquiry refers to (POL00121581)

      as being the "Guide to the Preparation and Layout of Investigation Red

      Label Case, Case File Reports and Case Closure Report'. I would like to

      flag that document (POL00121581) does not relate to 'Red Label Cases' -

      it relates to the preparation and layout of 'Investigation Non-Red Label Case

      Files.' My understanding is that non-red label case files were those that

                                   Page 29 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




        related to instances that were not going to be pursued via criminal

        proceedings. As such, there were no disclosure obligations relevant to what

        is contained in paragraphs 1.8, 2.4 and 2.5 of (POL00121581). I believe the

        rationale behind these paragraphs was to ensure that such failings were

        identified and reported within the business, so that they could be addressed.



  73.   I do not recall having any involvement in drafting or reviewing the document

        entitled "Identification Codes" at (POL00118104) and I cannot remember

        seeing this document. I have a vague recollection of having to follow an

        Identification Code produced by the police, but I do not know if document

        (POL00118104) represents that and I cannot recall what my view at the time

        was of the appropriateness of the identification codes described. I do recall

        that Investigation Managers were instructed to assign identification codes

        to suspected offenders, but I cannot recall the reasoning behind this.



Analysing Horizon data and requesting ARQ data from Fujitsu



  74.   When I was an Investigation Manager in the Security Team, I do not ever

        recall a situation where a cash shortfall that I was investigating was

        attributed to problems with Horizon by the SPM's manager(s) or assistant(s)

        / Crown Office employee(s) subject to the investigation. Therefore, I am

        unable to comment on what analyses would have been done on Horizon

        data by the Security Team in such situation, nor on whetherARQ data would

        have been requested from Fujitsu and if such ARQ data was shared with

        the SPM in question.



                                   Page 30 of 78
                                                                                   WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




75.   I can comment on how Horizon data was obtained and analysed in more

      general terms where a cash shortage was discovered during an audit. The

      relevant Horizon printouts were obtained by the Auditor on the day at the

      branch. If anything further was required during an investigation, for

      example, printouts from an earlier period to determine at which point the

      accounts no longer balanced, then you could receive this information

      directly from Fujitsu. An Investigation Manager could simply ask the Case

      Management Team to make this request to Fujitsu.




76.   I believe that it was common to have a Fujitsu manager as an expert witness

      in criminal proceedings relating to cash shortages, to provide their own

      analyses on the data and to determine whether Horizon was operating

      properly.



77.   When I worked in the Finical Investigations Unit, neither myself nor my

      colleagues in that team would have done any analyses on Horizon data,

      whether or not a shortfall was attributed to problems with Horizon by SPMs.

      As explained earlier in this statement, the Financial Investigations Unit did

      not get involved in any initial investigation leading up to criminal

      proceedings. All of our actions came after a conviction was obtained.




78.   The Financial Investigation Unit never requested Horizon data from Fujitsu,

      as such data did not assist Financial Investigators in their role. The Horizon



                                  Page 31 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITN08150100




        data was useful to Investigation Managers in the Security team who were

        investigation a potential crime, so they could look at transaction logs and

        see what was happening on a day to day basis in a branch. It was of no use

        to Financial Investigators, who were responsible for investigating what

        assets an individual had after a prosecution decision had been reached.

        The Horizon data did not contain that information.



Relationship with others



  79.   I have been asked to describe my involvement with Cartwright King

        Solicitors, including the level of interaction I had with them in a case. I

        believe that Cartwright King Solicitors were the firm that The Post Office

        Criminal Law Team allocated work to when cases were based in the London

        area. I believe they were the barristers or advocates that would take cases

        through the court system.




  80.   When I was an Investigation Manager in the Security Team, I do recall

        having some communication with barristers or advocates from Cartwright

        King Solicitors, when they were instructed on cases that I had investigated,

        in and around London and South East. However, I cannot recall what this

        communication was about, or the specific individuals that I communicated

        with. Usually the first contact I would have with any barristers would be at

        court on the day of a hearing, where a brief discussion would be held about

        the case and what was trying to be achieved. I do recall on the rare occasion

        I attended a conference with counsel and the lawyer with conduct of a case


                                    Page 32 of 78
                                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




        from the Criminal Law Team, however, I cannot recall a specific case in

        which I did this or the reason as to why I attended.




  81.   When I was a Financial Investigator, I recall being consulted more often by

        Cartwright King Solicitors, as at that time I was probablyjust as experienced

        in the process of Financial Investigations as they were. I cannot recall any

        specific cases or reasons in which I was consulted, but I do vaguely

        remember a situation where a defendant challenged a restraint order, and

        a barrister or advocate asked my opinion on varying a restraint order.

        Nevertheless, there is a chance that this was a barrister or advocate from a

        different firm, as when I was Financial Investigator I had a national remit, so

        I would have had communication with barristers and advocates based all

        over the UK.




Prosecution of Tahir Mahmood




  82.   I do not have any direct recollection of this case and therefore I can only

        rely on what is contained in the documents provided to me with the Request.




  83.   I have been asked to consider a memo dated 30 November 2005 at

        (POL00047756). I confirm that I have reviewed this, and from such review

        I believe that the point in which I became involved in the matter involving Mr

        Mahmood would have been on the day that memo was sent to me. It is clear

        from that memo that Collin Price was the Investigation Manager, who had

                                    Page 33 of 78
                                                                                 WITNO8150100
                                                                               WITN08150100




      investigated the incident and potential crime itself. The memo goes on to

      say that Mr Mahmood's sentence was listed for 12th December 2005 and

      that Counsel seeks instruction as to whether the loss of £33,0000 should be

      recovered by way of a compensation order or application for a confiscation

      Order under POCA. It seems, therefore, that I am copied in to the memo as

      the case would have been allocated to me to carry out the necessary

      financial investigations and provide an opinion to the Criminal Law Team on

      what the best mode of recovery would be. The Criminal Law Team would

      have then provided instructions to counsel, either taking on board my

      opinions or not.




84.   I cannot directly remember what my understanding of the case would have

      been at the time, but based on the contents of the memo dated 30

      November 2005, I believe I would have understood that Mr Mahmood had

      been found guilty of offences that caused a £33,000 loss to the Post Office

      and that he was due to be sentenced on 12th December 2005. I would have

      also understood that the matter would be passed to myself in the Financial

      Investigation Unit to investigate the benefit that would have been gained as

      a result of committing the crime, and what assets existed to assist in

      determining the best mode for recovery.




85.   I cannot recall if I was involved in any other proceedings against SPMs

      involving the Horizon IT system prior to this case, during my time as an

      Investigation Manager or as a Financial Investigator. However, I can say for



                                 Page 34 of 78
                                                                                    WITN08150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




      certain that I would not have had any involvement in any decision relating

      to the recovery of investigation costs at any point in my career path with the

      POL.




86.   Unfortunately, I do not have any recollection on whether or not I provided

      my view to the Criminal Law Team on the best mode of recovery. As such,

      I am unable to comment on whether any opinion I provided influenced the

      Criminal Law Team's decision on the method by which recovery of "the loss"

      should be sought.




87.   I have considered the letters dated 13 January 2006 at (POL00047799) and

      1 February 2006 at (POL00047817). These are simply applications to the

      relevant bodies to receive the necessary information when carrying out my

      financial investigations in the case. At the time these letters were sent by

      me, I was still undergoing my training to become an Accredited Financial

      Investigator. I believe this is why PC Rowntree applied for a production

      order on my behalf (as indicated at (POL00047799)) and why I state in the

      letters that I was being mentored by officers from the Metropolitan Police.

      Nevertheless, it would have been my decision toapply fora production order

      as part of the financial investigations I was undertaking — I just had to seek

      assistance from police mentors at this time, as without doing so it is unlikely

      the information would be released to me as I was not accredited.




                                  Page 35 of 78
                                                                                   WITN08150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




88.   I have also been asked to consider the documents at (POL00047825),

      (P0L00047838), (P0L00044858), (P0L00047840), (P0L00047841) and

      (POL00047826), which I can see are further requests. Again, it would have

      been my decision to make these requests when carrying out my financial

      investigations, however, as I was still training and not yet accredited by the

      ARA at the time, I would have had to seek guidance and approval of the

      accredited mentors at the Police.




89.   As I have no direct recollection of the case involving Mr Mahmood, I am

      unable to recall any specific information I obtained during the course of the

      financial investigations. I can only confirm that it would have been any

      information that was received following any requests I made. The

      information would also have been appended to any Section 16 Statement

      that I eventually drafted in the case.




90.   Whilst I cannot remember what specific information I obtained in this case,

      I believe that I would have compiled any information that was received and

      asked my police mentor to review it and check if I had obtained everything

      that was required. It is my understanding that they were a Senior Authorising

      Officer. At this point I believe David Pardoe was still training to become a

      Senior Auhtorising Officer so I could not yet go to him for approval. Once

      approval and authorisation was received from my Police Mentor, I would

      have sent everything over to the Criminal Law Team to consider. From

      reading the document at (POL00047756), I believe Juliet



                                  Page 36 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                   WITN08150100




      Macfarlane was the legal case worker in this matter, so it is likely I would

      have forwarded the information directly to her. I believe she would have then

      arranged for it to be submitted to the defence.




91.   I do not have any direct recollection of the confiscation proceedings against

      Mr Mahmood. I can only rely on the documents provided which illustrates

      that the Criminal Law team did decide to purse an application for a

      confiscation order, but I have not had any site of any advice I gave in relation

      to the prospects of pursuing this route. I also do not know if there was a

      hearing in respect of the confiscation proceedings.




92.   I have been asked what my view is of how the proceedings were conducted

      by POL. If this question relates to the criminal proceedings which led to a

      conviction, I do not feel that I can provide any view on this as I was not

      involved those proceedings. I also do not feel that I can provide any valuable

      viewpoint on the confiscation proceedings as I simply do not rememberthe

      case.




Prosecution of Hughie Noel Thomas




93.   I confirm that I have reviewed all the following documents that were provided

      in relation to this prosecution:




                                   Page 37 of 78
                                                                                   WITN08150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




                i) memo dated 26 September 2006 at [POL00048180]

                ii) memo dated 7 November 2006 at [POL00048229].

                iii) memo dated 7 September 2007 at [POL00049024]

                iv) Document POL00069056_007]

                v) email dated 31 October 2007 (and the email chain beneath) at

                   [POL00044917]




94.   Unfortunately I do not have any direct recollection of this case and therefore

      I can only rely on the documents provided to me with the Request.




95.   From such documents I can see that this was a case that Mick Matthews

      dealt with all the way through to confiscation. The reason why I am also

      copied in to the memo dated 7 November 2006 at (POL00048229) falls

      down to the fact that it was just myself and Mick Matthews who worked in

      the Financial Investigation Unit at the time, and we worked closely with one

      another. Therefore, we would usually both be copied into correspondence

      and memos before cases had been allocated between us, and more

      generally to assist with covering each other's case load in the event that

      one of us were absent.




96.   The memo dated 7 September 2007 at (POL00049024) and addressed

      specifically to me states 'this case was being dealt with by Mick Matthews.'

      The memo appears to be the Criminal Law Team providing with me an

                                 Page 38 of 78
                                                                                    WITN08150100
                                                                               WITNO8150100




      update as to where the case had got to. I believe this was sent to me

      because Mick was leaving the Financial Investigation Unit around this time,

      and therefore his open matters were being handed over to me.




97.   The email chain at (POL00044917) dated 31 October 2007 between Mick

      Matthews and Clive Burton from the Finance Department clearly shows that

      it was Mick who dealt with the case all the way through to confiscation.

      Again, I believe the reason that Mick forwarded this email chain to me was

      because he was leaving the Financial Investigation Unit and was handing

      over his ongoing matters to me.




98.   I can see that I am sent a memo at (P0L00048180) from the Criminal Law

      Team on 26 September 2006 to ask if a confiscation application was being

      pursued. I believe this is simply the Criminal Law Team chasing up on how

      far Financial Investigations had got and if an application had any prospect.

      I am unsure why this was sent to me and not Mick, given that it appears he

      had conduct of this case. In any event, I believe this memo is worded

      ambiguously and should not be read to indicate that it was me or Mick who

      would have made the ultimate decision to proceed to confiscation in this

      case. It was always the Criminal Law Team who had the last say on this. I

      am unsure how they would have come to the decision to proceed with

      confiscation.




99.   It appears that any involvement I had after the confiscation order was made

                                 Page 39 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




       by the court was to deal with some issues in relation to the terms of

       confiscation order being exercised in order to achieve recovery.




100.   I   have   been asked      to   explain   why   I   stated   the following at

       (POL00069056_007) - "it would appear that Mr Thomas has not been full

       and frank with the receivers ." Unfortunately I do not remember why I said

       this. It appears from the letter received from the Insolvency Service attached

       to the email chain at (POL00069056_007), that Mr Thomas had gone into

       receivership, and informed the receiver that certain assets were already

       taken by POL. However, at this time I do not think it was standard practice

       for us to place a restraint on or seize pensions. This was something that

       was implemented much later during my time as a Financial Investigator,

       although, I do not recall when. As such, I may have made this statement

       because Mr Thomas told the receiver that the POL had seized his private

       pension, where it is unlikely this was the case. However, this is simply an

       assumption based on the contents and timing of (POL00069056_007) and

       I cannot confirm this for certain.




101.   I have been asked what my view is of how the proceedings against Hughie

       Noel Thomas were conducted by POL. If this question relates to the criminal

       proceedings which led to a conviction, I do not feel that I can provide any

       view on this as I was not involved those proceedings. I also do not feel that

       I can provide any valuable viewpoint on the confiscation proceedings as I

       simply do not remember the case, nor was I heavily involved in the


                                   Page 40 of 78
                                                                                       WITNO8150100
                                                                                      WITNO8150100




         confiscation proceedings, as the documents provided illustrate that I took

         over the matter to deal with any outstanding queries after Mick left.



Prosecution of Josephine Hamilton


  102.   I confirm that I have reviewed all the following documents that were

         provided in relation to the prosecution of Josephine Hamilton:

                   i) memo dated 12 April 2006 at [POL00047903]

                   ii) Compliance Case       Review Report dated 18 April 2006 at

                      [POL00047945].

                   iii) memo dated 12 December 2006 at [POL00048309].

                   iv) memo dated 30 January 2007 at [POL00048454]

                   v) the emails of 9 and 10 October 2007 at [POL00049083

                   vi) the memo dated 15 November 2007 at [POL00049154]

                   vii) memo dated 19 November 2007 at [POL00044388

                   viii)emails dated 16 and 19 November 2007 at [POL00049168].

                   ix) closure   report   emailed    on    10   September      2007    at

                      [POL00049025],

                   x) memo dated 6 February 2008 at [POL00049535]

                   xi) memo dated 18 February 2008 at [POL00052733

                   xii) Court of Appeal in Josephine Hamilton & Others v Post Office

                      Limited [2021 EWCA Crim 577 at POL00113278 (and in

                      particular at paragraphs 142 to 148).




  103.   Unfortunately, I do not have any direct recollection of this case and therefore

         I can only rely on what is contained in the documents provided to me.

                                     Page 41 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




       Following a review of the memo dated 12 April 2006 at (POL00047903) and

       the Compliance Case Review Report dated 18 April 2006 (POL00047945),

       it appears that at this time I was still dealing with some matters as a

       Compliance Manager in the Security Team, whilst slowly transitioning over

       to the Financial Investigations Unit. The memo at (POL00047903) illustrates

       that Graham Brander was the Investigation Manager carrying out the

       criminal investigation in this matter, and in the memo he is providing me an

       update in relation to why there was a delay in the case. The Compliance

       Case Review Report at (POL00047945) illustrates that I had reviewed how

       far the case had progressed, which would have included a review of

       Graham's memo, and in response I noted that I would review the file again

       in a month. I do not know from direct memory how far the case had

       progressed. I can only rely on what Graham has written in his memo dated

       12 April 2006. It was also not my role as a Compliance Officer to provide a

       view on the case.




104.   I was not involved in conducting the criminal investigation of Ms Hamilton's

       case. As such, I cannot comment on whether the information about Ms

       Hamilton's ill health affected how the investigation was conducted. I also

       had no involvement whatsoever in the decision to charge Ms Hamilton. As

       explained earlier on in this statement, my role as a Compliance Manager

       did not entail any involvement in the substance of criminal investigations. I

       simply dealt with the procedural aspects of a case to make sure that case

       files were being progressed efficiently and were presented correctly.




                                  Page 42 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




105.   I have reviewed the memo dated 12 December 2006 at (POL00048309)

       and memo dated January 2007 at (POL00048454). Although I am copied in

       to both memos, I did not have any involvement in the preparation of the

       case before Ms Hamilton's appearance in the magistrates' court. I was also

       not the disclosure officer in these proceedings, so I would not have

       completed the schedule of unused material. The disclosure officer would

       have been Graham Brander as he was the Investigation Manager working

       on the case. It was usual that the individual responsible for conducting the

       investigation would also be the disclosure officer and would be involved in

       the disclosure process. I believe the reason I am copied in to these memos

       is to either keep me updated on the progress of the case in my capacity as

       a Compliance Officer/Manager, or because I was later to have some

       involvement in the matter in my role as a Financial Investigator, as indicated

       in the emails of 9 and 10 October 2007 at (POL00049083), the memo dated

       15 November 2007 at (POL00049154), the memo dated 19 November 2007

       at (POL00044388) and the emails dated 16 and 19 November 2007 at

       (POL00049168).




106.   From considering those documents, the only involvement I did seem to have

       in my capacity as a financial Investigator is to provide an opinion in relation

       to the following request made to me from Juliet McFarlane in her memo

       dated 15 November 2007 at (POL00049154):




                                   Page 43 of 78
                                                                                          WITN08150100
                                                                                        WITNO8150100




         " Ged Could you let me have your views as to confiscation in this matter,

         and if appropriate the prospect of recovery under such an order. A copy

         of the Indictment is attached. "



107. In my response to Juliet dated 16 November 2007 (found within

      (POL00049168) I summarise my opinion as followed —

      "My opinion

      1. Charge her with theft and go to confiscation, or

      2. Accept a plea of false accounting and go to confiscation

      3. If she pays us before we can always draw back out of the case but we

      need minimum £40,201.58"




108. I also I state in that email that "I am never confident with false accounting

      charges in relation to recovery under POCA 2002 and the theft charges

      makes life so much easier. "




109. This illustrates that my opinion was that pursuing a charge of theft and going

      to confiscation would be the more logical option in this case. The basis for

      this view is that whilst it is not impossible, it is extremely difficult to determine

      the benefit received by a defendant as a result of committing the crime of

      false accounting. Confiscation is effectively the recovery of financial loss

      suffered by the POL as a result of criminal conduct. The value of such loss

      is determined by the financial benefit received by the offender in committing



                                    Page 44 of 78
                                                                                        WITN08150100
                                                                                      WITNO8150100




       such crime. In cases of theft it is much easier to determine the benefit as

       the figure is clear cut — it is the physical amount they have stolen and any

       interest accrued on that value in line with Retail Price Index. It is not as clear

       cut with false accounting because you would need to agree how the

       offender benefitted and in what amount. If it hadn't been found that they had

       stolen money, what was the total of their financial gain? This was a very

       difficult answer to determine.




110.   Clearly my opinion did not determine the charging decision as the Criminal

       Law Team decided to drop the charge of theft and pursue false accounting

       charges anyway. I had no input in relation to the decision to drop the theft

       charge against Ms Hamilton. Such decision could only be made by the

       Criminal Law Team.




111.   I do not remember whether I provided any further advice in respect of the

       confiscation further to that contained in my email at (POL00049168). I also

       cannot remember if I had any further involvement at all, nor what sources

       of information I considered if I did.




112.   From reviewing the closure report emailed on 10 September 2007 at

       (POL00049025), the memo dated 6 February 2008 at (POL00049535)and

       the memo dated 18 February 2008 at (POL00052733), I can see that the

       case was concluded by way of a compensation order only and Ms Hamilton


                                    Page 45 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITN08150100




       re-paid the loss via cheque to the Post Office in the sum of £36,644.89. I

       have no direct recollection of what my view of this result in the case against

       Ms Hamilton would have been at the time, however, I believe that it is likely

       that I would have considered it a successful recovery of loss, and therefore

       a good result for the POL.




113.   Unfortunately I do not have any recollection of what my view was in relation

       to the decision to drop the theft charge. All I am able to confirm is that I

       believed it was usually more difficult to pursue confiscation in false

       accounting offences. It appears here however, that only compensation was

       Pursued.




114.   I have no recollection of the process in which the alleged loss was recovered

       in this particular case. I can only rely on the documents provided to me,

       which illustrates that the loss was paid back via a cheque from Ms

       Hamilton's solicitors.




115.   I am able to comment in more general terms on the process by which

       alleged losses were recovered. Where a confiscation order was obtained

       from the court, the financial assets that got confiscated from a defendant

       would be paid into the central account of a unit operated by the ARA. There

       were various ARA units around the country. I believe the ARA would then

       use the confiscated assets to drive training and further POCA confiscations.

       However, where the POL had suffered a loss, it would be requested that a


                                    Page 46 of 78
                                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




         compensation order was attached to the confiscation order for the same

         amount, (which was effectively for the same actual money, there was no

         double jeopardy in this) so that the confiscated assets could be forwarded

         on to the POL as a form of compensation once it was confiscated.




  116.   I have been asked what my view is of how the proceedings against

         Josephine Hamilton were conducted by POL. If this question relates to the

         criminal proceedings which led to a conviction, I do not feel that I can

         provide any view on this as I was not involved in the substance of those

         proceedings. I also do not feel that I can provide any valuable viewpoint on

         the confiscation proceedings as I simply do not remember the case, nor do

         I remember if I had any further involvement beyond providing my opinion in

         my email dated 16 November 2007.




  117.   I have also been asked to consider the Judgment of the Court of Appeal in

         Josephine Hamilton & Others v Post Office Limited [2021 EWCA Grim 577

         at (POL00113278) and provide my reflections on the way the investigation

         and prosecution of Ms Hamilton was conducted by the POL. Again, I do not

         feel like I can provide a valuable reflection on this as I was not involved in

         the substance Criminal Proceedings.




Prosecution of Janet Skinner


  118.   I confirm that I have reviewed all the following documents that were



                                    Page 47 of 78
                                                                                     WITN08150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




       provided in relation to the prosecution of Janet Skinner:

                  i) memo dated 25 September 2007 at [POL00049061]


                  ii) memo dated 9 July 2008 at [POL00049840]


                  iii) memo dated 28 July 2008 at [POL00049916].


                  iv) memo of 19 August 2008 at [POL00049946


                  v) the memo dated 20 August 2008 at [POL00049976]


                  vi) memo dated 1 September 2008 at [POL00050022].




119.   Unfortunately, I do not have any direct recollection of this case and therefore

       I can only rely on what is contained in the documents provided to me. From

       a review of the memo dated 25 September 2007 at (POL00049061), I

       believe that the financial investigations in this case were dealt with by Mick

       Matthews all the way through to the decision of the Criminal Law Team to

       pursue confiscation proceedings. I believe I am simply copied in to this

       memo so that the Financial Investigation Unit were updated on matters as I

       believe Mick had already left by this point. It appears that I had to see the

       final stages of the matter through in relation to obtaining the confiscation

       order, and receiving the confiscated funds.




120.   I do not recall having any input or providing Mick with any assistance in

       relation to any financial investigations that he carried out in this matter. I

       also had no input in relation to any criminal investigations that led to the

       prosecution, carried out by the Security Team.


                                   Page 48 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




121.   Unfortunately, I cannot recall the report sent by Ms McFarlane, referred to

       in the memo dated 9 July 2008 at (POL00049840). I can see that I am

       copied in to the memos dated 9 July 2008 (POL00049841) and 28 July 2008

       (POL00049916) in relation to my required attendance at court, however, I

       do not recall in what capacity I attended. I believe that I would have had to

       go in place of Mick as he had already left his position in the Financial

       Investigation Unit by the time of the hearing. I have no recollection of

       whether counsel contacted me on the date of the hearing.




122.   I can see from the memo dated 19 August 2008 at (POL00049946) that the

       Criminal Law team confirmed to me that confiscated funds were lodged with

       the North East unit, and that such funds would be forwarded on to the POL.

       This illustrates the standard process of recovery via an ARA confiscation

       unit, as described earlier in this statement.




123.   I have been asked what my view is of how the proceedings against Janet

       Skinner were conducted by POL. If this question relates to the criminal

       proceedings which led to a conviction, I do not feel that I can provide any

       view on this as I was not involved in the substance of those proceedings. I

       also do not feel that I can provide any valuable viewpoint on the confiscation

       proceedings as I simply do not remember the case, and it appears that I

       only stepped in to tie up matters once Mick had left.




                                   Page 49 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




Prosecution of Susan Rudkin



  124.   I confirm that I have reviewed all the following documents that were

         provided in relation to the prosecution of Susan Rudkin:

               i) the memo from Jarnail Singh dated 18 November 2008 at

                   [POL00050392]


               ii) My witness statement at [POL00050040]


               iii) the investigation report at [POL00046485]

               iv) the memo dated 26 March 2009 at [POL00124636]


               v) the case closure report at [POL00046555],


               vi) the memo dated 6 May 2009 at [POL00124632],


               vii) memo dated 6 July 2009 at [POL00124651]


               viii)the s. 16 statement at [POL00124659]


               ix) the Land Registry form at [POL00124653]


               x) the draft penal notice at [POL00124660]


               xi) the memo dated 26 August 2009 at [POL00124641].


               xii) the   annotated    email   chain   dated    September   2008    at

                   [POL00061322].




  125.   The memo from Jarnail Singh dated 18 November 2008 at (POL00050392)

         appears to relate to the case of Seema Misra, and therefore it does not



                                      Page 50 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




       assist me with my recollection of the case involving Susan Rudkin I note

       that the Request does not ask any questions in relation to Seema Misra — I

       would like to flag to the Inquiry that in any event, I have no recollection of

       that case.




126.   I also do not remember the case of Susan Rudkin in great detail and have

       had to rely heavily on the documents provided to me. Prior to reading those

       documents I only had a vague recollection of Susan Rudkin and her

       husband who was the SPM and I could remember that I carried out the

       financial investigations into Mrs Rudkin's financial affairs in respect of the

       recovery under POCA 2002.




127.   I had no involvement in the criminal investigations carried out prior to the

       criminal prosecution being brought. I can see from paragraph 6 of my

       undated statement in support of an application for a restraint order against

       Mrs Rudkin at (POL00050040), that I had no knowledge of what the case

       concerned until I was informed by Mike Wilcox, the officer in charge of the

       criminal investigation. I have no recollection of when Mike Wilcox provided

       me with this information.




128.   It is clear from my statement at (POL00050040) that Mrs Rudkin admitted

       to actions of false accounting and theft of POL money during an interview

       under caution with the investigation officers on 20 August 2008. Due to such

       admission, I would have been able to begin financial investigations into her


                                   Page 51 of 78
                                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




       financial affairs prior to a conviction being obtained. This explains why I took

       the actions described in paragraphs 8 — 14 of my statement, whilst criminal

       investigations were ongoing.




129.   In terms of providing a detailed account of matters, including any

       investigations I undertook and the sources of information I considered, I

       have to defer entirely to the evidence and information contained in the

       above-mentioned documents and provided in relation to this prosecution.

       This is because I had no direct involvement in the criminal investigation, and

       I have no direct memory of the specific actions I carried out during my

       financial investigations.




130.   In the email chain at (POL00061322) I can see that I state that Mrs Rudkin

       had a criminal lifestyle for the purposes of the POCA 2002. I believe I would

       have simply come to this conclusion in line with the interpretation of criminal

       lifestyle' provided under POCA. I set this justification and reasoning out in

       my email immediately after stating Mrs Rudkin had a criminal lifestyle. The

       application of this interpretation is also provided in my Section 16

       Statement, which explains that committing an offence over a period of at

       least six months and benefitting from such offence in total of not less than

       £5000 fell into such interpretation.




131.   From reading the email chain at (POL00061322) the Inquiry will see that

       although Mrs Rudkin had not yet been prosecuted by this point, she had


                                   Page 52 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




       admitted to false accounting to cover up losses experienced over a period

       exceeding 2 years, and she had admitted to theft through taking cash from

       the POL to cover general bills. An audit carried out at the branch on 20th

       August 2008 found that such actions led to a shortage in the Post Office

       accounts of £43,856.89. It is clear, therefore, that Mrs Rudkin's actions

       fulfilled the requirements for her to be considered to be living a `criminal

       lifestyle' under POCA, in line with the interpretation that POCA provides.




132.   I do not believe that there were any consequences as such to this

       conclusion I drew. I was simply providing my opinion to the Criminal Law

       Team based on my financial investigations carried out and application of

       POCA. I do not know whether my opinion had any influence on the Criminal

       Law team's approval to proceed with pursuing an application for restraint.




133.   I cannot remember directly, but from a review of the documents I believe

       that it was me who made the decision that an application for a restraint order

       was appropriate in this case. However, my reasoning would have had to be

       considered by a Senior Authorising Officer and their authorisation would

       have to ultimately be approved by the Criminal Law team. I was a Senior

       Authorising Officer myself at this time, but this did not mean I could

       authorise my own decisions — I would have had to seek authorisation from

       another Senior Authorising Officer, and the email chain at (POL00061322)

       illustrates that I consulted Dave Pardoe in this case.




                                  Page 53 of 78
                                                                                      WITNO8150100
                                                                                    WITN08150100




134.   The decision to make an application for a restraint order was not taken

       lightly and it most definitely would not have been applied for in every case.

       An application for restraint was only made when there was a real risk of an

       SPM dissipating assets prior to a confiscation and compensation order

       being obtained from the court. For example, this risk might be considered if

       during financial investigations evidence came to light that an SPM had

       misinformed us about the existence of assets. Further to this, there was a

       likelihood of suspects entering into receivership and inconsequenceassets

       being available to satisfy any future confiscation order set. In this scenario,

       it would be vital to obtain a restraint order first, as once receivership had

       been entered in to, you could no longer make and application for a restraint

       order. The decision to make an application for a restraint order was always

       carefully measured, and we had to log our reasoning for pursuing the route

       of restraint in a thought process log. We would have to discuss this log with

       a Senior Appropriate Officer before advice was given to the Criminal Law

       Team, and such log was available for inspection by the ARA at any point.




135.   Whenever confirmation was provided from the Criminal Law Team that an

       application for restraint was being pursued, it would then be the role of the

       individual with conduct of the financial investigations to draft and submit that

       application statement in support for the court. Proformas for such statement

       would be available from the ARA.




                                   Page 54 of 78
                                                                                    WITN08150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




136.   I believe the reason why the Financial Investigator assumed this role and

       not the Criminal Law Team is because they were better placed to draft the

       statement in support, having directly carried out the financial investigations

       to which the statement would refer. As such, I believe that no one would

       have asked me to write my statement in support at (POL00050040) — I

       would have just done it in line with standard practice once the Criminal Law

       Team confirmed that the application would go ahead. Unfortunately, I

       cannot remember when this was confirmed to me.




137.   From my recollection, some courts dealt with restraint application

       administratively. From a review of the documents I can see this application

       was being dealt with at Croydon Court. I believe that Croydon Court did

       require attendance when considering restraint applications, in which case it

       is likely that I did attend court in relation to the application for restraint

       against Mrs Rudkin. However, I do not have any direct recollection of

       attending.




138.   I have no recollection of considering the reasonableness of applying for a

       restraint order in respect of the robbery which took place at Ibstock Sub Post

       Office in 2006. I do not believe I ever considered this or applied for any

       application in relation to this.




139.   I note from my email dated 25 February 2009 at (POL00046513) to Jarnail

       A Singh (the principle lawyer on this case), that at this point I advised that


                                    Page 55 of 78
                                                                                       WITNO8150100
                                                                                     WITNO8150100




       a confiscation and compensation figure of £44,689.22 should be sought.

       This is clearly higher than the shortage of £43,894.15 in the POL accounts

       that was discovered. The reason I advise to seek this increased amount is

       because it accounts for the loss plus any increase of value to such loss

       when acquired as a benefit, in line with Retail Price Index. This was a

       calculation that I was required to carry out as part of my role as a Financial

       Investigator, and such calculation would have to be shown in the Section 16

       statement I produced in support of an application to the court for a

       confiscation order. I would like to flag to the Inquiry that my final calculation

       provided to the court in this matter can be found in paragraphs 9 to 10.1 of

       my Section 16 statement at (POL00124659). This calculation shows that

       the total benefit received was calculated to be much higher the stolen

       amount, however, the overall figure for recovery was negotiated down to

       only cover the theft amount.




140.   I have been asked to consider the memo dated 26 March 2009 at

       (POL00051248) and explain why was it necessary to pursue confiscation if

       Mr Rudkin was repaying the sum owed to POL. I believe that this would

       have simply been a belt and braces approach to ensure that the recovery

       could be enforced by the court in the event that such payments stopped.




141.   I have considered the documents at (POL00051371), (POL00052343),

       (P0L00051446),      (P0L00051792),       (POL00051800),       (P0L00052022),

       (POL00052072) , (POL00052308), (POL00052308), (POL00052349). I can



                                   Page 56 of 78
                                                                                       WITN08150100
                                                                                     WITNO8150100




       see from the documents provided to me that Mr Dove was Counsel in this

       case, but unfortunately I am unable to recall any discussions I may have

       had with him. I believe that it is likely that I did attend the confiscation

       hearing in this matter, but I do not remember any specific details of it. I defer

       entirely to the updates provided in relation to the progression of the matter,

       contained within these documents.




142.   It would have been considered necessary to apply for both a confiscation

       order and a compensation order for the same amount in this matter to

       ensure that the confiscated funds were forwarded to the POL by the relevant

       ARA unit as a form of compensation, as explained earlier in thisstatement.




143.   I do not feel that I am able to comment on the result of the criminal

       prosecution brought against Mrs Rudkin, as I had no direct involvement in

       it. In terms of the POCA proceedings in which I was directly involved in, I

       cannot recall what my view of the result would have been at the time.

       However, I believe it is likely that I would have felt that it was a successful

       result as we obtained an order that would achieve recovery of the financial

       loss faced by the POL, which was caused by a crime of theft that Mrs Rudkin

       had admitted to from the outset.




144.   I have reviewed the email chain from October 2009 at (POL00053389) and

       the email chain from January 2010 at (POL00060428). I do not have any



                                    Page 57 of 78
                                                                                  WITNO8150100
                                                                                WITNO8150100




       knowledge of the circumstances in which Mr Rudkin repaid the loss owed

       to POL as I was not involved in any arrangements concerning this. I can see

       from these documents that deductions from Mr Rudkin's salary of

       £1000 were made each month. I believe that these payments would have

       been offset against the confiscation order against Mrs Rudkin, but I have no

       knowledge of the circumstances in which that arrangement was made. It is

       likely that a member of the Personnel Department of the POL who dealt in

       SPM contracts would have been involved in bringing about such

       arrangement.




145.   I cannot remember the discussion I had with Contracts Advisor, Paul

       Williams, as referred to in (POL00053389). I believe the reason I would

       have advised Paul Williams that the deductions from Mr Rudkin's salary

       should continue is for the reasons set out in that email — Mr Rudkin had a

       Contract for Services which contained a clause regarding payment for

       losses, and as the confiscation order was made against Mrs Rudkin, then

       they should be treated individually as though they were agent and clerk.

       Form hindsight, I believe in providing this advice I would have also been

       considering the fact that the order needed to be met, and with the current

       arrangement in place it appeared it was on track to be met.




146.   I have considered the memo dated 23 February 2010 at (POL00054182)

       and can see that I have simply been copied in for information. The

       application for the extension of the confiscation order would have been



                                  Page 58 of 78
                                                                                       WITNO8150100
                                                                                     WITNO8150100




       made by Mrs Rudkin as a defendant either directly to the court or through

       her lawyers, therefore, I am unable to explain the circumstances in which

       such application was made.




147.   Following a review of the emails dated 16 August 2010 (POL00055170), I

       can see that I had already left the Financial Investigation Unit and any

       further conduct in this matter was handed over to Graham Ward. I do not

       recall having any involvement in the discussion about the appropriateness

       of a certificate of inadequacy, as referred to in this email chain.




148.   As far as I can remember, the circumstances in which a certificate of

       inadequacy would be considered appropriate was when the terms of a

       confiscation order could no longer be met, for example, the equity from an

       asset was no longer realisable as it had changed in value.




149.   From a review of the documents provided to me and in considering the case

       from hindsight, I do not think that anything should have been done differently

       from a Financial Investigation standpoint. I believe that all the correct

       procedures were followed in the POCA proceedings and I feel comfortable

       that in the end, the POL simply achieved a resolution that would recover the

       financial loss suffered in relation to an offence which the defendant admitted

       to. In terms of the criminal prosecution itself, I do not feel that I can provide

       any valuable comment in relation to whether the case should have been

       conducted differently, as I had no direct involvement.


                                    Page 59 of 78
                                                                                             WITNO8150100
                                                                                          WITNO8150100




 Prosecution of Mr Julian Wilson




        150.   I confirm that I have reviewed all the following documents that were provided

               in relation to the prosecution of Julian Wilson:

                      i) report dated 2 December 2008 at [POL00119142]


                      ii) witness statement of Graham Ward dated 16 December 2008 at

                         [POL00064718_001]


                      iii) the antecedents document at [POL00051185]


                      iv) emails from January 2009 at [POL00050726]


                      v) memo dated 9 February 2009 at [POL00050878]


                      vi) memo dated 28 May 2009 at [POL00051720]


                      vii) Advice at [POL00119150]


viii)                    memo dated 15 July 2009 at [POL00052047].




        151.   I do not have any direct recollection of this case, therefore, I can only rely

               on what is contained in the documents provided to me. From a review of the

               witness statement of Graham Ward dated 16 December 2008 at

               (POL00064718_001) it is clear that Graham had conduct of this case and

               as per paragraph 4 of that statement, I was the Senior Authorising Officer.




        152.   The documents indicate that I did not carry out any investigations into the


                                           Page 60 of 78
                                                                                      WITNO8150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




       financial affairs of Mr Wilson. These investigations would have been done

       by Graham, and any involvement I had would have only been to review and

       authorise his work.




153.   As already explained, it was the role of a Senior Authorising Officer (also

       referred to as a `supervising officer' in the Request) to go through a financial

       investigator's work and to provide authorisation if it was believed that the

       findings and reasoning of the investigator justified taking steps to advise the

       Criminal Law Team to pursue an application for restraint and or confiscation.

       I remember on various occasions acting as a Senior Authorisation Officer,

       although I cannot recall any specific cases, where I turned cases back to

       Financial Investigators if I believed they had not explored all possible routes

       of enquiry in order to justify their reasoning to pursue restraint or

       confiscation.




154.   I cannot recall directly every step I took in authorising the application for

       restraint in this case, but I imagine Graham would have spoken to me briefly

       about the case background, presented his findings to me and discussed his

       reasons for why he believed an application for restraint should be pursued.

       It may have been the case that I agreed with his reasoning straight away

       and provided authorisation for his work, or I could have asked him to make

       further enquiries into matters. Unfortunately, I do not remember.




155.   From reviewing the emails from January 2009 at (POL00050726) and the


                                   Page 61 of 78
                                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                                 WITNO8150100




       memo dated 9 February 2009 at (POL00050878). I can see that Graham

       made an application for restraint, and following the order being made for

       restraint the defence wished to vary the terms of the order. It appears that

       Graham had discussed the variation order with me as his Senior Authorising

       Officer to check that it was ok. It would usually be the Defendant in a case

       who would seek to vary a restraint order. I cannot remember specific

       circumstances when this would happen, but clearly in this matter it was to

       enable Mr Wilson to use two accounts that were restrained.




156.   I would like to flag that the advice note of Counsel referred to as document

       (POL0011915) appears to be another copy of the memo from Mr Singh

       dated 28 May 2009 at (P0L00051720). Such memo refers to the advice

       note and is clearly directed to Gary Thomas as the Investigation Manger in

       the criminal proceedings. It is clear that criminal proceedings are still

       ongoing as the subject matter of the memo relates to the Plea and Case

       Management hearing. I believe that myself and Graham are copied in simply

       to receive background information, in the event the case would be

       forwarded to the Financial Investigation Unit to assist with any further POCA

       proceedings following a conviction. As such, neither myself or Graham

       would have responded to Mr Singh's memo and Counsel's advice.




157.   From my reading of the memo dated 15 July 2009 at (POL00052047), it

       appears that Mr Singh has received a letter to inform that there has been a

       registration of a re-mortgage against Mr and Mrs Wilson's property, and he

                                  Page 62 of 78
                                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




         is forwarding this information to Graham and myself. I do not have any

         knowledge of who decided to register that charge, and I can't recall having

         any involvement in such registration. It is possible that this was forwarded

         by Mr Singh to assist Graham, as Graham may have already started

         investigating into Mr Wilson's financial affairs by this point. I believe this

         because the memo shows that a sentencing hearing was arranged for 3rd

         August 2009, which indicates that a conviction was obtained.




  158.   I have been asked what my view is of how the proceedings against Julian

         Wilson were conducted by POL. If this question relates to the criminal

         proceedings which led to a conviction, I do not feel that I can provide any

         view on this as I was not involved in the substance of those proceedings. I

         also do not feel that I can provide any valuable viewpoint on the POCA

         proceedings as I have no direct recollection of the case and from review of

         the documents provided to me, it was Graham who carried out the

         investigation into Mr Wilson's financial affairs.



Prosecution of Mr Peter Holmes



  159.   I confirm that I have reviewed all the following documents that were

         provided in relation to the prosecution of Peter Holmes:




                i) the memo dated 28 April 2009 at [POL00051356]

                ii) emails   dated   30    January    2009   at   [POL00050817]     and

                   [POL00050819]

                                     Page 63 of 78
                                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                                  WITNO8150100




              iii) memo dated 8 September 2009 at [POL00052429].


              iv) emails dated 30 March 2010 at [POL00054543].




160.   I would like to flag that the memo dated 28 April 2009 at (POL00051356)

       relates to the prosecution of Mr and Mrs Wilson, therefore, it does not assist

       me with my recollection of the case involving Mr Holmes. It also does not

       assist me with elaborating on my responses in relation to the Prosecution

       of Mr Wilson above.




161.   I do not remember the specific facts of the case against Peter Holmes in

       great detail but from reviewing the other documents provided in connection

       with this prosecution, it appears that I was Financial Investigator with

       conduct of the matter. Before reviewing the documents I did vaguely recall

       that this was a matter in which financial investigations ceased early on. This

       is because it involved a false accounting charge against an employee of an

       SPM and not an SPM themselves. It would have been almost impossible to

       attribute a financial benefit received by an employee of an SPM through

       their actions of false accounting, so confiscation proceedings were

       withdrawn. My recollection of this was confirmed when reviewing the emails

       dated 30 March 2010 at (POL00054543).




162.   I have reviewed the emails dated 30 January 2009 at (POL00050817) and

       (POL00050819) and I am not entirely sure what the checks I authorised

       were. It could have been the very early standard credit searches to retrieve

                                  Page 64 of 78
                                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                                    WITNO8150100




       information about bank and credit accounts held in the parties' names and

       whether there were any CCJs issued against them, but I can't say for certain

       as it is not clear from such emails.




163.   I had no input into any decision made in relation to the plea being offered,

       as referred to in the memo dated 8 September 2009 at (POL00052429).

       This would have been a consideration for the Criminal Law Team and I

       believe Ms McFarlane is just updating me on matters. Unfortunately I cannot

       remember any conversations I had with Ms McFarlane about this case and

       I cannot recall why a copy of the accountant's report submitted by the

       defence was sent to me by Ms McFarlane to consider. I can only assume

       that Mr Holmes' legal team were using the document in argument of his

       defence, and with it being a document containing financial information, it

       was forwarded to me as part of the Financial Investigation Unit.




164.   I believe that the only involvement I had in the confiscation process before

       it was withdrawn was in my capacity as the Financial Investigator, looking

       into the financial affairs of the parties and gathering evidence to see if there

       was enough to warrant confiscation proceedings. The reason as to why I

       advised on withdrawing confiscation proceedings in this case is set out

       clearly by myself within the emails dated 30 March 2010 at (POL00054543)

       and I have expanded on this in paragraph 161 above. Once confiscation

       proceedings were withdrawn, I would have had no further involvement in

       the case, including in any civil proceedings or recovery though the SPMs



                                   Page 65 of 78
                                                                                       WITNO8150100
                                                                                   WITN08150100




         contract.




  165.   I have been asked what my view is of how the proceedings against Peter

         Homes were conducted by POL. If this question relates to the criminal

         proceedings which led to a conviction, I do not feel that I can provide any

         view on this as I was not involved in the substance of those proceedings. I

         also do not feel that I can provide any valuable view on the POCA

         proceedings as I do no directly recall the case in great detail, and in any

         event, confiscation proceedings were ultimately withdrawn.




Knowledge of Was. errors and defects in the Horizon system



  166.   I was not aware of any concerns regarding the robustness of the Horizon IT

         system during my entire career within the POL. As far as I was aware, the

         system operated as was expected.




  167.   As explained earlier in this statement, whenever criminal proceedings were

         pursued following an investigation carried out by the Security Team, I recall

         that one of the witnesses on the list to provide evidence in such proceedings

         would be a Fujitsu Manager. I believe that they would be required to confirm

         whether or not the Horizon data obtained was reliable at the time in which

         a shortage was discovered on the system. If I had ever been made aware

         that there was a potential problem with the robustness of the Horizon IT

         system, I would have raised this with senior colleagues and flagged to them



                                    Page 66 of 78
                                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                                   WITNO8150100




       that in my opinion any criminal investigation would need to cease.



Other Matters



168.   Other than what I have already provided in my statement above, I have no

       further reflections on these matters, or on any other matters that are relevant

       to the Inquiry's Term of Reference.



169.   There are also no other matters that I wish to bring to the attention of the

       Chair of the Inquiry.




Statement of Truth

  eliev_e_.the._eszotent_of

Signed                        G
Dated 17 October 2023




                                   Page 67 of 78
                                                                                        WITNO8150100
                                                                                      WITN08150100




                 Index to First Witness Statement of Gerald Harbinson



No         URN                      Document Description                Control Number


     1.    POL00030578              S02 Royal Mail Group Criminal       POL-0027060
                                    Investigation and Prosecution
                                    Policy December 2007
     2.    POLOO104812              Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal       POL-0080444
                                    Investigation and Prosecution
                                    Policy
     3.    POL00104806              Royal Mail Group Security —         POL-0080438
                                    Procedures and Standards:
                                    Standards of behaviour and
                                    complaints procedure No.10-X
                                    v2
     4.    POL00031004              RMG Policy - Crime and              POL-0027486
                                    Investigation (S2) - version 3.0

     5.    POL00031003              Royal Mail Group Crime and          POL-0027485
                                    Investigation Policy v1.1
                                    October 2009
     6.    POL00084977              Post Office, Former SPM End         POL-0082035
                                    to End Debt Review v.0.5

     7.    POL00030580              Post Office Ltd - Security          POL-0027062
                                    Policy: Fraud Investigation and
                                    Prosecution Policy v2
     8.    POL00030579              Post Office Ltd Financial           POL-0027061
                                    Investigation Policy, May 2010

     9.    POL00026573              RMG Procedures & Standards
                                    - Proceeds of Crime Act 2002        POL-0023214
                                    & Financial Investigations doc
                                    9.1 V1
     10.   POL00104857              Royal Mail Group Security           POL-0080489
                                    Procedures & Standards:
                                    Initiating Investigations doc 2.1
     11.   POL00031008              RMG Ltd Criminal                    POL-0027490
                                    Investigation and Prosecution
                                    Policy v1.1 November 2010
     12.   POL00104853              Post Office's Financial             POL-0080485
                                    Investigation Policy

     13.   POLOO104855              Post Office Ltd. Anti-Fraud         POL-0080487
                                    Policy




                                     Page 68 of 78
                                                                     WITN08150100
                                                                   WITNO8150100




14.   POL00030786   Royal Mail Group Policy -        POL-0027268
                    Crime and Investigation (S2)
                    v3 effective from April 2011,
                    owner Tony March, Group
                    Security Director
15.   POL00104929   Post Office Limited: Internal    POL-0080561
                    Protocol for Criminal
                    Investigation and Enforcement
                    (with flowchart)
16.   POL00105226   Undated Appendix 1 - POL         POL-0080851
                    Criminal Investigations and
                    Enforcement Procedure
                    (flowchart)

17.   POL00030602   POL: Criminal Enforcement        POL-0027084
                    and Prosecution Policy

18.   POL00031005   Conduct of Criminal
                    Investigation Policy for the     POL-0027487
                    Post Office. (Version 0.2)
19.   POL00027863   Conduct of Criminal              POL-0024504
                    Investigations Policy v0.3

20.   POL00030902   Final Draft of the Post Office   POL-0027384
                    Conduct of Criminal
                    Investigation Policy
21.   POL00084989   POL Financial Investigation      POL-0082047
                    Unit Business Process
                    Documentation - Security &
                    Investigation Debt Process
                    text
22.   POL00121639   Post Office "Financial           POL-0127901
                    Investigations Partnership for
                    Recovery Presentation" by
                    Ged Harbinson and Graham
                    Ward
23.   POL00121640   Financial Investigations         POL-0127902
                    Partnership for Recovery
                    Presentation on Compliance
24.   POL00104747   Investigation Policy: Casework   POL-0080387
                    Management (England &
                    Wales) v1.0
25.   POL00104777   Investigation Policy: Casework   POL-0080417
                    Management (England &
                    Wales) v4.0
26.   POL00121569   Post Office Investigation team   POL-0127832
                    - compliance - Guide to the
                    Preparation and Layout of


                    Page 69 of 78
                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                   WITNO8150100




                    Investigation Red Label Case
                    Files - Offender reports &
                    Discipline reports.
27.   POL00121570   POL Investigation Team           POL-0127833
                    Compliance - Guide to the
                    Preparation and Layout of
                    Investigation Red Label Case
                    Files prepared by Ged
                    Harbinson
28.   POL00121582   Post Office Ltd Investigation    POL-0127845
                    Team Compliance Guide to the
                    Preparation and Layout of
                    Investigation Non-Red Label
                    Case Files
29.   POL00121581   Post Office Ltd Investigation    POL-0127844
                    Team Compliance Guide to the
                    Preparation and Layout of
                    Investigation Non-Red Label
                    Case Files. Case File Reports
                    and Case Closure Report
30.   POL00118104   Appendix 6- Identification       VIS00012693
                    codes (undated - date taken
                    from parent email)
31.   POL00047756   Memo from J A McFarlane to       POL-0044235
                    Investigation Team Post Office
                    Limited re: Regina v Tahir
                    Mahmood, Birmingham Crown
                    Court Sentence - 12th
                    December 2005 Case No:
                    0506/0061
32.   POL00047799   Letter from Ged Harbinson,       POL-0044278
                    Investigation Manager Post
                    Office Ltd to Lloyds Bank PLC,
                    Court Production Order Unit.
33.   POL00047817   Letter from Ged Harbinson        POL-0044296
                    Investigation Manager Post
                    Office Ltd to Susan at Land
                    Registry Coventry.
34.   POL00047825   Tahir Mahmood case study:        POL-0044304
                    Letter from Ged Harbinson to
                    Courtney Weston at Allied
                    Dunbar RE: DPA section 29 -
                    investigation proceeds of
                    crime - request for policy
                    holder and payment details
35.   POL00047838   Letter from Ged Harbinson to     POL-0044317
                    Churchill Insurance FAO.
                    Counter Fraud Services re:


                    Page 70 of 78
                                                                           WITNO8150100
                                                                         WITNO8150100




                        DATA Protection Act 1998
                        Section 29.

36.   POL00044858       Request for financial details of   POL-0041337
                        Tahir Mahmood from Inland
                        Revenue.
37.   POL00047840       Confidential Enquiry from Ged      POL-0044319
                        Harbinson, Post Office
                        Investigation Manager to Pat
                        Calouri Intelligence Office
                        Counter Fraud Services
                        Churchill Court MP30.
38.   POL00047841       Letter from Ged Harbinson to       POL-0044320
                        Lloyds Bank PLC re: Your Ref:
                        30929900969160 Our ref:
                        POLTD/0506/0061
39.   POL00047826       Tahir Mahmood case study:          POL-0044305
                        Letter from Ged Harbinson to
                        Sharon McIntyre at Scottish
                        Widows REL DPA section 29 -
                        investigation of proceeds of
                        crime - request for policy
                        holder and payment details for
                        account
40.   POL00048180       Hughie Noel Thomas Case            POL-0044659
                        Study: Internal PO Memo from
                        J A McFarlane to Ged
                        Harbinson requesting whether
                        they are proceeding with
                        confiscation in R v Hughie. -
                        Re Regine v Hughie Noel
                        Thomas
41.   POL00048229       Letter from Phil Taylor to         POL-0044708
                        Investigation Team Post Office
                        Limited and Diane Matthews re
                        Regina v Hughie Noel
                        Thomas, Caernarfon Crown
                        Court. POLTD/0506/0401.
42.   POL00049024       Memo from Juliet McFarlane to      POL-0045503
                        Ged Harbinson re Regina v
                        Hughie Noel Thomas.
                        POLTD/0506/0401.
43.   POL00069056_007   Email chain from Ged               POL-0065535_007
                        Harbinson to Clive Burton -
                        attached Letter from
                        Insolvency Service to POL re
                        Hughie Noel Thomas -
                        Gaerwen PO (Branch Code
                        160/604) POLTD/05/06/0401.


                        Page 71 of 78
                                                                     WITNO8150100
                                                                   WITN08150100




44.   POL00044917   Email from Mick F Matthews to    POL-0041396
                    Ged Harbinson, cc'd Paul
                    Dann, Clive Burton and others
                    re: HUGHIE NOEL THOMAS -
                    SUSPENDED POSTMASTER
                    GAERWEN POST OFFICE -
                    BRANCH CODE: 160/604Q
45.   POL00047903   Letter from Graham Brander,      POL-0044382
                    Investigation Manager to Ged
                    Harbinson, Investigation Team
                    Compliance Manager.
46.   POL00047945   Compliance Case Review           POL-0044424
                    Report from Ged Harbinson to
                    Graham Brander.
47.   POL00048309   Memo from Juliet McFarlane to    POL-0044788
                    Investigations Team Post
                    Office Limited, re Royal Mail
                    Group plc v Josephine
                    Hamilton Aldershot
                    Magistrates Court.
                    POLTD/0506/0685.


48.   POL00048454   Memo from J McFarlane to         POL-0044933
                    Investigation Team Post Office
                    Limited, RE: service of
                    committal papers (R v.
                    Hamilton)
49.   POL00049083   Email from Graham Brander to     POL-0045562
                    Jennifer Andrews, Juliet
                    McFarlane, Dave Pardoe and
                    others re: Fw: Hamilton
50.   POL00049154   Josephine Hamilton Case          POL-0045633
                    Study: Memo from Juliet
                    McFarlane to POL
                    Investigation Team and others
                    re: Regina v Josephine
                    Hamilton (South Warnborough)
                    Winchester Crown Court
                    Mention - 19th November 2007
                    (POLTD/0506/0685)


51.   POL00044388   Josephine Hamilton case          POL-0040867
                    study: Memorandum from Miss
                    J A McFarlane to Investigation
                    Team Post Office Limited, cc
                    Graham Brander, Ged
                    Harbinson and Dave Pardoe
                    RE: R v Josephine Hamilton



                    Page 72 of 78
                                                                      WITNO8150100
                                                                    WITNO8150100




                    mentions hearing 19/11/2007 -
                    update after hearing

52.   POL00049168   Email from Graham Brander to      POL-0045647
                    Juliet McFarlane, Ged
                    Harbinson and Paul Dawkins
                    re Josephine Hamilton.
                    POLTD/0506/0685.
53.   POL00049025   Email from Graham Brander to      POL-0045504
                    Nigel Allen re Case Closure
                    Reporting South Wamborough.
54.   POL00049535   Josephine Hamilton case           POL-0046014
                    study: [Internal Memo from
                    Ged Harbinson to Dave
                    Pardoe re: Investigation Ref: -
                    POLTD/506/0685 - OFFICE
                    South Warnborough /
                    SUSPECT NAME Josephine
                    Hamilton]
55.   POL00052733   Josephine Hamilton Case           POL-0049212
                    Study: Memo from Phil Taylor
                    to POL Investigation Team Re
                    Regina v Josephine Hamilton -
                    Winchester Crown Court 4th
                    February 2008
56.   POL00113278   Approved Judgment between         POL-0110657
                    Josephine Hamilton & Others
                    and Post Office Limited
57.   POL00049061   Janet Skinner case study:         POL-0045540
                    Memo from Juliet McFarlane to
                    Investigation Team POL cc
                    Geb Harbinson re R v Janet
                    Louise Skinner Confiscation
                    Hearing - enclosing
                    confiscation order and minute
58.   POL00049840   Memo from Ms McFarlane to         POL-0046319
                    Fraud Team Post Office Ltd re
                    R v Janet Louise Skinner
59.   POL00049916   Janet Skinner: [Memo from         POL-0046395
                    J.A. McFarlane to Fraud Team
                    Post Office Limited cc: Ged
                    Harbinson re: Regina v Janet
                    Louise Skinner Hull Icrown
                    Court - Case No:
                    POLTD/0607/0108]
60.   POL00049946   Memorandum from Juliet            POL-0046425
                    McFarlane to Fraud Team Post
                    Office Limited cc Ged
                    Harbinson. Re: "Regina v

                    Page 73 of 78
                                                                      WITN08150100
                                                                    WITNO8150100




                    Janet Louise Skinner Hull
                    Crown Court - 26th August
                    2008 Case No:
                    POLTD/0607/0108".
61.   POL00049976   Memorandum from Juliet            POL-0046455
                    McFarlane to Fraud Team Post
                    Office Limited cc Ged
                    Harbinson. Re: "Regina v
                    Janet Louise Skinner Hull
                    Crown Court - 26th August
                    2008 Case No:
                    POLTD/0507/0108".
62.   POL00050022   Memorandum from Juliet            POL-0046501
                    McFarlane to Fraud Team Post
                    Office Limited cc Ged
                    Harbinson. Re: "Regina v
                    Janet Louise Skinner Hull
                    Crown Court - 29th August
                    2008 Case No:
                    POLTD/0607/0108".
63.   POL00050392   Letter from Jarnail Singh,        POL-0046871
                    Senior Lawyer to Fraud Team
                    Post Office Limited c.c. Ged
                    Harbinson re: POST OFFICE
                    LIMITED v SEEMA MISRA
64,   POL00050040   Susan Rudkin case study:          POL-0046519
                    [Witness statement of Gerald
                    Harbinson in support of an
                    application for a restraint
                    order]
65.   POL00046485   Investigation report in re to     POL-0042964
                    theft/money laundering in re to
                    Susan Jane Rudkin
66.   POL00124636   Memo from Debbie Helszajn to      POL-0130917
                    Fraud Team Post Office
                    Limited, RE: Regina V Susan
                    Rudkin, Case No.
                    POLTD/0809/0101, plea
                    before venue
67.   POL00046555   Email from Mike Wilcox to Paul    POL-0043034
                    X Williams re Case Closure
                    Reporting for Susan Rudkin
68.   POL00124632   Memo from Rob Wilson to           POL-0130913
                    Fraud Team Post Office
                    Limited, cc Mike Wilcox, Ged
                    Harbinson and Press Office
                    RE: Regina v Susan Jane
                    Rudkin, Report on Final


                    Page 74 of 78
                                                                       WITNO8150100
                                                                     WITNO8150100




                    Result, Case No:
                    POLTD/0809/0101

69.   POL00124651   Susan Rudkin Crim Case             POL-0130932
                    Study - Letter from Ged
                    Harbinson to Jarnail Singh re
                    RUDKIN and Confiscation
                    (section 16 (3)statement
                    under POCA 2002
70.   POL00124659   Susan Rudkin Criminal Case         POL-0130940
                    Study: Statement of
                    Information relevant in
                    accordance with section 16 (3)
                    of POCA 2002 - R v Susan
                    Jane Rudkin, prepared by
                    Gerald Owen Harbinson
71.   POL00124653   Criminal Case Study: Susan         POL-0130934
                    Rudkin - Post Office Ltd Land
                    Registry Check Form for 118 —
                    120 High Street, IBSTOCK,
                    Leicester LE67 6LJ
72.   POL00124660   Susan Rudkin Case Study -          POL-0130941
                    Restraint Order Prohibiting
                    Disposal of assets in the
                    Matter of Susan Jane Rudkin
73.   POL00124641   Memo from Jarnail Singh to         POL-0130922
                    Fraud Team Post Office
                    Limited cc Mike Wilcox, Ged
                    Harbinson and Graham Ward
                    re R v Susan Rudkin -
                    Confiscation Order made
74.   POL00061322   Email chain from Ged               POL-0057801
                    Harbinson to Mike Wilcox cc
                    Graham Brander re: Fw:
                    Ibstock Sub Post Office (re
                    Restraint)
75.   POL00046513   Email from Ged Harbinson to        POL-0042992
                    Jamail Singh regarding
                    POLTD/0809/0101 Susan
                    Rudkin
76.   POL00051248   Memo from Debbie Helszajn to       POL-0047727
                    Fraud Team Post Office
                    Limited c.c. Mike Wilcox, Ged
                    Harbison and Press Office RE:
                    R v Rudkin (Guilty Plea to theft
                    on 23 March 2009)
77.   POL00051371   Letter from John H. Dove. to       POL-0047850
                    Mr. J. Singh re: Regina - v -
                    Susan Jane Rudkin.

                    Page 75 of 78
                                                                      WITNO8150100
                                                                    WITNO8150100




78.   POL00052343   Susan Rudkin case study: note     POL-0048822
                    of hearing - confiscation order
                    and compensation order
79.   POL00051446   Email from Ged Harbinson to       POL-0047925
                    Jarnail Singh re confiscation
                    timetable Susan Rudkin
80.   POL00051792   Email from Ged Harbinson to       POL-0048271
                    Jarnail Singh, Mike Wilcox.
                    Re: Regina v Susan Jane
                    Rudkin
81.   POL00051800   Letter from Jarnail Singh to      POL-0048279
                    Fraud Team Post Office Ltd re:
                    R -v- SUSAN JANE RUDKIN
82.   POL00052022   POST OFFICE LTD                   POL-0048501
                    CONFIDENTIAL;
                    INVESTIGATION,
                    PERSONNEL, Memo from
                    Jarnail Singh to Ged
                    Harbinson Re: RUDKIN and
                    Confiscation (section 16 (3)
                    statement under POCA 2002.
83.   POL00052072   Letter from Jarnail Singh to      POL-0048551
                    Post Office Security c.c. Mike
                    Wilcox and others re: REGINA
                    v SUSAN JANE RUDKIN
84.   POL00052308   Email from Marilyn Benjamin       POL-0048787
                    to Angela May on behalf of
                    Clerks Re: R v Susan Jane
                    Rudkin hearing.
85.   POL00052349   Memo Letter from Jarnail          POL-0048828
                    Singh to Mike Wilcox, Graham
                    Ward and Ged Harbinson. Re:
                    Regina v Susan Jane Rudkin
                    Stafford Crown Court
                    Confiscation Proceedings
                    under the Proceeds of crime
                    act - 19th August 2009
86.   POL00053389   Email from Rob Wilson to Paul     POL-0049868
                    Williams re Ibstock 223 227
                    solicitors letter
87.   POL00054182   Memo from Jarnail Singh to        POL-0050661
                    Post Office Security and Ged
                    Harbinson re: REGINA v
                    SUSAN JANE RUDKIN
                    STAFFORD CROWN COURT
                    SATISFACTION OF
                    CONFISCATION ORDER



                    Page 76 of 78
                                                                            WITNO8150100
                                                                          WITNO8150100




88.   POL00055170       Email chain from Marilyn            POL-0051649
                        Benjamin to Jarnail A Singh re:
                        FW: Regina v Susan Jane
                        Rudkin
89.   POL00119142       POST OFFICE LTD             POL-0119061
                        CONFIDENTIAL:
                        INVESTIGATION Julian Wilson
90.   POL00064718_001   Graham Ward's witness               POL-0061197_001
                        statement in support of an
                        application for a restraint order
                        (Section 41 Proceeds of Crime
                        Act 2002) against Julian
                        Wilson.
91.   POL00051185       Report into antecedents of Mr       POL-0047664
                        Julian Wilson, including details
                        of property owned.
92.   POL00050726       Julian Wilson case study:           POL-0047205
                        Email from Graham C Ward to
                        Jarnail A Singh, RE: FW: Post
                        Office Ltd v Julian Wilson
93.   POL00050878       Letter from Jarnail Singh to        POL-0047357
                        Fraud Team Post Office
                        Limited, Re: Post Office
                        Limited v Julian Wilson
94.   POL00051720       Letter from Jarnail Singh to        POL-0048199
                        Fraud Team Post Office
                        Limited c.c. Gary Thomas and
                        others re: REGINA v JULIAN
                        WILSON
95.   POL00119150       Memo from Jarnail Singh to          POL-0119069
                        Fraud Team Post Office
                        Limited cc Gary Thomas,
                        Graham Ward, and another re
                        Regina v Julian Wilson -
                        Enclosing counsel's advice
                        and copies of other documents
                        lodged with the Court
96.   POL00052047       Letter from Jarnail Singh to        POL-0048526
                        Fraud Team Post Office
                        Limited c.c. Graham Ward and
                        others re: REGINA v JULIAN
                        WILSON
97.   POL00064718_001   Graham Ward's witness               POL-0061197_001
                        statement in support of an
                        application for a restraint order
                        (Section 41 Proceeds of Crime
                        Act 2002) against Julian
                        Wilson.


                         Page 77 of 78
                                                                    WITNO8150100
                                                                  WITN08150100




98.   POL00051356   Letter from Jarnail Singh to    POL-0047835
                    Fraud Team Post Office
                    Limited re: POST OFFICE
                    LIMITED v JULIAN WILSON
                    AND KAREN WILSON
99.   POL00050817   Peter Holmes case study:        POL-0047296
                    Email from Ged Harbinson to
                    Intelligence Transactions and
                    Criminal Intelligence, RE:
                    Intelligence Check Request
100. POL00050819    Email from Ged Harbinson to     POL-0047298
                    Intelligence transactions and
                    criminal intelligence, RE:
                    Authorising checks of Peter
                    Holmes
101. POL00052429    Memo from J A McFarlane to      POL-0048908
                    Post Office Security, RE: R v
                    Peter Anthony Holmes,
                    Newcastle Upon Tyne Crown
                    Court, Mention, W/L W/C 14th
                    Sept 2009
102. POL00054543    Email from Andrew Daley to      POL-0051022
                    John Breeden re Holmes




                    Page 78 of 78
