WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Witness Name: GARETH IDRIS JENKINS
Statement No.: WITN00460200
Dated: 1 JUNE 2023

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF GARETH IDRIS JENKINS

|, Gareth Idris Jenkins, will say as follows:

1. | make this second witness statement in response to a request dated 31 August 2022
made under Rule 9 of the Inquiry Rules 2006 regarding Phase 3 of the Post Office
Horizon IT Inquiry. This Rule 9 request asked me 56 questions and provided me with
93 documents (over 3,000 pages in total) upon which to comment or to inform my

answers.

Introduction

2. On 6 February 2023 | signed a witness statement (WITN00460100) that answered
questions 1-15 and 53-56 in this Rule 9 request. | relied on my rights in respect of self-
incrimination to decline to answer questions 16-52. This was not an easy decision. |
took it upon the advice of my lawyers. | have always said that | wanted to assist the
Inquiry but | was concerned, at that stage, that | had little understanding of the
documentary material held by the Inquiry about phases 3 and 4 or the scope of the
parallel police investigation. | said that | would keep this decision under review with

the assistance of my lawyers.

3. Since my first witness statement was filed, | understand from my lawyers that many
thousands of documents have been disclosed on the Inquiry’s database. | understand
that, at the time of my finalising this statement, of the approximately 60,000 documents
currently on this database, a very considerable proportion are relevant to the period

of time that | worked on Horizon. Being able to see some of this material has proved

Page 1 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

important as many documents | have seen relate to matters that | had forgotten. |
understand that disclosure to the database, particularly in relation to phase 4, is
ongoing. My lawyers and | have tried to keep on top of this huge and evolving
documentary picture, as well as the written and oral evidence given to the Inquiry. As
a result, | reached the point whereby | felt that | had a better understanding of the
scope of phase 3 and the underlying documents and could better answer the
questions asked. | have therefore decided that | will waive my rights in relation to self-
incrimination for the purpose of answering the remaining questions in the Rule 9

request (questions 16 to 52). That is the purpose of this second witness statement.

But | also wish to make clear that an important factor in my decision to waive my rights
and give this second witness statement is because | have read and, in a number of
cases, watched the evidence that the SPMs have given to the Inquiry. | cannot begin
to understand the terrible things they suffered. They deserve a full explanation for
what went so disastrously wrong. For my part, | spent the best part of my day to day
working life focusing on the technical minutiae of a system which | considered, overall,
to have worked well and to have supported important public services. It has been very
difficult to have to confront the experiences which the SPMs have conveyed to the
Inquiry. | have been struck by the lack of effective support and assistance that they

were given.

| had originally been scheduled to appear before phase 3 of the Inquiry on 4 and 5
May 2023. On 20 April 2023, the Inquiry provided my lawyers with 27 further
documents and, on 27 April 2023, with 226 further documents. Together this
amounted to over 4,000 pages of new evidence (making over 7,000 pages of evidence
in total) that | might be asked about on 4 and 5 May 2023. My lawyers told me that a
large number of these documents had not previously been uploaded to the Inquiry’s
Relativity database. Because these documents were additional to those in the Rule 9
request, their relevance was not, in many instances, clear-cut or it was not clear what
in a very lengthy document | might need to specifically respond to. However, the
Inquiry did identify the page numbers in about 50 of those documents to direct me to
some of the relevant extracts. | am mentioning all of this because whilst | have done
my best to review this material, there are documents (for example, lengthy technical
documents that are relevant to many different issues) the exact relevance of which
are unclear. | have not tried in this statement to pre-empt or guess that but rather

responded to questions 16 to 52 in the Rule 9 request by reference to the 93

Page 2 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

documents that accompanied this request. Where | think | can, and it might be useful,
| have incorporated references to documents within the wider Rule 10 documents
given to me on 20 and 27 April 2023.

6. | am grateful to the Inquiry for giving me time to provide this statement with the
assistance of my lawyers and agreeing to postpone my phase 3 oral evidence so that
the Inquiry and Core Participants have sufficient time to consider it. | have used this
time to try to familiarise myself with the new documents | have been asked to consider
and | continue to do so. Given the volume of those new documents, | have also had

to rely on my lawyers to direct my attention to particular documents.

7. In my first statement at paragraphs 8 to 11, | expressed certain concerns about the
limitations of my memory and the incomplete nature of the available documentary
record. That | had forgotten certain issues or events has been borne out by my
consideration of the new documents. For example, | explained in my first statement
that my knowledge of bugs, errors and defects would have been based upon my being
allocated specific issues to respond to by third line support (or by my routing to them
to others in fourth line support). However, the new documents suggest that | had a
greater overview of the issues that arose during the pilot of Horizon Online than | had
remembered. | remain concerned that the complete documentary record is not always

available and refer to this below.

8. Before turning to questions 16-52 in the Rule 9 request, | would like to expand on two
matters raised in my first statement: (a) the EPOSS counter system, and (b) Project
Impact and the removal of the suspense account.

The EPOSS counter system

9. In my first statement at paragraphs 28 to 31, | explained that | did not have a direct
role in relation to the EPOSS counter system, that in 1998 | had no responsibility for
EPOSS and that | could not recall having any involvement in EPOSS at that time.

10. | would like to expand on these comments. The Riposte software that Escher provided
to Fujitsu on the Post Office account comprised two main components. The first
component was the message store. The second component was the desktop counter
application, which was the basis of EPOSS. | was involved in the technical operation

Page 3 of 75
11.

12.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

of the message store from 1996 to around 2003. This component had been designed
by Drew Sutherland at Escher, and his main interface at Fujitsu was Mark Jarosz, with
whom | worked fairly closely. | was not involved in the technical operation of the
desktop counter application until around 2003, when Project Impact commenced.

Prior to then, | occasionally became involved in discussions about the counter

application, but only when it affected my work on the Agent layer.

| recall that a number of Fujitsu employees and contractors attended a three-week
induction course in Boston (where the headquarters of Escher are located) in 1996. |
attended the first week in order to get an understanding of how the EPOSS counter
would interact with the Agents. | then returned home as this first week of training was
sufficient to brief me for my role in the Agents team. Others stayed on and attended
the full three weeks so that they could learn in more detail how to write counter
applications. One of these people was Brian Orzel, whom | came to regard as the
main interface between Escher and the counter development teams at Fujitsu on
EPOSS matters. Brian worked as a contractor at Fujitsu. | recall that he subsequently
spent a year on secondment at Escher’s offices in Boston in the late 1990s so that he
could work more closely with Escher. Apart from Brian, | regarded Alan Ward and
Steve Warwick as the main EPOSS experts within Fujitsu. For a period of around six
months in the late 1990s, | recall Alan travelling to Escher’s offices in Boston once
every week. | believe that Alan and Steve would have the principal authors of the main
Fujitsu design documents for EPOSS.

The new material provided to me by the Inquiry includes documents FUJ00079301
(E8), FUJ00079303 (E9) and FUJ00079304 (E10), which are emails from 1999. These
emails were not available to me when | signed my first statement. They have jogged
my memory about certain details but they do not change my fundamental recollection
as set out above or what | said in my first statement. These emails relate to the design
that was being done by Steve Warwick to add in further reconciliation checks to
EPOSS to ensure that the cash account was accurate. | think this was required due
to one of the Acceptance Incidents on Legacy Horizon (but | cannot be certain of that).
My involvement was primarily to be aware of the new reconciliation totals that were
being generated so that they could be harvested by the TPS Harvester Agent at the
end of each day, thus allowing the TPS host to carry out the reconciliation checks. In

order to do that | was reviewing Steve's design paper and | probably made those

Page 4 of 75
13.

14.

15.

16.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

comments in these emails to show how the reconciliation process could be improved,

although | was not responsible for the detail of the design.

My main concern was to ensure that | understood the new reconciliation messages
that were being produced by EPOSS so that the TPS Harvester Agent could harvest
them correctly. As a member of the Agents team at that time, it was my responsibility
to ensure that the TPS Harvester Agent did its job properly during the end of day
reconciliations, and that no other part of the Horizon system put its operation at risk. |
believe that | was also concerned about whether EPOSS was sufficiently resilient to
crashes of the PC (for example as a result of a power cut) during these reconciliations.
In other words, these emails are consistent with my recollection that, at this time, |
was considering EPOSS from the perspective of my responsibility for the Agent layer.

The Inquiry has also provided me with [FUJ00079488] (E13), which is a change
proposal (“1. Description of Change Proposed: The Cash Account message attribute
grammar is changed to provide the cash account line number and CAP as used by
EPOSS in the Cash Account report. The new attribute grammar is defined below’).

Included in this document is an Action Number of 19 February 1998 which states:

“TSC IMPACT (G JENKINS) We're currently redesigning TPS and reissuing it
for a different reason. We have decided to take the opportunity (sic) of
incorporating this CP (together with CP1041 and 1039 and another as yet
unnumbered CP on TPS from Stephen Channell) at the same time. As such
there will be zero cost, and the handover will be done 27/2/98. 19/2/98.”

This was a request to change the way in which the Counter recorded a Cash Account
Line in the message store. This affected the TPS Harvester Agent, for which (as noted
above) | was responsible. | was expected to provide a cost for making the change.
My comment indicates that as we were already making other changes to the Agent
for unrelated reasons, the incremental cost of this change was zero. Whilst | do not
recall this specific change, it is another example of where | was involved because

EPOSS impacted on the Agent layer.
| have reviewed the evidence that Anthony Oppenheim, Terence Austin and Jan
Holmes gave to the Inquiry concerning EPOSS, in particular the decision-making

process in 1999-2001 about whether EPOSS should be rewritten, the audit of EPOSS

Page 5 of 75
17.

18.

19.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

and the activities of the EPOSS taskforce. They do not suggest that | had any role —
and | do not recall playing one — in responding to concerns about the stability of
EPOSS or possible degradation in its coding. | note that Mr Austin, in particular, states
that he had a hands-on role in commissioning the EPOSS audit. He named persons
who formed the team who responded on EPOSS issues, including Alan Ward (the
chief architect), John Hunt, Steve Warwick (whom he described as the expert in
EPOSS) and Pete Jeram. This is consistent with my recollection that Alan and Steve
were the main experts in EPOSS. | note that Mr Austin told the Inquiry that he didn’t

know who | was.

The Inquiry has also recently provided me with an email dated 10 May 2000 (E11)
[FUJ00079333]. | was copied into this email chain, which had originated from an email
from Stephen Muchow about concerns about risks of degraded counter and cash
account performance and of possible code regression between C13 and Cl4. | believe
that | was copied into this email because | had responsibility for the migration of the
Data Centre between Cl3 and Ci4. | note that in the email after the one into which |
was copied, Mike Coombs asked that the issue be added to the migration meeting
that was being called for. Whilst this was something | would have needed to know
about from the perspective of migration, | wouldn't have been involved in the detailed
counter changes. This is another example where | became involved in discussions

about EPOSS because it was relevant to my other responsibilities.

My technical knowledge of EPOSS began to develop in around 2003, when | recall
attending a training workshop to show me how to use the counter and, in particular,
to understand how the balancing process worked. This was necessary because, by
this stage, | was moving away from the Agents team and starting my new role on

Project Impact.

Prior to this stage, and whilst | had no responsibility for EPOSS, | was aware that it
had suffered from problems which | assumed were being worked on and resolved.
This knowledge was gleaned from general office discussion rather than any direct
involvement. | think it is worth repeating that my base was Bracknell and the EPOSS
development was being done in Feltham. | was a frequent visitor to Feltham, but the
office | tended to visit was not the one in which the EPOSS developers worked, so |

didn't have much contact with them.

Page 6 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

20. Ihave read the evidence that Anne Chambers gave to the Inquiry concerning EPOSS.
She named Matt Arris as the EPOSS team leader when she joined Fujitsu. That name
initially rang no bells with me at all, but since hearing it | have a vague memory of
someone with that name working on the counter development team. | do not recall
having any dealings with him. Anne also told the Inquiry that she understood me to be
the principal Fujitsu expert on the counter application, although | note that she said
she wasn’t sure if | was based in Feltham and that she didn’t meet me for two, three
or four years after she joined the SSC. | can’t remember when | first came into contact
with Anne but | think that she is right that we didn’t meet for a number of years and
that this fits with my role in the early 2000s. In those early years of Horizon when |
worked on the Agents, my main contacts in the SSC were John Simpkins, Pat Carroll
and Mik Peach. | think that it is likely that | started to work with Anne (or got to know
her better) when Project Impact went live in 2004 or 2005 but | can’t be certain. |
acquired more knowledge and understanding of the counter through my work on
Project Impact and | think that | would only have been regarded as having the sort of

expertise she attributes to me after that point.

21. Insummary, until around 2003, | do not recall having anything to do with EPOSS other
than indirectly, when it had an impact on my work with the agents, e.g. when
messages were not being written properly which then affected the agent layer. To the
best of my recollection, this happened very infrequently. From around 2003 onwards,
| began to gain technical expertise and a practical understanding of how EPOSS
operated.

Project Impact and the removal of the suspense account

22. In my first statement at paragraphs 41 to 46, | summarised my involvement in Project
Impact and, at paragraphs 43 and 44, | explained my understanding of POL’s decision

to remove the suspense account.

23. Since signing my first statement, | have read the evidence of Susan Harding, Phil
Boardman and Steven Grayston. | have also reviewed documents relating to Project
Impact that | had not reviewed when | signed my first statement. | agree entirely with
the evidence given to the Inquiry that one of POL's objectives for Project Impact was
to remove the suspense account, or more accurately to remove all suspense accounts

into which SPMs could post discrepancies. | understood that by doing so POL

Page 7 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

ultimately intended to save costs. | also retain a vague memory of Project Impact
workshops in which POL employees (I cannot remember who) suggested that SPMs
had, historically, used the suspense accounts for money they had stolen and justified
their removal on that basis. | was not involved in any POL work or analysis that
demonstrated this concern. Rather, it was my job to assist in the design and provision

of the system to meet POL’s objectives.

24. My recollection was that whilst many suspense accounts were removed, some of them
remained in place and that there were still suspense accounts in place at the point at
which | retired. | have looked through a number of technical documents to see if they
are consistent with my memory. The Inquiry has drawn my attention to an email dated
12 February 2004 (E63) [FUJ00126038] that | and many others received. It refers to
POL’s decision the day before to remove the suspense account altogether and states
that this would have the effect of requiring branches to make good all losses
immediately. However, (D90) [POL00038916], dated 16 September 2004, is what |
believe to be the final design document that sets out the technical changes which were
actually implemented by Project Impact. Pages 147 and 148 list all suspense account
products that were present before Project Impact and identify what was to happen to
each of them afterwards. This list indicates that some of these suspense account
products were to be retained. There is further relevant information in section 2.5.1.1.4
of this document on page 47: this says that the Housekeeping menu (which is where
the suspense account products are displayed) is to be restricted to Managers and
Supervisors and that the set of products is to be rationalised, with some suspense
account products being retained. This design document is consistent with my memory
that there was removal of some suspense accounts but retention of other suspense
accounts. The documents at [FUJ00090393] (F78) (see the list at 9.3) and
[FUJ00090060] (F77) seem consistent with this.

25. | understand that POL’s requirements about SPMs settling disputed sums before
rolling over raises an entirely different, practical issue. However, from my perspective
as a designer of the system concerned with how to change the software, | don’t think

that | appreciated or thought through the potential consequences of these changes.

Bugs, errors and defects: general comments

[Rule 9 request: questions 23 to 49]

Page 8 of 75
26.

27.

28.

29.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about bugs, errors and defects
(BEDs), both in Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online. | hope it is helpful if ! make some

general comments at the outset.

First, both Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online contained or gave rise to BEDs. It
would have been impossible for a computer system, especially one that operated on
the scale of Horizon, to be free of BEDs. The fact that BEDs were both anticipated
and occurred is the reason why Fujitsu employed large teams of people in four lines
of support whose job was to investigate and to attempt to fix them. This also reflects
the fact that BEDs cover a multitude of issues. Many will give rise to issues of
performance or operational issues. The majority will not impact on the branch

accounts.

Second, my memory is that BEDs were more prevalent during the testing and pilot
phases of Legacy Horizon in 1997-1999 and Horizon Online in 2009-2010. That did
not surprise me. It is one of the purposes of having a test phase and then a pilot phase
to detect BEDs and to fix as many of them as possible before (a) the system goes live
post-testing, and (b) the live system is rolled out to the whole estate post-pilot. As the
Inquiry will have seen, there are sequences of actions that occur in real life which may
reveal the existence of a BED and which would not have been picked up in testing.
The process of testing but then piloting on live data ought to reveal many such
sequences. Fujitsu would conduct pilots incrementally across the estate. For example,
depending on the complexity of the software change, we would start by introducing it
to two or three branches, then anything between 50 and 100 branches, then 1000
branches, and then roll it out to the whole estate. My belief at the time was that both
Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online stabilised as they transitioned through these
testing and pilot stages. However, there were ongoing issues in Legacy Horizon after
its pilot phase ended, which | understood, at the time, to have persisted until around
2003 or 2004, and which (for the most part) related to the Riposte software supplied
by Escher. Other specific issues could and did present themselves from time to time.

Third, the nature of my role in fourth line support meant that, apart from the pilot phase
of Horizon Online between January and June 2010, | only saw part of the picture about
the BEDs that affected Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online. | was an experienced
architect but I did not have a detailed knowledge of each moving part of Horizon, which

was a vast and complex system, nor did | have oversight over the whole system. My

Page 9 of 75
30.

31.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

work on the Agents layer gave me a good overview of the expected functioning of the
system but not the detail of all BEDs as and when they arose. What was referred to
fourth line support only represented a sub-set of the issues affecting Horizon at any
one time (although this ought to have included the most serious issues that third line
support could not fix, or issues that required a code fix). It also seems to have been
the position (from my understanding of the evidence given to the Inquiry) that PEAKs
which reached the SSC may not necessarily have been joined up with each other.
Only a small proportion of BEDs were allocated to me in my role in fourth line support,
and with some limited exceptions, | was not involved in fixing them. | only learned
about certain BEDs many months or years after they had been allocated to and fixed

by others.

Fourth, of the BEDs that | knew about whilst | worked at Fujitsu, those that | remember
as being of particular significance were the Callendar Square / Falkirk bug (in Legacy
Horizon), the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug (in Horizon Online), the
Suspense Account bug (in Horizon Online) and the Dalmellington bug (in Horizon
Online). | have read Mr Justice Fraser’s Technical Appendix to his Horizon Issues
judgment, in which he identifies 29 BEDs in total, including the four mentioned above.
Having looked at the evidence given to me by the Inquiry, it appears that | knew about
the existence of some of the other 25 BEDs mentioned in the Technical Appendix (I
expand on this in more detail below). My contemporaneous knowledge of some of
these other BEDs was sometimes limited. The underlying evidence suggests that on
occasion | was copied into a single email or that someone spoke to me about an issue,
which is then reflected in a single entry in a PinICL or PEAK. There are other BEDs
that | had a greater degree of involvement in responding to. | think it likely that once
some of these other BEDs were fixed, they receded in my memory or their significance
diminished. My memory of these other BEDs has been jogged by seeing documents

in the civil proceedings and the Inquiry.

Fifth, both Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online were configured to create an audit trail
and | believed at the time, and | continue to believe now, that this audit trail had
forensic integrity. It recorded the transactions as inputted by Branch staff (which might
not reflect what they had in fact done) but, in particular, recorded any erroneous
transactions that arose as a result of a BED (thus assisting in their identification).

Page 10 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

32. Sixth, Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online were completely different systems as far
as the architecture of Horizon within branches was concerned. Horizon Online
retained many of the back-end systems and interfaces from Legacy Horizon but was
otherwise an entirely new counter system. Amongst other transformations, it removed
all use of Riposte and replaced it with a simple Java-based application, and it stored
all data in data centres, rather than locally at the counter. As such, | am not aware of
any BED that affected branch accounts in Legacy Horizon that also affected branch
accounts in Horizon Online (and vice versa). To this day | do not understand, on a
technical level, how the same BED could have an impact on branch accounts in both

systems.

Data Tree Build Failure Discrepancies
[Rule 9: questions 24 to 29]

33. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about data tree build failure

discrepancies. These only occurred in Legacy Horizon (not Horizon Online).

34. | have read the second corporate statement of Fujitsu dated 29 December 2022
[FUJ00126035]. This divides data tree build failure discrepancies into two separate
categories. Looking at the documents available to me, this division makes sense,

although as explained below, | would add a third category.

35. All three categories of this problem concerned the data server component in Riposte
but | believe each problem was completely different from the other. The first category
seems to have occurred in 1999-2000. | do not believe that | was aware of this first
category at the time. The second category occurred in 2005-2006. | believe that | was
aware of this second category at the time. The third category occurred in 2007. |
believe that | was aware of this third category at the time. | hope it makes sense if |

address each category in turn.

36. Before doing so, however, | will provide an overview of what the data server is and
how it operated on the counter. This is only an overview because | claim no particular
technical expertise on the data server. In simple terms, the data server was a key
component of the Legacy Horizon counter system and was used for generating reports
and preparing accounts. It did this by scanning the Riposte message store (which was

where the Riposte product held its data) searching for “relevant” messages. For this

Page 11 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

purpose, “relevant” messages were all transactions for a given period, usually the
current accounting period. This meant that, prior to Project Impact, it would be
scanning for up to a week’s worth of messages, but after Project Impact, it could be
up to a month’s worth. Each message found would be added to various nodes of a
tree of accumulators that reflected the accounting hierarchy of products. For example,
astamp was considered to be, first, a stamp, but also a postage product and ultimately
a sale made at the branch. This hierarchy was defined in reference data also retrieved
from the local message store. Given the volume of such transactions, this process
could be quite slow: it could take up to an hour to build the transactions for a month in
a busy branch. Because of this, once the data tree had been built, it was re-used for
subsequent processes during balancing, for example recording discrepancies, which
also needed to be taken into account in later phases of the balancing. In order to
support this functionality without rebuilding the tree, a “notification” mechanism was
used whereby a background process would be monitoring the message store for new
relevant messages that were written to it, and these new messages were then added

to the tree.

First category: 1999-2000

37. My understanding of the first category of the data tree build problem is not
contemporaneous: it is based on my reading of the documents given to me by the
Inquiry and from what | recall of my work in relation to the Horizon civil litigation in
2018, which is when | believe | first became aware of it. The fact that | did not know
about this problem at the time does not surprise me. This is because the data server
is a component on the counter EPOSS system which, as explained above, | had no

responsibility for at that time.

38. From reading the documents, | believe that what happened is that a bug in the counter
EPOSS system resulted in a failure to add relevant messages to the data tree if the
counter system was running too slowly or additional messages were arriving too

quickly.
39. When | first became aware of this bug in 2018, | agreed that it had the potential to

cause discrepancies to branch accounts and would therefore have affected the

reliability of Legacy Horizon. That remains my view.

Page 12 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

40. The only caveat | would add is that the bug did not necessarily cause a discrepancy.
This is because the shortfalls caused by the bug appeared in an "office snapshot" and
not the Cash Account Report, meaning that there was no problem with the underlying
transaction data. | agree with the analysis set out in Mr Justice Fraser's Technical
Appendix to his Horizon Issues judgment that the bug would not affect branch
accounts, that there was no issue with the underlying transaction data and, if the office
snapshot was re-run, it would very likely provide the correct information, because the
data reading issue was temporary. | also agree with Mr Justice Fraser that a
discrepancy would only arise if the branch ran the office snapshot, got an inaccurate
report and then rolled over, making good any discrepancies in the process, leading to
a shortfall in the branch accounts.

41. Apart from what! can read in the documents, | do not know who or which teams within
Fujitsu were aware of this problem. | do not know what steps they took to investigate
or fix the problem, other than to say that | believe that it was fixed in late 2000 and
that it did not re-occur in any branch. As noted above, the second and third categories
of the data tree build problem are different from this first category and so | do not
regard them as a re-occurrence. | do not know whether and how Fujitsu informed POL
about this problem. | do not know whether and how Fujitsu informed SPMs about this

problem.

Second category: 2005-2006

42. | did have some contemporaneous knowledge of the second category of data tree
build problems, although | confess that | had forgotten many of the details until |

reviewed the documents given to me in the civil proceedings in 2018 and the Inquiry.

43. | believe that the simplest way of explaining this second category is by looking at two
PEAKs, both of which were raised on test rigs (i.e. they were not raised from problems
concerning live data in branches). The first PEAK is PC0121925 (D77)
[POL00028867], raised on 13 June 2005. The second PEAK is PC0123319 (D79)
[POL00030523], which was cloned from it on 19 July 2005. The reason that test rigs
are relevant to the problem is because in 2005, Fujitsu was carrying out testing
following the change in accounting, implemented by Project Impact, from weekly cash
accounts to monthly branch trading statements. As a result, the data server needed

to be reconfigured to change how transactions were scanned and added to the data

Page 13 of 75
44.

45.

46.

47.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

tree during the balancing process. It was in the context of testing the reconfiguration
of the data server that these two PEAKS were raised. The testing identified that some
of the (hypothetical) transactions put through the test rigs, such as cash discrepancies,

were not being added to the data trees.

In relation to the first PEAK (PC0121925), | can see that the problem identified in
testing was not reliably reproducible, despite the development team spending a lot of
effort trying to do so. Martin McConnell recorded at 12.50pm on 29 June 2005:

“After several days of attempting to recreate this problem with a keyboard
controlling test program which has generated tens of thousands of EPOSS
transactions, thousands of print preview cut off reports | have only seen one
instance of this problem whereby a message does not get passed to EPOSS
counter code via the message port interface. Am attempting a fresh run as of
this morning (29th June) and will leave for a further 24 hours or so to see if |
can see the problem at least once more.”

Further down this first PEAK, it records that the team were only able to reproduce the
error about once in approximately 150,000 attempts (see the entry by Martin
McConnell at 10:58am on 4 July 2005), on a process that would only be conducted

on live data in actual branches once every few weeks.

The analysis in this first PEAK is reflected in the Test Report for S80 dated 3 August
2005 (D65) [FUJ00086360]. This report stated, at pages 40-41, that automated testing
on the test rig had repeated the test scenario more than 10,000 times and the problem
had not occurred once. It also stated that it was suspected that the test rig “contributed
to the problem occurring and that there was no reason to believe that live would see

any more incidences”.

The Inquiry has asked me to look at a testing plan concerning the S81 release (D68)
[FUJ00086363] and to explain my comment: “I’m not convinced any fix has been
applied, so I’m not sure what you can actually test”. | made this comment on 27 July

2005 in track changes. The full text of my comment reads as follows:

Page 14 of 75
48.

49.

50.

51.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

“I'm not sure what you can test here. The original problem was a “one off” which
occurred once in about 2000 attempts. Martin had a lot of problems reproducing
and I'm not convinced any fix has been applied, so I'm not sure what you can

actually test.”

As this full text indicates, | was referring to the first PEAK mentioned above
(PC0121925) and reflecting what had been documented on the PEAK by Martin
McConnell on 29 June 2005, i.e. that no one had been able to reproduce the sequence
of actions at the counter which had brought this problem about and therefore to
reproduce it. The fact that it was not reproducible demonstrated either that the
sequence of events was so rare as to make it next to impossible to recreate them or

that there was some form of fault on the test rig.

The second PEAK (PC0123319) was a clone of the first PEAK and provided some
further information about a specific data tree problem that was easier to reproduce
reliably. The PEAK records that Fujitsu developed a fix for this specific problem by 19
August 2005 and that the PEAK was closed on 5 September 2005.

Until | reviewed the documents provided to me by the Inquiry, | had believed that the
problem identified in this second PEAK had ultimately been fixed after testing and that
it had not re-occurred, either in testing or in the live estate. However, from reading
(D69) [FUJ00086368], which is a note of an internal Fujitsu morning prayers meeting
on 16 August 2005 that | did not attend, | can see that this PEAK is mentioned next to
the comment "problem recurs after application of fix". However, as noted above, the
PEAK itself states that a fix was developed by 19 August 2015 and that the PEAK was
closed on 5 September 2005. On this basis, | assume that the problem in the second

PEAK was fixed but | cannot be completely certain about that.

In relation to both PEAKs, | do not know whether the problems identified in the test
environment ever emerged and affected live data in actual branches, or whether the
fix rolled out for the second PEAK proved to be effective. In the absence of further
documents, | cannot say whether these problems had an actual impact on branch
accounts. Reflecting on the two PEAKs now, and with the benefit of hindsight, | believe
that there were probably other processes on the test rig counter that slowed down

Riposte and made it very unpredictable. As mentioned in the S80 Test Report, it is

Page 15 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

possible that these processes were caused by the testing environment and would not

have occurred in actual branches.

Third category: 2007

52. The Inquiry has asked me to consider PEAK PC0146170 (D74) [FUJ00086490]. This
was a PEAK raised on 18 May 2007 and concerns what | would describe as the third
category of data tree build problems, which was completely different from the first two
categories described above. In other words, this was not an issue that had persisted
from the earlier data tree issues but had (from memory) arisen from a new use of the
data tree mechanism. | did not make any entries in this PEAK and | doubt that | would
have read it at the time. However, | can see that | am referred to in the PEAK so must
have had some knowledge of the problem. | retain no memory of the matters raised
in this PEAK, but reading it now and trying to reconstruct what happened, | believe
that the underlying problem, in simple terms, was that the counter was running too
slow and/or Riposte was running too fast, and as a result the data tree was not picking
up relevant transactions. | can see from the PEAK that | talked to Gerald Barnes, who
was a developer, about why this problem was happening, and that Gerald came up
with a fix, working in consultation with Chris Bailey, who was a software designer

working in fourth line support.

Callendar Square/Falkirk bug
[Rule 9 request: questions 29 to 35]

53. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about what it calls the Callendar

Square/Falkirk bug. This occurred only in Legacy Horizon (not Horizon Online).

54. In the Technical Appendix to the Horizon Issues judgment, Mr Justice Fraser grouped
together a number of problems under a single heading called ‘Callendar
Square/Falkirk’. | understand why the Court and now the Inquiry has taken this
approach but it risks creating the erroneous impression that the bug was
homogeneous in the sense that it was caused by the same factors, and manifested
itself in the same way, in every branch it affected. This was not the case. As | explain
below, what happened at Callendar Square branch in Falkirk in 2005 was caused by
an underlying bug in the Riposte software that manifested itself when a combination
of unpredictable factors, including (in that particular case) the steps taken by the SPM

Page 16 of 75
55.

56.

57.

58.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

to rectify the issue, came together. In other words, there was an underlying software
bug, but how it manifested itself and whether it caused harm was contingent on the
presence of other circumstances. These circumstances were not fixed. That is why

the problem was hard to reproduce.

This is at the root of the distinction between the limited "time out waiting for lock”
issues that | observed between 2000 and 2003 and which | ultimately concluded were
benign, and the “Callendar Square” issue in 2005, which involved a storm of multiple
events and which was not benign.

| draw this distinction to also make the point that the lock error was the symptom of an
underlying bug in the Riposte software, rather than the cause of it. Diagnosing the
cause of this lock error was so difficult because its emergence was contingent upon a
coincidence of unpredictable factors that varied from one case to another. And,
depending on precisely which factors precipitated the bug in any given case, the

effects of the resulting lock error varied in their nature and seriousness.

| should also reiterate that, in the period between 2000 and 2003, my focus was the
behaviour of the Agents, so | was mainly interested in occurrences of the “time out
waiting for lock” events that were recorded in the Data Centre (i.e. on the
Correspondence Servers or Agent Servers), rather than occurrences of these events
on the counter. | was confident at the time (and remain so) that where the events
occurred in the Data Centre, they were benign, because the Agents (for which | was
responsible) were designed so that if such an event was raised, they would handle
the issue and carry on with the overnight processing successfully. My understanding,
based on my involvement in locking issues between 2000 and 2003, was that where

these events occurred on the counter, they were also benign.

My understanding of the lock problem developed in three main stages. The first stage
was in 2000-2003, when | became involved in a small number of lock problems
experienced at different branches and on the correspondence servers. The second
stage was in 2010, when | learned more of the detail of the specific lock problem
experienced at Callendar Square branch in 2005. The third stage was in 2018-2019,
when | learned more about the scope of the lock problems throughout the lifetime of

Legacy Horizon as a result of my involvement in the civil litigation against POL. In

Page 17 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

other words, my understanding of the lock problem evolved over nearly 20 years. |

hope it makes sense if | deal with each of these three stages in turn.

First stage: 2000-2003

59. The Inquiry has given me six PinlCLs (and associated emails) dating from 2000 to
2003 which analysed lock errors experienced at three different branches and on two
different correspondence servers. | don’t think that all of these lock errors can be
explained in general terms. | think it is better if | explain the issues that arose, on a
case by case basis, by reference to the specific PinICL. | will address the PinICLs in
chronological order.

60. PinICL PC0057478 was raised on 9 September 2000 in relation to branch number
260801. It states that at this branch, the lock error occurred during the overnight
migration of counters from one version of Riposte to another. I'm not sure what the
reference to “migration” means in this context. It may mean migration from the
previous manual system to Horizon. Looking at this date, the national rollout of Horizon
was still happening and so this could be a counter operating on its first day running
Horizon (but | cannot be sure either way). There were no transactions occurring during
this period since the branch was closed. The email refers to a Riposte Index rebuild.
This was something that was fairly processor intensive and was scheduled to run out
of hours, so that was probably the root cause. As a result, the lock error did not have
any impact on the business or its accounts. The Inquiry has asked me why | said, in
my email on 21 November 2000 at 4.30pm (D36) [FUJ00083564] that the issue raised
in this PinICL was “not a serious problem (and so low priority).” Although this issue
would have had no impact on the branch accounts, | believe that when | made this
comment, | was not referring to any issue in this PinICL (i.e. the underlying software
bug or the lock error). | believe | was referring instead to a specific event generated
on the counter. To illustrate this, | go back to my earlier email on the same day of
8.20am (D31) [FUJ00083548]. In that email, | referred to a number of errors that | had
seen on the event log for the branch, including the “Therefore we killed the process
directly” event. As | noted at the time, this event was being generated as a result of
the cleardesk function, which was an overnight process that ran around 3am every
night to restart the counter to pick up new Reference Data. That process had worked
correctly at this branch, so it puzzled me why the event “Therefore we killed the

process directly” was appearing. My reference to “3p each for a phone call” referred

Page 18 of 75
61.

62.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

to the automatic call that this event would generate, even though it was not indicative
of something harmful occurring. It was this event that | was referring to in my email of
4.30pm later that same day (D36) [FUJ00083564], when | said that it was “not a
serious problem, and so low priority.” Immediately after these words, | added: ‘[...] but
we would like to get rid of all counter error events”. | believe | added this caveat
because, even though the “Therefore we killed the process directly” event did not
seem to be caused by anything harmful, | was still keen to resolve any events that

might adversely affect the operational performance of the counter.

PinICL PC0056922 was raised on 2 November 2000 in relation to branch number
367642. | forwarded it by email to Mark Jarosz on 3 November 2000 (D29)
[FUJ00083544]. The Inquiry has not asked me specific questions about this PinICL
but | hope it assists if | make some general observations about it. From reading the
PinICL now, it seems that the lock had caused problems at the branch until the counter
was re-booted at 3am the following day. It probably arose because end of day
processes were running at the same time as the SPM was trying to balance and this
overloaded the PC, although | cannot be certain of this. The counter would have
restarted at 3am the next morning and cleared the issue. As | understand it, the SPM
didn't attempt to carry on using another counter and her accounts wouldn't have been
impacted. | agree, however, that Riposte was ‘rather sick’ in that it made the counter

unusable until it was restarted.

PinICL PC0057957 was raised on 16 November 2000 in relation to branch number
260801. This is the same branch as for PC0057478 (see above). Both calls were
raised by SMC from their event monitoring. The issue occurred at midnight. The
Inquiry has referred me to an email | received from Mark Jarosz on 1 December 2000
(D42) [FUJ00083582] about this PinICL and has asked me what Mark meant when he
said: “a timeout of this sort [was] likely to be benign in the sense that it should not
result in a message store corruption.” To attempt to explain what Mark meant, | need
to go back to my email to Mark at 11.48am on 24 November 2000 (D37)
[FUJ00083568]. This email forwarded the PinICL and explained to Mark that | had
looked through the message store and the event log and noticed that at the time of
this failure (just after midnight) there was an LFS (Logistics Feeder System or Logistics
Feeder Service) background task running. | explained that the LFS had written a BLOB
to the message store at 0.01am and then a further BLOB around one minute later. |

suggested that there were probably message store scans occurring between the two

Page 19 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

BLOBs and queried whether that had caused the time out. | observed that since the
failure occurred just after midnight, Riposte would be reloaded soon. Despite the
indications that this was not a serious issue, | said that we needed a “definitive
statement” from Drew Sutherland (the Escher designer of the message store) as to
whether this event was benign, or what problems we could have when it happened. It
was this request for a definitive statement that | understood that Mark (having spoken
to Drew) was responding to in his email to me on 1 December 2000 (D42)
[FUJ00083582]. | have read the evidence that Mark gave to the Inquiry about this
email although | did not really understand his explanation. When | read his email at
the time, | believe that | understood him to mean that, because this particular incidence
of the lock error was unlikely to impact the message store, it would not have any
impact on branch accounts. | respected Mark, and had | disagreed with this opinion, |

would probably have said so in my response. In the same email, Mark told me that:

‘[...] had the operation which was affected by this timeout been a message
server internal operation [...] then an additional error event should have been
logged. Therefore a possibility is that an API call has time [sic] out and the

application is not checking for error events”.

The Inquiry has asked me to explain this comment. | believe that | probably
understood Mark to mean that, if an API call timed out, no error code would be
returned, so the counter would be unable to detect a problem and would carry on
regardless. However, in this case, it was an LFS background task which | think was
using the "C" interfaces to Riposte and so it could be checked for response codes. In
other words, Mark was alerting me to a potential problem and was saying that whilst
the problem was likely to be benign, he could not be definitive about it. This is why he
went on in his email to make two recommendations for progressing the matter. His
first recommendation was to “get the LFS agent code checked to confirm that all API
calls have error checking”. | passed the matter to the LFS team regardless of whether
the LFS Agents were picking the issue up [PC0058994/ FUJ00075544 entry of 18
December 2000]. The PinICL confirms that the LFS team, in turn, discussed the matter
with Mark Jarosz. Regardless of whether the applications were checking for errors,
the SMC were continuing to monitor events and should have detected if these events
were happening (and then raised a call to SSC to investigate or contacted the branch).
In terms of this specific PinICL, | can confirm that the timeout which occurred would

not have impacted the branch accounts.

Page 20 of 75
63.

64.

65.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

PinlICL PC0065665 was raised on 3 May 2001 on the Correspondence Servers, and
is not therefore related to any particular Branch and would not have impacted on any
branch's accounts. The Inquiry has referred me to an email | sent to Mark Jarosz on
11 May 2001 (D45) [FUJ00083600] about this PinICL and has asked me to explain
why | said: “What I'm really asking is for confirmation that the associated errors are
indeed benign”. The reference to errors was to the three groups of events that |
described in the email. At the beginning of this email, | stated that | had previously
raised with Mark the “Error 82” events raised historically on counters. | also stated that
| was aware that the error itself was benign, though it could result in other errors to

agents.

PinICL PC0075892 was raised on 2 May 2002 in relation to branch number 312511.
The Inquiry has asked me why | said, in my email on 8 May 2002 (D48)

[FUJ00083621] that the problem was a “one-off”. From the email, it is clear that | had
examined the logs and determined that all had been fine at this branch, which had
closed early at 1.30pm. Some hours later at 4.24pm there were some Error 32
messages "Timeout while waiting for thread completion”. These occurred at five
second intervals. The machine then appears to have rebooted and initialised correctly.
However, there were then further Error 32 messages and at 6.40pm an Error 89
message ("An unexpected error occurred while attempting to insert a message.
Timeout occurred waiting for lock”). These messages continued to occur until the
“3am bounce” (i.e. as part of the overnight cleardesk process that ran around 3am
each day). After that, everything went back to normal. Going by what | have written, |
probably described it as a “one-off” because | believed that Fujitsu’s event monitoring
system had detected the issue. Had the issue recurred, | believe that the event
monitoring system would have generated similar events/errors. To the best of my
recollection when | used this term, there had been no other events/errors about the
problem that had caused this lock error. Again, in this case, there would not have been

an impact on branch accounts.

PinlCL PC0087709 was raised on 27 February 2003 in relation to a correspondence
server and so would have no impact on branch accounts. | forwarded this PinICL to
lain Janssens on 28 February 2003 (D50) [FUJ00083634] and sent and received
emails about the PinICL on 27 and 28 February 2003 (D51) [FUJ00083640]. The
Inquiry has asked me what the effect was of the agents failing in this case and why |
said: “Riposte is clearly behaving badly, in that it won't support agents until it is

Page 21 of 75
66.

67.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

restarted”. To put this comment in its context, | go back to my earlier email of the same

day, when | said:

“We've seen a number of cases of the event 82 in the past, however usually
they have been "one-offs" and benign. In this case the agents are repeatedly
failing with the agent timeouts coinciding with the event 82s. As the PinICL

says, the first error was an Event 89 which | don't remember seeing before.”

When | wrote these emails, | was explaining that it had now become clearer to me that
the message store on one of the 16 correspondence servers was no longer operating
correctly for the specific duration of the locking issue due to a problem with Riposte
(though | can now see that | was mistaken in thinking that | hadn't seen an Event 89
previously in this context: see PinICL PC0075892 above). Looking back at this, | can
see that the issue was similar to the other instances of locks in that it was not harmful
save that, in this case, one of the correspondence servers needed to be restarted for
normal operations to be restored. This was not a branch issue. | do not believe that
this had any impact other than a slight delay in processing, because if one
correspondence server failed and needed to be restarted, there were three others that
could be used immediately instead (there were generally clusters of four
correspondence servers linked to 5,000 branches each, so if one of those servers
failed, the three remaining servers in the same cluster continued to service all 5,000
branches). In relation to the effect of agents failing in this case, this would have no
impact on the branch because the agents were designed to recover the work

elsewhere if they hit unexpected errors that forced them to shut down.

When | look at these six PinlICLs, the two connections that | see between them now
are (a) the existence of the lock error, and (b) an underlying but unknown software
problem in Riposte. However, how the underlying software problem manifested itself
— and caused a lock error — depended on different coincidences of factors on each
occasion. Had the factors been the same on each occasion, it would have been far
easier at the time to reproduce a case that Fujitsu could send to Escher for testing, so
that the underlying software problem in Riposte could be fixed. Unfortunately, we were
unable to do so.

During the period 2000-2003, my belief was that all of the lock errors | saw were
benign, in the sense that they did not have any impact on branch accounts. | formed
this belief because, immediately after the event “timeout waiting for lock”, Riposte

always generated a second event “failing to insert a message”. If this second event

Page 22 of 75
68.

69.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

was generated due to replication, there were automatic protocols in the system that
re-attempted the operation later on, i.e. there was a delay in processing but no data
loss. If this second event was due to an agent process, the agent would fail or shut
down (as they always did when they hit unexpected errors) but recover the work
elsewhere through a fix built into the agent layer that my team had designed. As
explained above, the lock error required operations staff to intervene and restart the
correspondence servers, but this had no adverse impact on branches or their
accounts: there were duplicate correspondence servers and the system was designed
to carry on should one of the correspondence servers fail. It may also assist if | explain
that Riposte provided two separate interfaces: a full application interface and a
simplified interface. The agents (for which | was responsible at the time) used the full
application interface. The counter software (for which | was not responsible at the
time) used the simplified interface. In the full application interface, every call on a
Riposte function would return an error code and the agents were designed to trap any
unexpected errors, handle them appropriately and ensure that there were no negative

consequences.

Looking back at my emails, | can see that | questioned whether the lock errors were
indeed benign, and on occasions, | asked Mr Jarosz to investigate further, including
by consulting Escher. | did this because | felt that it was important to test whether my
belief — that the lock errors were benign — was correct. | don’t recall Mr Jarosz saying
anything that changed my belief. That is not to say that | was unconcerned about the
lock errors, but | saw nothing at the time to indicate that these issues went beyond
affecting operational performance. | wanted Escher to improve the Riposte product so
that SPMs encountering lock errors no longer had to endure the hassle and wasted
time of a counter reboot, which was the only “workaround” we could suggest given our
inability to fix the problem. It seemed to be impossible to get to the bottom of the
underlying software problem causing the lock errors, and without a reproducible case,
it was going to be very difficult to get a fix from Escher. Moreover, had the underlying
bug been causing actual discrepancies in branch accounts, | would (as stated above)
have expected this to have been picked up by Fujitsu’s event monitoring (such as in
PinlCL PC0057478) or reported by branches.

| do not know what Fujitsu did between 2000 and 2003 to inform POL or the SPMs

about any of the six PinlICLs discussed above.

Page 23 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

70. Before moving on, | will address three miscellaneous questions the Inquiry has asked
me about lock errors in the period 2000-2003:

a. The Inquiry has asked whether | recall a release management forum meeting
(RMF) on 1 August 2001 and has asked why the RMF resolved at this meeting
to close four PinICLs (PC0050916, PC0063692, PCO0065665 and PC0062490).
| was not a regular attendee at RMF meetings and would only have attended if
it was going to examine outstanding PinlICLs assigned to me. | do not recall
whether | attended this RMF meeting. | do not have a copy of the minutes from
this meeting that might help me. However, looking at one of these PinICLs
(PCO065665), | can see that it contains an entry at 8.48am on 10 August 2001
by Barbara Longley, which reads: “After last weeks [sic] RMF meeting on
Wednesday the following PinICLs were decided to be closed as fixed at Future
Release (“Assumed fixed by SP6 at BI2”): 50916, 63692, 65665, 62490.” |
interpret the words “assumed fixed” to mean that the RMF assumed that the
problems would be fixed by Escher during the next release of Riposte. In other
words, the problems in these PinICLs had not been fixed yet but the RMF
decided to close the PinICLs because it considered that the problems would be
fixed in a coming release. Whilst | don’t remember that | was involved in this
decision, it appears that the RMF may have made the working assumption that
the significant update to Riposte (as part of Release BI2 and related to network

banking) would encompass a fix of these issues.

b. The Inquiry has referred me to an email | sent on 22 March 2001 (D43)
[FUJ00083592] and has asked what “RER” meant. | made this reference to
RER in the context of a PinICL assigned to me: | said that this PinICL “is on the
RER as a ‘nice to have.” | cannot be completely certain, but | believe that RER
meant “Riposte Enhancement Register”. | believe that the PinICL to which |
was referring in this email was PCO0061665. The Inquiry has also asked why
this PinICL was closed. The answer to this appears to be contained in Chris
Wannell’s response to my email dated 25 March 2001 (D43) [FUJ00083592],
namely that “being on the RER suggests that it is not a PinICL but a design

change to Escher code”. In other words, it was not a bug, but a request for new

Page 24 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

functionality. If we wanted Riposte to be changed in that way, then we would

need to commission Escher to make a change.

c. The Inquiry has referred me to an email exchange dated 17 April 2001 between
Brian Orzel and me (D44) [FUJ00083596]. This email exchange contains a list
of a number of PinlICLs, some of which relate to locking errors, to be sent to
Escher for fixing. The Inquiry has asked why PC0056922, PC0057478 and
PC0057957 were not included in this list. It has been drawn to my attention that
one of those on the list is PC0058994 and is described as a copy of PC005795.
Fujitsu only needed to send a copy of one PinlCL to Escher to be fixed so this

suggests that one was selected for being sent on.

Second stage: 2010

71. At some point in 2003, my involvement in the lock errors seems to have ceased. |
cannot be completely sure why that was, but | believe it was linked to the fact that |
moved from the Agents team and onto Project Impact full-time. It could also be that
Brian Orzel left and the interface to Escher moved on to lain Janssens. It may also
have been because the SSC stopping sending PinICLs about lock errors to fourth line

support.

72. Prior to this Inquiry, | did not recall having any conversations or learning anything new
about the lock errors between 2003 and 2010. However, amongst the materials | was
provided with on 27 April 2023 is a lengthy email chain from October 2008 (E19)
[FUJ00083712], although the Inquiry has not provided me with the attachments. | was
copied into some of the emails in the chain but not others. The chain is a discussion
of ARQ data relating to seven different branches: the identifying FAD codes for those
branches are listed in the first email in the chain. The Inquiry has said that this email
chain relates to the Callendar Square bug, but | am struggling to see the connection.
None of the seven branches is the Callendar Square branch. It appears that some of
the seven branches suffered from lock errors, though without further details, | cannot
say whether this is the same lock error experienced at Callendar Square. By the start
of 2010, | think | was aware in very general terms that a small number of branches
were still occasionally experiencing single or limited event lock errors, which were very
different from the event storms seen at Callendar Square, but | did not know the

details.

Page 25 of 75
73.

74,

75.

76.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Putting that to one side, my memory of events is that | knew very little about the
Callendar Square issue (in terms of the specific lock error experienced at the
Callendar Square branch in Falkirk in 2005) until 2010. | think | had heard about it or
heard it mentioned before then but | had no detailed grasp of it until 2010.

The reason the Callendar Square branch was brought to my attention in early 2010
was because | was asked to comment about it in the criminal proceedings brought by
POL against Mrs Seema Misra. | am aware that this goes to phase 4 of the Inquiry,
but | cannot answer this question without some reference to Mrs Misra’s trial. In
summary, | was asked to provide some evidence about the Callendar Square bug in
the context of this trial. | had no first-hand knowledge of it and so | conducted some
research about what had happened. Having ascertained what | understood to have
occurred at Callendar Square, | set out my understanding of the position to Anne
Chambers and asked that she confirm whether my understanding was correct. The
email correspondence at (E20) [FUJ00083721] was part of this communication. | did
this for the purpose of assessing whether the same problem had affected the branch
where Mrs Misra had worked (West Byfleet).

The understanding | developed about Callendar Square was that a fault in the Riposte
software had affected transfers of stock between stock units. It manifested itself by
the receiving stock unit being unable to “see” the transfer made by the sending stock
unit, resulting in the transfer message not being written and the counter carrying on
regardless with an incomplete view of the accounts. Because the transfer in was not
visible, the SPM (unnecessarily but entirely understandably) repeated the transaction,
and this caused a receipts and payments mismatch. In other words, what the SPM did
—and | do not criticise the SPM in the slightest for doing so — contributed to the problem
because the repeated transfer contributed to the missed balance. This would have
been visible to SMC since the underlying Riposte issue created a flood or storm of NT
events (about 1 every 10 seconds until the counter was restarted) as Riposte
repeatedly attempted to write the messages.

| don’t recall that, in 2010, | drew a connection between what had happened at
Callendar Square in 2005 and the lock errors | had seen between 2000 and 2003. |
have asked myself why, if my memory is right, | did not draw that connection. | believe

the answer is that the circumstances in which the problem at Callendar Square arose

Page 26 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

(the failed transfer between multiple stock units) were very different from the
circumstances in which the earlier lock errors had occurred between 2000 and 2003.
| also think that the exercise | was conducting in 2010 was the focused one of
analysing whether the Callendar Square issue had occurred at Mrs Misra’s branch
and that | did not research the issue more broadly. It is also possible that | had
forgotten the detail of the earlier lock errors by 2010. It was only in 2018-2019 that |

recall drawing a connection between them (see further below).

77. Because | was not involved in investigating the Callendar Square bug when it arose
in 2005, | cannot be certain who else (apart from Anne and others at the SSC) were
aware of it at the time. | became aware in 2010 that Fujitsu had informed POL about
the error when it arose but | do not know what steps Fujitsu took to inform POL, the

SPM at Callendar Square or any other SPMs.

78. | also understood in 2010 that Escher had developed a fix for the underlying software
problem causing the specific event storms seen at Callendar Square which was rolled
out by Fujitsu in the S90 release, which went live in March 2006. As can be seen in
the email at [FUJ00083721] (E20), Anne told me that:

“Anyway it stopped happening once S90 was installed (around 4th March 2006,
according to info below). This particular problem would only affect branches
with more than one stock unit. It happened several times at Callendar Square,

though we never found why they were so badly affected.”

79. As mentioned above, from memory, | may have had some awareness of other
occasional time out waiting for lock incidents at this point in early 2010 but had not

linked these to Callendar Square.

Third stage: 2018-2019

80. As part of the civil proceedings brought against POL, | was asked by POL's lawyers
to look in more detail at the lock errors experienced in Riposte up to 2010. As a result,
| reviewed a large number of PinICLs, PEAKs and KELs that | do not believe | had
previously reviewed. The Inquiry has recently provided me with a note dated 9
February 2019 (E90) [POL00028911]. | think that the table in section 2 of this note

may have been prepared by someone else, but section 3 records my reflections

Page 27 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

having carried out this work. As | observed in section 3, it was only by doing this work
in 2018-2019 that | realised the “full scope” of the issue. This work developed my

understanding of the locking errors in two main ways:

a. | became aware that the locking errors had affected more branches than | had
previously realised. | recall suggesting to POL’s lawyers that they should refer
to the spreadsheet of affected branches (prepared by Anne Chambers just
before she retired in 2015) to illustrate how many branches it had affected. |
embedded the spreadsheet in the note as | thought that it might be a useful

document for the POL lawyers to see.

b. Whilst many incidences of the locking errors were not associated with any
discrepancies in branch accounts (e.g. they resulted in operational problems
such as screen freezes), | became aware that it was not just the Callendar
Square branch that had suffered from discrepancies but other branches where

there were counter occurrences of the time-out waiting for lock problem.

81. Ihave considered why | did not have a fuller picture at the time. | think this reflects the
nature of fourth line support whereby not every PinICL on a same or similar issue was
referred back to the person who may have dealt with the same or similar issues
previously. As noted above, | also believe that my move into full-time work on Project
Impact in 2003 may explain why | had no role in investigating Callendar Square and
had no grasp of the detail of the Callendar Square issue until 2010 (and was not

generally involved in lock issues after 2003).
82. As a result of my work in 2018-2019, and having read the evidence that Anne
Chambers gave to the Inquiry about the lock error, | agree with her assessment that

it reflects poorly on Fujitsu that it took until 2006 for a fix to be implemented.

Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug
[Rule 9 request: questions 36 to 42]

83. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about the Receipts and Payments
Mismatch bug. This occurred only in Horizon Online (not Legacy Horizon).

Page 28 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

First awareness of bug

84. The Inquiry has asked me about an email exchange with Mrs Chambers on 6 May
2010 with the subject line “Receipts payments mismatches” (D10) [FUJ00081602]. A
Receipts and Payment mismatch is a symptom of something having gone wrong as
opposed to the actual problem. Despite the subject line of my email, | do not believe
that the events described in this email were caused by the bug discovered several
months later (which Mr Justice Fraser called the Receipt and Payments Mismatch
bug). | am fortified in that view because when Fujitsu responded to the Receipts and
Payments bug several months later, the SSC checked all occurrences of the events
which demonstrated the mismatch to have occurred. This exercise highlighted a few
instances of other events but which were not the same issue. | have checked the
spreadsheet of branches ((F12) [FUJ00081220]) which were affected by the Receipts
and Payments bug and the two branches mentioned in the May email are not on it. |
agree with Anne Chambers (having regard to the evidence that she gave to the
Inquiry) that this was not an early incident of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch
bug.

85. | had picked up on the issue referred to in the May email because | had been keeping
a watch on event logs and | spotted these error messages. | decided to double check
that SSC had been informed of these and that there was a process in place to monitor
these events. It isn’t clear from the response if that was the case, however Anne did
re-assure me that there was a KEL such that SMC should have been picking up such

events and raising calls.

86. Ihave looked through the documents given to me by the Inquiry and tried to work out
when | first become aware of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug. | believe that
this was on or around 27 September 2010. | recall that | had been away on holiday for
two weeks and returned to the office on 27 September 2010 (which was a Monday). |
recall that the SSC told me that Horizon Online had been generating unexpected error
events arising from a receipts and payments mismatch when balancing the accounts.
| was immediately tasked with trying to understand this bug. | rapidly produced a note
about the bug (D25) [FUJ00083353], spoke to development about it and circulated it
to the SSC at 1.50pm on 28 September 2010 (D24) [FUJ00082443]. It is probable that
others in Fujitsu (particularly in the SSC) were aware of the bug prior to 27 September

2010 but | do not know who they were or what they knew about it.

Page 29 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

87. In summary, whilst | believe that this bug would have been present in Horizon Online
from the beginning of its roll out in early 2010, | believe that | personally became aware

of it on or around 27 September 2010.

My note entitled ‘Correcting Accounts for “lost” Discrepancies’

88. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about my note dated 28 September
2010 entitled ‘Correcting Accounts for “lost” Discrepancies’ (D25) [FUJ00083353].

89. My understanding of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug, as reflected in my
note dated 28 September 2010, was that it arose during the balancing process at the
end of a balancing or trading period. It arose if a branch cancelled the completion of
a trading period, and then re-attempted the completion, which caused discrepancies
from that trading period to disappear from the Horizon Online counter, whereas those

same discrepancies remained visible on the back-end branch account.

90. Itwas clear to me when | first became aware of the bug and wrote my note that it could
cause discrepancies and thereby affect the reliability of Horizon Online. | think that

this was reflected in the speed with which it was responded to by Fujitsu.

91. The Inquiry has asked me about the fix for the bug. Two separate issues arose. In
summary, the fix was to correct the bug in the code (to prevent it arising again).
Separate to that, there was the need to correct the accounts for those branches which
had been affected. In sections 6 and 7 of my 28 September 2010 note, | suggested
that this could be done by injecting new data into the main branch database (called
the BRDB). | noted as follows:

“Fixing the Data for each Affected Branch

The data can be corrected by adjusting the appropriate Opening Figures and
BTS Data that relates to the current TP. This will result in the Discrepancy
needing to be processed when rolling over into the next TP.

| propose that if we are to do this then we take a copy of the data for one branch
and check out the proposed changes on a test system and then rollover the

Page 30 of 75
92.

93.

94.

95.

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

branch on the test system to ensure that the discrepancy is handled correctly
before we attempt to correct Live data. Having done one example in this way,
we then need to agree a timetable with Post Office Ltd to correct the other
branches and ensure that this is communicated with the Branches to ensure
that everyone involved is happy.”

My note proceeded on the basis that, if there was to be this sort of adjustment, the
branches affected should be told of the correction. Ultimately, Fujitsu did not use this
method, and instead POL adjusted the accounts using the back-end POL SAP
accounting system. | agreed that this was a better way to correct the discrepancies

caused by the bug.

The Inquiry has asked me why, at this stage (i.e. 28 September 2010), Fujitsu had not
informed POL about the bug. My email dated 28 September 2010 made clear my view
that POL should be informed of the issue:

“We probably need to formally raise this as a problem with POL. I'm not sure
how this is done, but presumably you can initiate that.”

In section 6 of my note, | recommended that Fujitsu should carry out the steps at
section 4 so to identify the “full scope” of the problem before communicating it to POL
through the usual problem management mechanisms. These were steps that could
and should be carried out swiftly. It made sense to me that Fujitsu should approach
POL as soon as it was able to explain the full extent of the problem properly and
provide recommendations about how to deal with it. | understand that Fujitsu did
inform POL and sent POL my note one day later on 29 September 2010 (see below).
This was the sort of timeframe | had in mind.

The Inquiry has asked me to expand on the proposal | made in my note to monitor
116, 117, 902 and 903 events. Whenever the bug arose, a 902 or 903 event was
written into the NT event logs, which were monitored by operations staff (in the SMC),
and a 116 or 117 business event was written into the BRDB, which was monitored,
albeit not routinely, by the SSC. After discovery of the bug, | recommended that all
four events (i.e. 116, 117, 902 and 903 events) should now be monitored more closely
both by operations staff and the SSC during the investigation phase to ensure that all
occurrences of the bug were detected. | should add that the SMC should have
monitored 902 and 903 events in any event and raised a call for SSC to investigate

Page 31 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

(as indicated in the KEL Ballentj1759Q referred to in the May email (D10)). However,
| suggested that SSC actively check for all four events to make doubly sure that we
picked up every occurrence of this issue. As explained above, | recall that the SSC
also looked back in time to check if there were earlier occurrences that they had
missed.

96. The Inquiry has asked me why | considered that the full extent of the bug could be
identified by Windows NT events (i.e. the 902 and 903 events) and the Counter
Business Events (i.e. the 116 and 117 events). The simple answer is that | believed
at the time — and | still believe now — that this was a failsafe method of scoping for any
occurrences of the specific bug. In other words, | believed that actively monitoring for
these four events, both in the past and in the present, would reveal the full extent of
the bug.

Emails on 29 and 30 September 2010

97. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about emails | sent and received on
29 and 30 September 2010.

98. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the reference to “Penny in prosecution support’
in my email dated 29 September 2010 (D11) [FUJ00081135]. This is Penny Thomas,
who worked in the Fujitsu prosecution support team. Whilst investigating the Receipts
and Payments Mismatch bug, | had come across a tool that the SSC had developed,
which allowed them to produce a report in a readable format rather than as raw data.
| thought that this tool could potentially be very useful in analysing evidence passed
to POL for prosecutions and so | flagged it for discussion with Penny. This had nothing
to do with the main issue discussed in the email chain (hence | used the words “as an
aside” in my email).

99. The Inquiry has asked me to expand on my reference to “(by inserting data into
BRDB)”. |f Fujitsu was required to re-insert the lost discrepancies, then new records
would have to have been inserted into the BRDB. This would probably have been
done using a specially developed script by the BRDB Host development team.
However, it was soon agreed (I can’t remember exactly when — but this was the

outcome of the teleconference with POL the following week) that this was not the best

Page 32 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

approach and that it was better to make corrections to the POL SAP system by POL

using normal business processes.

100. The Inquiry has referred me to bullet point 4 in my email of 30 September 2010 and
has asked whether | took any steps to investigate whether the events referred to in
this bullet point were a separate issue and/or had been fixed. | don’t recall whether |
was involved in any investigation, but looking at the email, | would agree that these

were events unrelated to the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug which were fixed.

101. The Inquiry has referred me to bullet point 7 in the same email and has asked me
whether | can describe the nature and results of the investigation into these two
branches (122946 and 374632). As | explained in my email dated 6 October 2010
(D13) [FUJ00081211], branch 122946 lost its opening figures when it migrated (i.e.
from Legacy Horizon to Horizon Online), whilst branch 374632 lost its opening figures
after 60 days.

102. As can be seen from this email chain, this was in reply to John Simpkins asking me to
identify which branches required further investigation by the SSC (see his reference
to raising PEAKs for SSC to investigate further). Having passed the information on for
SSC investigation, | don’t believe | had any involvement in their investigation.
However, | can see that the problem at branch 113459 became the subject of further

emails in 2012 (see below).

103. The Inquiry has referred me to bullet point 10 in the same email and has asked me to
expand on my comment “lets [sic] wait until! POL ask us to fix something before
worrying about adding them into the list’. | cannot now recall why | made this comment
but looking back on it, | think | was referring to those branches which could get the
mismatch in the interim (pending the problem being fixed). This is what Mark Wright
seemed to be suggesting in his earlier email, when he said: “! would suggest that we
wait until we know what POL want us to do before we collect any more info for the
new offices”. The responsibility for managing this ongoing issue lay with the SSC and
Problem Management (and Mark Wright was the main person doing that). | think | was
agreeing with him that we could hold off on analysis of any new branches until we

knew what POL wanted to do by way of a fix.

Page 33 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Interaction with POL and SPMs about the bug

104.

105.

The Inquiry has provided me with a number of documents relating to Fujitsu’s
interaction with POL and SPMs about the bug and has asked me questions about
these documents. In particular, the Inquiry has asked me to set out details of all

conversations and/or meetings that | attended with POL concerning the bug.

lam afraid | cannot remember the details of every conversation that | had or meeting
| attended 12 years ago about this event, but what | can recall or deduce from the

documents are the following significant events:

a. | first became aware of the bug on or around Monday 27 September 2010 (see
above).

b. | put together the note that described the bug and sent it to the SSC on Tuesday
28 September 2010 (see above).

c. | believe that Fujitsu first told POL (Emma Langfield) about the bug by email on
Wednesday 29 September 2010 at 11.04am: (D12) [FUJ00081 137]. This email
attached my note about the bug. In the same email, Fujitsu proposed a
conference call between POL and Fujitsu on Thursday 30 September or Friday
1 October 2010.

d. There was a delay of around 48 hours before POL responded to this email at
142.15pm on Friday 1 October 2010: (D12) [FUJ00081 137].

e. | believe that the proposed conference call, which | attended, took place on
Monday 4 October or Tuesday 5 October 2010: (E16) [FUJ00081584] (see

below).

f. | do not recall having much further input until early 2011, when | was asked by
POL (although | cannot remember whether this approach was made directly or
more likely via someone at Fujitsu) to put together a detailed “storyboard” of
exactly how the bug had arisen and what the SPMs would have seen on their

screens.

Page 34 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

g. | produced a “scoping” document on 11 February 2011: (D17) [FUJ00081527].
| did this to make sure that POL agreed what they wanted me to do before |

started work. | sent this scoping document to Rod Ismay at POL.

h. On 18 February 2011, Mr Ismay asked me a number of questions / clarifications
about the scoping document | had produced: (D19) [FUJ00081544].

i. On 22 February 2011, | responded to Rod Ismay’s questions: (D19)
[FUJ00081544].

j. | believe that | probably had one or more conference calls with POL in the next
few days about the “storyboard” they had asked me to produce: (D20) [see
FUJ00081545].

k. | produced a more developed version of the scoping document, which by now
had become the storyboard, on 25 February 2011: (D21) [FUJ00081550].
Looking at this now, however, | cannot be certain whether this was the final

version.

|. After | produced the final version of this document, | do not recall having any
further interaction with POL about the bug until April 2012, when Andrew Winn

at POL asked me questions about the list of affected branches (see below).

m. After | dealt with those questions, | do not recall having any further interaction
with POL about the bug until May or June 2013, when | remember having a
number of calls with POL senior management and POL’s lawyers, about

informing Second Sight of the bug.

106. | am aware that the Inquiry is interested in the typed note made of the conference call
that took place between POL and Fujitsu on 4 or 5 October 2010: (E16)
[FUJ00081584]. | have not been asked questions about this note in the Rule 9 request.
| did not write this note. | have a vague memory of this call but | cannot recall the
exact details. What | can recall is that the basic approach to investigating the bug was
agreed, as well as how to correct the accounts of the affected branches. | then left it
to the SSC, problem management and POL to implement what had been agreed. In

terms of how POL and Fujitsu agreed that the accounts should be corrected, my

Page 35 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

recollection is that there was very little debate about which of the three “Solutions” set
out in the note should be used because everyone agreed on “Solution Two”, i.e. an
amendment to the accounts by POL using POL SAP. “Solution One” in this note did
not reflect what was set out in my note dated 28 September 2010, which proceeded
on the basis that SPMs should be informed of the change to the data.

107. In relation to what Fujitsu or POL told SPMs about the bug and when this happened,
| do not believe that | was involved. However, | believe that POL did communicate with
all of the affected branches in order to explain the bug and to reassure the SPMs. This
was envisaged in “Solution Two”. However, | cannot recall exactly what these

communications involved.

108. | understood that Fujitsu rolled out the fix to all branches in late 2010. My recollection
is that Fujitsu identified a precise scenario that had resulted in the bug, and so it was
relatively easy to run that same scenario on the fixed code to ensure that the fix was
successful. As with any other fix, | believe that the fix for this bug also went through a
set of standard regression tests to ensure that there were no adverse side effects.

109. | do not know the detail of all of the investigations, but | recall that the SSC continued
to monitor the events raised by the bug until late 2010 and circulated a weekly email
with an updated list of affected branches. Fujitsu applied the fix to all branches and
then continued to monitor for any further occurrences of the tell-tale events for at least
a further month to ensure that all instances of the bug were identified. As far as | recall,
this monitoring did not identify any further branches as being affected by the bug after

the fix was rolled out.

110. To my knowledge, Fujitsu did not exercise its remote access powers at any point in
investigating or fixing the bug. No doubt the SSC will have viewed live data from within
the BRSS (a read-only copy of the live BRDB system) in order to investigate and
diagnose the problem. However, viewing live data on the BRSS would have had no
impact on live data in the BRDB. | also assume that the SSC may have retrieved
diagnostic logs from the counters, although | do not know for sure whether this
happened. If it did happen, this was a standard process that simply retrieves — but
does not amend - live data. As noted above, | understood that POL adjusted their
version of the accounts of affected branches using the back-end POL SAP accounting
system. This had no impact on the accounts as seen in the branches.

Page 36 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

111. | cannot identify with confidence every team or person within Fujitsu who knew about
the bug. All | can say is that | understood that various individuals within development,

the SSC and problem management were aware of it, but there may have been others.

Identifying affected branches

112. | understood that Fujitsu set up a detailed monitoring exercise to detect any other
instances of the bug and continued this monitoring until it was confident that the fix
had been rolled out effectively to all branches. Initially the number of affected branches
appeared to be in the region of about 40. After the investigations described above, |
believe that the SSC calculated that the bug had occurred on 64 occasions in 62
branches in total and produced a final list of those branches. The bug had caused
some of those branches to suffer losses and some of them to experience surpluses. |
understood that where the branch suffered a loss, the SPM was reimbursed, and
where it had experienced a surplus, the SPM was allowed to keep the surplus. To put
that figure of 62 branches into context, there were around 12,000 branches in the

whole estate at that time.

113. | note that in the email correspondence at (D14) [FUJ00081214], Antonio Jamasb of
POL sought an update on the number of affected branches because he was speaking
to senior stakeholders within POL. Mark Wright stated that he had been sending a
report every week to the POL Duty Manager. This reflects my understanding that POL

received weekly reports about the extent of the impact of the bug.

114. As | have noted above, this specific Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug arose if a
branch cancelled the completion of a trading period, and then re-attempted the
completion, which caused discrepancies from that trading period to disappear from
the Horizon Online counter, whereas those same discrepancies remained visible on
the back-end branch account. The issue would always occur in the event that the final
rollover was partially cancelled, then re-attempted without exiting the process. That
this was a rare sequence of activities was demonstrated by the issue having only
occurred around 64 times (in the content of 12,000 branches rolling over successfully
every month without hitting this sequence of activities). This would help to explain why
it had not been discovered during testing. That it was rare did not matter — it was

responded to swiftly and decisively.

Page 37 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

115. A small number of branches that were initially included in this list were subsequently
removed from it. These included branches 122946, 113459 and 374632, and the
Inquiry has asked me why they were not considered to be affected the bug. Looking
back at the emails, | believe that the SSC reached this decision because these
branches did not generate both: (a) a 116 or 117 event in the BRDB, and (b) a 902 or
903 event in the event logs. Both (a) and (b) needed to be present in order for the bug

to be present.

116. | believed at the time that the SSC had identified every branch affected by the bug.
From time to time, | saw the reports that the SSC produced that identified the affected
branches (because | was copied in) for the purposes of updating POL. | believed that
the investigations that the SSC conducted were thorough. If there is evidence to
suggest that the SSC did not identify all affected branches, | would be very concerned
by that and | would welcome the opportunity to comment on it.

The other branches

117. On 2 April 2012, Andrew Winn at POL emailed me to ask about two branches that had
been removed from the list of affected branches early on in Fujitsu’s investigation into
the bug: (E95) [POL000297 18]. The two branches were 122946 and 113459. Having
investigated the problem, | replied on 10 May 2012, explaining that these two
branches had been affected by separate problems not related to the Receipts and
Payments Mismatch bug. In relation to branch 122946, | noted that Steve Parker had
initiated an investigation into the problem on 5 January 2011 using PEAK PC0207483.
| said that | had been unable to work out what had happened to the investigation into
branch 113459. | suggested to Mr Winn that POL and Fujitsu's problem management
teams should liaise with each other to get to the bottom of the matter.

118. My review of the documents recently provided to me by the Inquiry include:
a. An email dated 16 April 2013 from Andrew Winn to Steve Bansal: (F124)
[POL00098016]. | was one of a number of people copied into the email. In the

email, Mr Winn again asked about the same two branches and sought

confirmation that there was no unresolved problems in relation to them. | note

Page 38 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

that Mr Winn stated that POL asked for Fujitsu’s investigation into branch
122946 not to proceed. | do not know why this happened.

b. An email dated 2 July 2013 from me to Mark Wright and Pete Newsome noted
that Andrew Winn was chasing Steve Bansal about the two branches: (E96)
[POL00029719]. Later that same day, as part of the same email chain, | can
see that Mark Wright unearthed an email from Steve Parker to Andrew Winn
dated 6 January 2011 which gave the results of the investigation into branch
122946. It seems that Andrew Winn was unable to find this email in 2012/2013
when he asked me about branch 122946. | can see from the email chain that
Pete Newsome forwarded this 6 January 2011 email to Rod Ismay on 3 July
2013.

119. Ultimately it appears that these two branches were affected by problems which were
different from the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug. That is why they were
removed from the list of affected branches in late 2010. The investigation into branch
122946 concluded in January 2011 and Mr Winn appears to have been notified of this.
| am unclear what happened to the investigation into branch 113459, although | note
that, in his email dated 3 July 2013 to Rod Ismay, Pete Newsome said that he had an

answer in relation to that branch and would forward it shortly.

Email of 12 November 2010

120. In the context of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug, the Inquiry has asked me
about an email | sent on 12 November 2010: (D14) [FUJ00081214]. This email was a
reply to a request from Antonio Jamasb at POL, who (amongst other points) requested
a “summary from Fujitsu stating why we have no other integrity issues with Horizon

and why we couldn't see this issue”.

121. Mr Jamasb’s email was forwarded to me and John Simpkins and | then forwarded it
to Mark Wright (because it was he and not John Simpkins who was dealing with the
Receipts and Payments mismatch bug). | said in my email to John Simpkins, Mike
Woolgar and Mark Wright that | didn’t think we could make such a statement and that
what we could do was to check through what “known integrity issues” we have and

Page 39 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

also make the more general statement that when integrity issues arrive, then they

leave a trail enabling them to be identified and their scope to be ascertained.

122. By “known integrity issues”, | meant any issues that had come to light in the very early
stages of Horizon Online which had the potential to cause discrepancies to branch
accounts. | asked Jon Simpkins and Mark Wright whether they were aware of other
integrity issues that we hadn't fixed because | could not think of any. Mark Wright
responded, in turn, that he did not think there were any more integrity issues but that
we still had recovery issues and duplicate JSNs in the audit trail. To put these in
context, recovery issues relate to problems with communications failures (and which
| deal with below) which will occur occasionally in all systems. They were spotted by
the reconciliation mechanisms and SPMs were prompted to follow certain processes
where they arose. As regards duplicate JSNs, | recall that there had been some issues
in the pilot phase of Horizon Online about duplicate JSNs but that these had been
fixed some time before this email correspondence. | don’t understand these to have
impacted the branch accounts (and recall that there were checks for them as part of
the ARQ retrieval process). | left it to Mike Woolgar to respond back to Antonio Jamasb

as he considered appropriate.

123. What was suggesting in this email was that Fujitsu inform POL of any integrity issues
we had and also point towards the audit trail as a means of identifying those integrity
issues. A number of problems had become apparent during the pilot of Horizon Online
and the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug had been discovered thereafter. This
made me wary of giving a blanket assurance, at what was still an early point in the life
of Horizon Online. The audit trail could however be relied upon to demonstrate if there

was a bug going to the integrity of the system.

Suspense Account bug

[Rule 9 request: questions 44 and 45]

124. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about this bug, which only affected

Horizon Online (not Legacy Horizon).

125. | believe that | first became aware of the bug at some point in March 2013, although |
am afraid that | cannot be more precise than that.

Page 40 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

126. In order to refresh my memory of the bug, | have read my report dated 15 May 2013
(D26) [FUJ00083375], which was largely based upon work previously conducted by
Anne Chambers (and others in the SSC). This contains a description of the nature of

the bug and its consequences.

127. To summarise, the bug was caused by a failure to fix an earlier problem in 2011. My
report described this earlier 2011 problem as follows: “in April 2011 a problem was
found with the archiving strategy related to Stock Units that have been deleted in
Branch”. What | meant by this was that if a branch deleted a Stock Unit, the removal
of the data associated with that Stock Unit by the archiving process was faulty. The
changes implemented in 2011 were designed to cure this problem by amending the
metadata in BRDB_ARCHIVED_TABLES. Whilst these changes fixed this problem, it
created another problem, which was that, if a branch deleted a stock unit between the
dates on which PEAK PC0203522 and PEAK PC0208783 went live, temporary data
used in calculating the local suspense account was not archived when it should have
been, and so was erroneously re-used a year later, leading to new reconciliation

problems.

128. My note said that this problem would occur “under some specific, rare circumstances”.
What | meant by this was that, for the bug to arise, a stock unit would need to have
been deleted within a relatively narrow window of two or three months (i.e. between
the fixes of the two PEAKs mentioned above). It would also have been unusual for a
branch to delete a stock unit in any event. Hence the circumstances in which the bug
could arise were rare, as reflected by the fact it was only found to have occurred on

14 occasions in 12 branches.
129. Dealing with the other questions the Inquiry has asked me about this bug:
a. | agree that the bug resulted in discrepancies in these 12 branches: | noted in
my report that five branches had losses and seven had gains (and two had

both). This was the totality of the affected Branches. However the problem

would re-occur annually until the offending data was removed.

Page 41 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

| do not know every team or individual within Fujitsu who may have known
about the bug, but | believe that individuals within development, the SSC and

problem management were all aware of it.

| understood that POL was already aware of the bug before it was first reported
to Fujitsu in early 2013. | do not know when POL first became aware of it but |
understood that an SPM had raised the issue with them in 2012, but for reasons
| do not understand, POL did not pass the problem to Fujitsu. | understood that
another SPM subsequently raised the issue in 2013 and this led to Fujitsu

becoming aware of it.

. As far as | can recall, the bug was resolved by SOT, who applied a script
developed and tested by the host development team to modify the database to
remove the old records that should have been archived. This is what | meant
when | said in my note that “these records have been manually deleted”. | did
not think of this as a form of remote access involving the deletion of live financial
data; it was a change to temporary data held in Horizon Online’s back-end
systems that should have been deleted many months earlier. This was done to

prevent SPMs experiencing further balancing problems.

| understood that POL informed the SPMs in the 12 affected branches about
the problem, including that it had been fixed, but | do not know exactly what
they were told. My paper contained draft terms for a letter to the SPMs which
explained what had happened. | think this was drafted by Andy Winn and was
incorporated into my note. The note refers to the proposed letter being
approved by POL’s legal department prior to sending (this does not surprise
me as the letter contained information which could only have been provided by
POL).

| don’t think | was involved in specifying or applying the fix. Anne Chambers
had identified the offending records and arranged to have them removed. | may
have been consulted, but Anne did all the hard work. We also introduced a new
test into the balancing process that would detect if there were any potentially
spurious old records around, so that if in future we encountered something
similar, the SPM would have been made aware of it. This can be seen at

paragraph 2.3 of the note.

Page 42 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

g. | believe that the bug was not picked up in earlier testing because the issue did
not become readily visible until Horizon Online had been running for at least a

year.

130. In summary, whilst the Suspense Account bug was a serious issue, | believed that
Fujitsu reacted quickly to the bug (as soon as they became aware of it) and that there
were only 12 branches where it caused actual discrepancies, all of which were rapidly

rectified. | am not aware of any recurrences of the bug thereafter.

Dalmellington Bug / Branch Outreach Issue

[Rule 9 request: questions 46 and 47]

131. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about this bug. This affected Horizon

Online (not Legacy Horizon).

132. | first became aware of the bug after | retired in February 2015. After | retired, Fujitsu
kept me on a retainer for ad hoc consultancy work and | was asked to spend a couple
of days assisting them with this issue. Partly because | had retired, | am unsure who
within Fujitsu knew about the bug before | did. | prepared a note about the bug on 15
November 2015 (D56) [FUJ00085882]. | believe this sets out a full description of the
bug and its consequences.

133. To summarise, the bug occurred when an SPM owned both an outreach branch and
acore branch. Outreach branches are typically only found in rural or remote locations:
they are opened by an SPM for a few hours each week, usually in a village hall or
pub. The SPM needs to remit cash and stock from their core branch (which is open
all week during normal office hours) to their outreach branch, and then, if there are
any surpluses, remit those surpluses back again from the outreach branch to the core
branch.

134. Outreach branches are typically not very busy, which may lead to the counter sitting
idle for 75 or more minutes. If this happened during the Log On process, or if a user
forced another user’s profile to log out of the counter, the Log On script would remain
on the stack whilst incomplete. This was the precondition to a lengthy and complicated

series of further steps that might sometimes (but not necessarily) arise. Assuming

Page 43 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

these steps did arise in a particular order, when the user hit the enter button on the
screen (ostensibly to complete the remittance process of cash or stock from the
outreach branch to the core branch or vice versa), the function completed but did not
tell the user that it had completed. This may have led to a false belief in the user that
the cash or stock had not been remitted. If, as a result of this false belief, the user hit
the enter button again, the cash or stock was remitted again, leading to the function
being repeated, causing a shortfall of cash or stock on the branch accounts due to the
duplicate remittances. This would have been fairly obvious to SPM as a new receipt
was printed for each spurious remittance. As a result, the bug, exacerbated by the
(entirely understandable) acts of the SPM, could result in multiple remittances of cash
or stock between outreach branches and core branches that would have shown as
cash or stock losses if not rectified, as the cash or stock logged on the system would

not match up with the actual cash or stock in the branch.

135. When | first became aware of the bug, it was immediately obvious to me that it had
the potential to cause discrepancies in branches. However, as explained below, it
appears (save for the branches in respect of which | do not know the position) that it

did not result in actual discrepancies.

136. Dealing with the other questions that the Inquiry has asked me about the bug:

a. | donot know when Fujitsu first informed POL about the bug but | understood
that the reason | prepared my note was so that it could be provided to POL to

assist with their understanding of the problem.

b. Ido not know exactly when Fujitsu or POL contacted the affected SPMs or what
they said, but | understood that Fujitsu support staff were in contact with the
affected SPMs because the call had been raised by those SPMs in the first
place. Indeed, | recall that Fujitsu contacted the affected SPMs directly with a
suggested avoidance (namely to reverse the duplicate remittances in) whilst

the bug was being fixed.

c. | understood that the Fujitsu development team subsequently identified the
actual bug in the code and developed a fix. Because | had retired, | was not
involved in developing this fix and so | do not recall any details about how it
worked, or when it was rolled out to branches.

Page 44 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

d. Ido not know what steps Fujitsu took to identify the extent of the bug. However,
| recall that, on my recommendation, Fujitsu reviewed its archives looking for
the symptoms of the bug since Horizon Online went live in 2010. | believe that
the results of this review were fed into the Power point presentation at (D27)
[FUJ00083379], which documents the findings provided to POL on 10
December 2015. | believe | first saw this presentation in 2018 (| do not recall
that | had any part in preparing it). The presentation stated that there had been
112 occurrences of the bug in the previous five years. Based on the analysis
carried out by Mr Justice Fraser in the Technical Appendix, | believe that this
figure is wrong. My understanding based on the work | did in 2018 is that the
first 65 of these occurrences, which happened between February 2010 and
January 2011, were caused by two different problems with similar symptoms,
all of which had been fixed by January 2011. | believe that the number of
occurrences of this bug was 47, and of those 47, my understanding (which
seems to be supported by Mr Justice Fraser's analysis) is that POL corrected
nearly all of them at the time by means of transaction corrections (I think that
some may also have been corrected by the SPM just reversing the duplicate
transaction). The presentation states that there were four uncorrected
instances of the bug. | do not know what was done in relation to those four

cases.

e. | believe that the bug had not been identified in testing because the sequence
of events required to create the bug was very obscure. | outlined in my note
dated 15 November 2015 the twelve steps that had to occur in the correct order
for the bug to arise. Moreover, this bug only arose when dealing with remitting
cash or stock to or from outreach branches, which were a very small

percentage of POL branches nationwide.

137. In summary, whilst the Dalmellington bug was a serious issue, | believed that Fujitsu
reacted quickly to the bug after they first became aware of it, and that there were only
four branches where it may have caused actual discrepancies. From reading the
second Fujitsu corporate statement given to the Inquiry [FUJ00126035], | understand
that the fix was rolled out in January 2016. | am not aware of any recurrences of the
bug thereafter.

Page 45 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Withdrawn stock discrepancies

[Rule 9 request: question 43]

138. The Inquiry has drawn my attention to PEAK PC0208335 (D76) [FUJ00086720] and
asked me to explain the “known problems with declarations containing withdrawn
products”. | do not recall the specific problem described in this PEAK, but reading it
now, | believe that the “known problems” were that, if POL withdrew a stock product,
after a period of time Horizon Online removed the reference data for that product. This
could cause problems when SPMs conducted their stock declarations. If an SPM
attempted to update an old declaration a long time after the withdrawal of a product,
there would be no reference data to identify the product. | don’t think that the failure in

the declaration process could lead to discrepancies in the branch accounts.

139. The Inquiry has asked me how the particular problem described in this PEAK was
fixed. | proposed how to fix the problem in my entry on the PEAK dated 16 February
2011 at 11.45am, but | cannot tell from the PEAK whether this actually fixed this
problem, or whether Fujitsu used an alternative fix. Either way, the PEAK records on

10 September 2012 that the problem was fixed.

A hypothetical problem

[Rule 9 request: question 48]

140. The Inquiry has asked me questions about PEAK PC0187425: (D22) [FUJ00081770].
| do not recall this PEAK, but reading it now, | believe that, in early 2010, | was
reviewing some code on Horizon Online and came across a hypothetical problem
whereby, if a record was not locked before updating, another user could potentially
amend it from elsewhere. This problem seemed to me to be hypothetical because it
could only arise if there were two counters accessing and updating the same database
entries simultaneously (within the same fraction of a second), which in normal
operating conditions should not happen. Nonetheless, | raised a PEAK to look into
whether my hypothesis was correct. My concern was that, had this problem occurred
in live data, only one of the two operations would succeed, and the other would be
ignored without that user being informed. In other words, the other user would

mistakenly think that he or she had updated the data.

Page 46 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

141. This PEAK was hypothetical in the sense that the factual scenario that might give rise
to it would not occur. As far as | am aware, the problem never occurred on any live
data. Even if the problem had occurred on any live data, | do not believe that it would
have caused discrepancies in branch accounts because the updates were not to
transactional tables.

142. | do not know whether POL or SPMs were informed about this PEAK but given its

hypothetical nature | would be surprised if they were.

Giro payments

[Rule 9 request: question 50]

143. The Inquiry has asked me to consider two documents which relate to the investigation
by Second Sight. My understanding is that the Second Sight investigation will be
explored in phase 5 of the Inquiry, but | will do my best to answer the Inquiry’s

questions on this specific issue.

144. | understood that at some point in 2012 POL commissioned Second Sight to
investigate the Horizon system. | recall having a few conversations with lan
Henderson, who was an investigator with Second Sight, and | recall assisting with the
technical aspects of some reports that | understood POL sent to Second Sight. |
believe that (D9) [FUJ00080537] was one of these reports, since the identifier SRO11
was used for “spot reports”, which was the name given to reports produced by POL
and sent to Second Sight to assist them in their investigation. POL’s legal team
sometimes asked me to carry out technical analyses of Horizon data, which |
understood POL would use in these spot reports. | believe that this particular report
contains some of my analysis, including the section that describes the Horizon Online
counter processes, but without seeing the accompanying emails, | cannot identify the

specific wording | suggested.
145. The Inquiry has asked me about my “feedback” on this report (the word used in the

email dated 25 March 2013 at (D8) [FUJ00080536)). | do not recall what feedback |
gave, and from what | can see, the report does not contain amendments in track

Page 47 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

changes or any other information that would assist me in working out what feedback |

gave.

146. The Inquiry has asked me why the email and attached report were marked as “subject
to legal professional privilege”. | did not send the email or write the report, so | do not
think | can answer that question. What | can recall is that POL’s lawyers asked Fujitsu
to mark such spot reports as legally privileged. | assumed that there were good legal
reasons for doing that.

Remote access
[Rule 9 request: questions 16 to 20]

147. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about remote access. My
understanding of remote access differed between Legacy Horizon and Horizon
Online, so | will address the two separately. Before doing so, however, | would like to
make some general comments, all of which apply to both Legacy Horizon and Horizon
Online:

a. | have never used remote access. | did not have the permissions or privileges
to be able to do so. None of my jobs ever required me to have this functionality.
As a result, | have only ever had a general (and indirect) understanding of the
nature of the remote access rights POL or Fujitsu could and did exercise. | have
read the evidence to the Inquiry given by Richard Roll, Mik Peach, Steve Parker
and Anne Chambers and | would defer to their direct knowledge of remote
access. For the same reasons, | do not know who had remote access rights,
the periods during which they had remote access rights or the details of their

security vetting/qualifications.

b. There has always been a basic distinction in my mind between remote business
access exercised by POL and remote support access exercised by Fujitsu. An
example of the former was POL’s use of transaction corrections in Legacy
Horizon, which was a type of external input into Horizon which the user of the
system had to authorise. The latter encompassed different kinds of scenarios
— from rolling out software updates including fixes, improving the operational
performance of counters and updating the back-end databases. It also

encompassed injecting data to correct a problem, and to my mind, this involved

Page 48 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

either restoring data that had been lost, or alternatively adding new data to

reverse or amend the effect of existing transactions.

| never understood or perceived that there was anything secretive or sinister
about the fact that Fujitsu had used remote support access. | do not know how
it would have been feasible to operate Horizon without it. When | met Second
Sight in September 2012, | told them this. As far as | am aware, every computer

system, large or small, has a form of remote access built into it.

My understanding when | was employed by Fujitsu — and my understanding

now — is that Fujitsu never had the capacity to delete data from branch

accounts. | only understood that it had the capacity to inject and thereby add
data to branch accounts (which would not cause any deletion of existing data).
(Fujitsu was also able to inject data that would effectively amend Persistent
Objects in Legacy Horizon, for example to change the current TP of a Stock
Unit).

My understanding when | was employed by Fujitsu — and my understanding
now — is that whilst Fujitsu had the capacity to inject data to branch accounts,

this happened very rarely.

When Fujitsu injected data, | believed at the time — and | still believe now — that

all such injections would be visible in the audit data.

When Fujitsu injected data, | believed at the time that POL approved such
additions. | now understand that there were occasions when POL was not

approached and did not approve it.

| don’t recall giving thought at the time to what SPMs were told about Fujitsu’s
exercise of its remote access powers. Looking at it now, however, if Fujitsu was
simply making background changes to improve the operational performance of
the counter, | don’t see why Fujitsu would necessarily inform the SPM (just as
many computer systems run software updates without the user being asked
explicitly to approve them). However, | can see that the injection of data to

change branch accounts raises entirely different issues.

Page 49 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

i. If the relevant teams within Fujitsu injected data to enable action to be taken to
correct a discrepancy caused by a BED or other problem, | cannot see how this
could have affected the reliability of the branch accounts. The only purpose of
injecting data was to present a true picture in the branch accounts. My
assumption was that Fujitsu only ever injected new data for this reason. | don’t
think that | contemplated or considered the possibility of malicious access until

many years later.

Remote access in Legacy Horizon

148. My understanding of Legacy Horizon was that there were two teams in Fujitsu, the
SSC and Systems Operations Team (SOT), that had and exercised remote access
rights. | understood that both teams could access the correspondence servers, which
received live data from the branch counters in the form of messages. If, for example,
the SSC discovered a system failure or BED, | understood that it may have been
necessary for the SSC to inject messages into the system to correct data which had
been affected by the failure or BED. To do this, my understanding was that the SSC
or SOT could write a new (corrected) message that either replaced lost messages or
that reversed the effect of the original (incorrect) message without deleting it. |
understood that this could be done in two ways: either by injecting the new message
at the correspondence servers or by injecting the new message directly at the

counters.

149. When | was employed by Fujitsu, my belief was that, in practice, on the very rare
occasions it arose, the SSC and SOT nearly always injected new messages at the
correspondence servers, not at the counters. In my experience, messages injected at
the correspondence servers would contain information that identified who had injected
the message and why (usually in the form of an incident reference). However, in the
civil litigation in 2018, | learned that the SSC and SOT had injected new messages at
the counter more frequently than | had previously realised. | cannot now recall the
detail but | remember that there were technical reasons why the messages had to be
injected at the counter and not at the correspondence server. These technical reasons
made sense to me at the time of the civil litigation. If messages were injected at the
counter, in my experience, those messages would have attributes in the raw audit

data which meant that they were identifiable as such. However, messages injected at

Page 50 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

the counter were generally more difficult to spot in the audit data than messages

injected at the correspondence server.

150. My understanding was that adding a new message to the correspondence servers or
to a counter did not delete the original message (the effect of which it was reversing).
The original message would remain visible on the correspondence servers. | also
understood that Fujitsu's archive server received a copy of all data transmitted from
the branch counters to the correspondence servers, including any new messages
injected at the counter. This understanding was the consequence of how Riposte was
structured: it simply did not allow any data to be deleted. All that could be done was
to write further messages that undid the effect of the original messages. | understood
that this would leave a complete and visible audit trail on both the correspondence

servers and the audit server, clearly showing all additions and modifications.

151. My understanding at the time was that there were procedures and processes that
governed when and how the SSC or SOT could exercise remote access in Legacy
Horizon. | never knew the detail of these procedures and processes. | only knew that
they existed and | have a memory that they were tightened up over time. | do not know
who was responsible for ensuring compliance with these procedures, but | believe that

it was the Security team.

Remote access in Horizon Online

152. Horizon Online operated a main branch database (BRDB) that stored all live data. |
understood that certain members of the SOT could access the BRDB, but only for the
purposes of applying software updates. As far as | was aware, this type of access did
not have the effect of adding, modifying or deleting any of the live data on the BRDB.

153. | understood that, with one proviso, the SSC could view but not amend live data on
the BRDB. The proviso was that the SSC had access to a tool that enabled them to
inject new transaction data onto the BRDB in an emergency to fix urgent system
problems or BEDs. Rather confusingly, this tool was known as ‘Transaction
Corrections’, but it was completely different to the POL function of issuing Transaction
Corrections to a branch in the event of a discrepancy. During my employment by
Fujitsu, using the Transaction Corrections tool was the only way that | understood that

the SSC could remotely inject live data onto the BRDB. | recall learning, at the time it

Page 51 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

happened, that the SSC had used this tool once in March 2010, during the pilot of
Horizon Online. | do not recall why this was necessary other than to fix a BED. | recall
being told that the SSC’s use of the tool on this occasion was in accordance with an

audited process, but | knew nothing about what this process involved.

154. Any transactions injected by SSC using the Transaction Corrections tool would be
included in the audit trail and, by virtue of the Node number (99, which is shown in the

audit trail as having added the message), would be immediately identifiable.

155. As a result of my involvement in the civil litigation in 2018-2019, and now this Inquiry,
| have become aware that the SSC had other tools that they could (and did) use to
remotely inject live data onto the BRDB. | believe that use of the AppSup Role when
accessing BRDB was one of these tools. | may have heard the name AppSup when |
was employed by Fujitsu, but | did not know at that time what it was or how it worked,
and | still don’t understand it fully now. This probably reflects the fact that | was not an
expert in the Oracle-based software that is relevant to database access in Horizon
Online. In particular, | have never had detailed knowledge of precisely how this
software was configured at any one time to permit or prevent remote access to

different applications and to different groups of people.

156. | do not know what procedures or checks were in place at different times to control
remote access by the SSC or SOT in Horizon Online. This was not my responsibility
and | did not use remote access. | was only aware that there were procedures and
processes that governed when and how the SSC or SOT could exercise remote
access, and that when the SSC used the Transaction Corrections tool to access live
data in the BRDB, this process was audited. | never knew the detail of these
procedures and processes. | only knew that they existed. | also recall that, after my
retirement in February 2015, | learned that improvements were made to the auditing
of changes to the BRDB to make it clearer what changes had actually been made to
data. | do not know who was responsible for ensuring compliance with these

procedures, but | believe that it was the Security team.

157. For completeness, | should add that | was also aware that the SSC (and others) could
access copies of the live data stored on a replica support database (BRSS). As far as
| was aware, if the SSC accessed the BRSS, this did not add, modify or delete any of
the live data on the BRDB. In particular, | had read-only access to BRSS but | do not
consider this to be a form of remote access.

Page 52 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Reports on Horizon Data Integrity
[Rule 9 request: questions 21 and 22]

158. The Inquiry has asked me questions about two reports | prepared concerning data
integrity in Horizon.

My report on Legacy Horizon

159. (D6) [FUJ00080526] is my report dated 2 October 2009 concerning Legacy Horizon.
When the Inquiry first provided me with this report, | could not remember how it had
come about. | have now listened to the evidence given to the Inquiry by Dave Smith
of POL, in which he describes a call in which he briefed me to prepare the report. | do
not remember this call but what he told the Inquiry makes sense to me and | am
content to take his word for it. Mr Smith’s evidence as to why he commissioned this
report appears to reflect its contents: he recalled that he wanted information on
whether Horizon could be affected by power interruptions and about the security of
the audit file.

160. Under the heading “Purpose”, the document explained that it was a technical
description of the measures built into Horizon to ensure data integrity including a
description of failure scenarios. As the paper makes clear, ensuring data integrity in
this context meant ensuring the integrity of data committed to the audit trail. As such
at section 2, | described the process by which data was stored on hard discs within
the post office counter, then at the data centre and then sealed within the audit trail.
The report contemplated circumstances in which data could be lost. Section 3 of the
report dealt with a series of equipment failures. | pointed out that the effects on data
integrity were contingent upon whether the counter could be restarted or not and then
went on to explain the different scenarios that could arise (and the checks that could

be made to see whether, for example, a transaction could be completed).

161. As is clear, the paper was not a report or survey on all of the issues or BEDs which
had affected Legacy Horizon. It was not a report on the integrity of Legacy Horizon in
terms of it being affected by BEDs which might affect branch accounts. It was sought
for a more limited purpose and its contents reflect that. | note that this report was
reviewed and approved by a number of senior and technical people within POL and
Fujitsu (and bears the emblems of both organisations).

Page 53 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

162. The Inquiry has asked me why the words “without prejudice” appear on the report. |
am not a lawyer and | am not completely sure what without prejudice means in this
sort of context. | don’t think | would have used these words unless someone told me

to write them. If someone did tell me to write them, | can’t recall who that was.

My report on Horizon Online

163. (D7) [FUJ00080534] is my report dated 25 November 2011 concerning Horizon
Online. | believe that there are earlier and later versions of this same report. This is
reflected at section 1.1, which refers to Horizon Online having been operational for 12
months (which would have been correct at around the time of the first draft of the

report in January 2011).

164. | recall that | drafted this report because Fujitsu senior management decided to obtain
an independent audit from KPMG as to the integrity of the audit data produced by
Horizon Online. | believe this was probably linked to press reports (in particular a BBC
documentary) raising concerns about the reliability of Horizon. My report was intended
to be included in the briefing materials for KPMG, so that they had a high-level
technical overview as to how data was recorded in the audit trail. | recall meeting
KPMG on three or four occasions to discuss the audit trail. Ultimately, however, this
KPMG audit did not happen. | cannot now recall the reasons but | believe that Steven
Long (who was the Post Office Account Director at the time) took the decision not to

proceed with it.

165. This report was intended to address the same core issue which was addressed in my
earlier sister report on Legacy Horizon. This was spelt out at section 2 (“Purpose”)
where | stated that “The scope of this paper is restricted to showing the integrity of the
audit trail and that it accurately reflects the transactions entered at the counter.” The
scope of this report was to demonstrate that Horizon Online was configured to create
an audit trail, and that this audit trail had integrity because it captured and secured all
data arising from all transactions carried out by SPMs at the counter.

166. Section 3 of this report was a technical description of how data was committed to the
audit trail. Section 4 was the specific part of the report dedicated to describing the

storage of data within the audit system. This part of the report referred to missing or

Page 54 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

duplicate JSNs and | referred to these as potentially occurring as a result of a bug or
someone tampering with the data in the BDRB. This was mentioned as potentially

relevant to the audit trail.

167. Again, as is clear from the contents of this report, it was not and was not intended to
be a report on the integrity of Horizon Online in terms of it withstanding or being
impacted by BEDs that might affect branch accounts. It served a narrower purpose.
Again, | note that it had a number of reviewers, including senior members of the Fujitsu

team.

168. The Inquiry has asked me why | added the words “legally privileged” to the report. |

cannot recall but had probably been advised to do so.

169. The Inquiry has asked me why it did not occur to me that there might be a problem
with the Oracle software. As noted above, | claim no technical expertise in Oracle, but
| was aware at the time that many other large companies and applications used it and

| do not recall being aware of any major technical problems with it.

The Horizon audit trail

170. In this statement | have referred on a number of occasions to the audit trail or audit
data created by Horizon. In his Horizon Issues judgment, Mr Justice Fraser agreed
with Dr Robert Worden’s description of “audit data” as a “gold standard” upon which
to identify and or investigate BEDs. | also considered that the audit data was a gold
standard, but Mr Justice Fraser is incorrect when he subsequently says that audit data
captured every keystroke carried out by the SPM at the counter. To be clear, this is
not a criticism of Mr Justice Fraser (and | note that some witnesses at the Inquiry also
thought this). | hope it is helpful to expand on what | mean when | talk about an audit
trail and audit data, as a basis for my belief that it had integrity. | will deal with Legacy
Horizon and Horizon Online in turn.

Legacy Horizon audit trail

171. There were many hundreds of audit points in Legacy Horizon and many different ways

of filtering and extracting audit data. In Legacy Horizon, | designed the mechanism on

Page 55 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

the correspondence servers which would listen to and pick up new Riposte messages
(including all transactions and business events), which would then be written onto a
serial file. There were tens of thousands of messages per serial file. All of those
messages were then sucked into an audit server, and this became the audit trail. The
audit trail contained every single message written to Riposte, i.e. a whole universe of
raw data. Fujitsu developed tools that filtered this audit trail and extracted parts of it.

These extracts are the ARQ data. To summarise, there were five main data groups:

a. The trace logs (also referred to as diagnostic or counter logs). These comprised
specific messages output by the code to indicate the paths that were taken.
The trace logs were retained for a period of days and assisted the SSC in
looking at immediate problems raised by SPMs in relation to counter failures.
They were not audited and were unavailable after a short period of time
(probably about 30 days, but | can’t remember exactly).

b. The raw audit trail (also referred to as transaction logs). This did not pick up
every single keystroke at the counter, but it did comprise all “transactions” (such
as cash receipts) and “events” (such as log-ins) at the branch, as well as a
myriad of other things such as working data generated during balancing and
cash declarations. However, it excluded “events” captured by the NT event logs

(see below). The raw audit trail was retained for seven years.

c. Transactional ARQ data. This comprised all “transactions” (but not “events”)
extracted from the raw audit trail (see above) when required. This was retained

for seven years.

d. Business Event ARQ data. This comprised all “application business events”
(such as the printing of receipts) extracted from the raw audit trail (see above)

when required. This was retained for seven years.

e. NT eventlogs. These comprised the vast majority of system errors or warnings,
sometimes also called “error events”, such as lock errors in Riposte. They were
retained for seven years. It was part of the system design as to what the NT

event logs captured.

Page 56 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Horizon Online audit trail

172. Horizon Online sought to replicate the data extraction system for Legacy Horizon: as
soon as the data centre received data, it would be written to an audit table, which
would contain all transactions and all events. Horizon Online enabled the transactions
to be presented in a near identical format to the ARQ data tables used in Legacy

Horizon. As with Legacy Horizon, Horizon Online also produced NT event logs.

Further bugs, errors and defects

[Rule 9 request: question 49]

173. The Inquiry has asked me to consider the list of 29 BEDs identified by Mr Justice
Fraser in the Technical Appendix to his Horizon Issues judgment and has asked me
detailed questions about each one. Of those 29 BEDs, | have already addressed in
this statement: (a) Data Tree Build Discrepancies (BED 10), (b) the Callendar
Square/Falkirk bug (BED 2), (c) the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug (BED 1),
(d) the Suspense Account bug (BED 3), (e) the Dalmellington bug (BED 4) and (f)
withdrawn stock discrepancies (BED 13). | will not say anything further about those
six BEDs here.

174. Of the remaining 23 BEDs, it is difficult for me to answer detailed questions with
confidence about what | knew or might have known. As | have set out above, the four
BEDs that have always stood out in my mind as being particularly significant were the
Callendar Square/Falkirk bug, the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug, the

Suspense Account bug and the Dalmellington bug.

175. That said, | wish to assist the Inquiry as best | can. My lawyers and | have reviewed
the broader span of Rule 10 documents which | was given notice of (on 20 and 27
April 2023), to check whether they demonstrate that | had contemporaneous
involvement in responding to other BEDs mentioned by Mr Justice Fraser in the
Technical Appendix. Whilst | cannot guarantee that | have picked up every reference
that may have been made to me on PEAKs and other technical documents, | have

noted the following.

Page 57 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Remming Out (BED 6) issue 2

176. The materials disclosed include a paper that | wrote entitled “Rem Misbalance” (F104)
[FUJ00121073], which | had forgotten until | saw it again. | wrote this on 13 February
2007 and it was timed as written at 4.45pm. As set out in the paper, the issue that
arose was a consequence of the introduction of LFS_COUNTER 35_6. This went to
a limited number of branches for a pilot from 4 February 2007 to 11 February 2007
and then to the whole estate on 12 February 2007. The problem first occurred in two
pilot branches over the weekend of 10 February 2007 but was not investigated until
after the weekend (this was noted in the paper as being normal practice). | recorded
that it occurred in 47 other branches on 12 February 2007 and that therefore 49
branches needed to have their accounts corrected. The paper was focused on the
question of correction and set out that the simplest option was to send a Transaction
Correction to correct the amount in Suspense and to use the Cash In Transit account
to correct the files being sent to POL FS. The solutions suggested demonstrated that
they had been worked out in conjunction with POL. The paper noted that LFS_Counter
35_6 was removed on 12 February but that there were 229 counters in 120 branches
where the regression was unsuccessful and that they could have problems until the
software was fully regressed. The process for managing such later occurrences would

be the same as for the 49 branches known at the time of my paper.

177. In an email of the same day at 4.49pm (F103) [FUJ00121072], | set out that where
branches had not tried Pouch Reversals, that everything should be fixed as a result
of a phone call from Fujitsu support staff asking them to process a Dummy Rem (and

that no Transaction Correction would be required).

178. On 14 February at 8.31am, | emailed lan Trundell of POL (E60) [FUJ00121074] to
inform him of my understanding that a fix was being prepared and that once it was
prepared it would be tested and distributed in the normal way. | informed him that “I’m
not normally in the loop for such things, but presumably details of this will be
communicated to POL in the normal way (whatever that is).” This reflected my general

lack of involvement in that side of the response to issues arising in Horizon.

179. In Mr Justice Fraser’s Technical Appendix, he noted that KEL acha508S provided
advice as to how this issue could be manually fixed; that Fujitsu ran automated reports
to spot any further occurrences and fixed the issue.

Page 58 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

180. From my perspective, | was involved in producing, at speed, an immediate solution to
the remming out issue. | don’t think my involvement could have been for more than a
few days. As far as | was aware a fix was identified and the issue resolved. In short,
the problem was swiftly identified, the branches regressed to the previous version of
the software and, to my knowledge, this problem did not recur.

Bureau de change problems (BED 23) issue 1

181. The PEAK for this issue is PC0129767 (E77) [POL00001 264] and it appears to have
arisen on 6 December 2005. It therefore relates to Legacy Horizon. Anne Chambers
recorded on the PEAK (see entry dated 6 December 2005 at 2.39pm) that:

“Really this is user error. The transaction log search on the session id displayed
3 entries: for currency, margin, and cash. For the existing reversal, he entered
the transaction id for the cash settlement only. If he had entered the transaction
id for the currency/margin (they are the same), both parts would have been
reversed as he intended. Reversal of a transaction settlement is always
allowed but is ineffective - it just reverses cash and settles to cash, as is stated
on the screen and on the reversal receipt. Net impact on anything is nil. A
balance snapshot taken after this will still show both the currency having been
sold, and the margin. This should have indicated that the reversal had not been
done as intended. Because the PM then adjusted his stock to remove the
currency which he had failed to reverse, the margin for the transaction
remained (because margin is not stock). Hence he had a loss to the value of
the margin. Can this be corrected via a Transaction Correction?”

182. | agreed with this, recording (on 7 December 2005 at 11.22am) that:

“I'm not really clear as to why this has been raised as a PEAK. As explained
above, the root cause is a user error, though it is also clear that the user
documentation (which is Post Office Ltd's responsibility) could also be clearer.
There are many things that we or Post Office could do (some are simple Ref
Data changes as indicated earlier in this PEAK). However we cannot make any

changes without guidance from Post Office. All | can suggest is that we make

Page 59 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Post Office aware of the analysis carried out above and ask them what (if

anything) they want to do about it.”

183. Looking at the PEAK now, | don’t think this was an error in the system but | can
understand why the user was confused and | was certainly not attaching any blame
to the user. For Horizon Online, we got POL to change the reversal mechanism,

meaning the mistake could no longer occur.

Remming in (BED 4) issue 1

184. | note (and it is referred to in Mr Justice Fraser’s Technical Appendix), that | am
mentioned in PEAK PC0203085 (F21) [FUJ00081870] in one entry of 18 August 2010
at 6.35pm where Anne Chambers recorded:

“I checked whether there were any exceptions in the BAL OSR logs for any of
the messages, there was nothing. Gareth Jenkins thinks that it should not be

possible to complete the rem in on both counters. Please investigate.”

185. This suggests that Anne and | discussed this issue but | have no idea now what we
discussed or whether it involved any of the underlying detail. It would seem to reflect

the sort of question | could have been asked without needing background detail.

Recovery issues (BED 8) issue 1

186. | understand this issue to relate to the bug found in April 2010 which Fraser J referred
to in his Technical Appendix. It relates to a normal (that is not failed) recovery which

is recorded in an incorrect accounting period. It was fixed in early June 2010.

187. The documents recently given to me by the Inquiry include an email chain dated 26
May 2010 (F105) [FUJ00121083]. This email chain refers to KEL acha5650L, which
in turn refers to PEAK PC0197769, which was raised during the pilot phase of Horizon
Online. My attention has been drawn to an entry on this PEAK on 26 April 2010 in
which Anne Chambers states that she has discussed the problem with me and that

we were attempting to find out whether any other recovered transactions had been

Page 60 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

similarly affected. | note the observation made by Anne in her witness statement given
to the Inquiry (at paragraph 135). | agree with her that this was not an instance of a
failed recovery but that the recovered transaction was assigned the wrong Trading

Period. | also note that there was monitoring of this issue.

188. Upon review, it appears that this was a specific bug where the accounting period had
changed between the original failure and the time of recovery resulting in the recovery
transactions being put into the wrong accounting period. This was a relatively
straightforward bug in the pilot phase. The email reflects an agreement between Anne
and me that all such cases should be identified so that POL could communicate with
the SPMs.

Counter Replacement Issues (BED 12)

189. | note by reference to Mr Justice Fraser's Technical Appendix that | was mentioned in
PEAK PC0052823 about a counter replacement issue [FUJ00075614]. The PEAK
records that Mike Berrisford and | looked at this issue on a test rig. Again, | cannot
recall much about this save that there was a fix produced in September 2002, when

we made changes to the “install a replacement counter” software.

Local Suspense Account (BED 7)

190. | have been through a number of documents given to me on 20 and 27 April 2023 and
| don’t think that | am named in them in respect of the Local Suspense Account issue
which arose in 2010. However, my attention has been drawn to an email of 29 April
2010 [FUJ00121077] in which | explain to the Post Office what the issue amounted to
and the solutions for fixing it. This may well be an example of a case in which | was
asked to draft a communication to POL for the purposes of explaining an issue. My
email attached a spreadsheet of the 33 branches affected. My email stated that the
spreadsheet showed the branches, the amounts and the settlement product used for
clearance.

191. | noted that if the branch cleared the Local Suspense at the end of the period which
was current, using the same method as they used in the previous period, there would

be no lasting effect. The problem would not cause them a discrepancy (though it might

Page 61 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

look as though it had done so) and the Assign to Nominee and other accounts in
POLFS would be correct. For branches where there was a current cash discrepancy,
where the branch cleared Local Suspense to cash (or made good), this could be
resolved immediately by using the Housekeeping function to clear losses / gains from
Local Suspense.

192. Where branches chose more than one settlement option, it was noted that they should
use the Housekeeping function before the next TP rollover, to clear the loss/gain from
Local Suspense that was settled to cash. Then the remainder should be settled to
Assign to Nominee (or whatever was appropriate during the TP rollover. If the branch
had a new loss/gain and this was not the appropriate settlement product, they may

have needed additional help.

193. | asked the MSU to pass this information to POL attaching the spreadsheet. | asked
the MSU to tell POL that the NBSC had already been involved with some of the

branches (those which were highlighted in yellow).

Other matters

194. As the Inquiry might anticipate, given the passage of time, this statement cannot be
definitive as to my state of knowledge. | would not have recalled my involvement in,
or communications about, a number of these issues and am only able to comment on
them having seen the underlying material provided to me by the Inquiry. If the Inquiry
wishes to me to consider any specific document or other documents, | am willing to

do so.

195. There are some issues which have been considered during the examination of other
witnesses and which the documents provided to me as part of the Rule 10 process

touch on. | thought it would assist if | attempted to deal with these in writing.

Secrecy

196. This relates to the suggestion that there was a hesitancy or a culture within Fujitsu of
not providing information to POL. | understood that there was a proper concern that

there should not be informal or ad hoc communications with POL when issues arose

Page 62 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

about Horizon but that these communications should be raised through the
established or formal channels (or upon myself or others being asked to provide an
explanation through those channels). In April 2010, an issue was raised as to how
POL had come by some information about a recovery. | noted in my reply that it was
probably because | had spoken to lan Trundell at POL and that "/ probably said more
than | should, but I'm used to working openly with POL and not keeping them in the
dark" (E42) [FUJ00095095]. As noted elsewhere in this statement, | was clear that
POL needed to be told about the duplication of the ARQ data and the Receipts and
Payments Mismatch bug.

Duplication of ARQ Data in 2010

197. As was set out in Penny Thomas’ report on duplicate data (E51) [FUJ00097058], this
issue came to light on 21 June 2010 when duplicate transaction records were
identified in an ARQ return. This report was written by the following day with a list of
actions. In essence, the issue lay with the ARQ extraction tool. Under Legacy Horizon
the audit process could result in transactions being duplicated (identically) in the audit.
The Legacy Horizon retrieval process spotted this and filtered them out but the Horizon
Online version didn't. None of this affected the underlying audit data. It was the
extraction of the data into the ARQ spreadsheets and the possible use of those

spreadsheets in legal proceedings that was of consequence.

198. By way of immediate response, Penny’s report noted that as the unique identifier
‘NUM' was not included in the current ARQ returns, it was agreed that this would be
incorporated in the queries used to filter the records until the problem was solved.
This would allow the service to continue and duplicated transaction records would be
identifiable.

199. The report recorded that | agreed to draft a statement for management review detailing
the issue for onward transmission to POL. It also noted that a separate issue
was also identified whereby a seemingly duplicated transaction had a different NUM
and that | had agreed to look at the detail of this. | believe that this is a reference to
Postal Services transactions whereby multiple, identical mails items were accepted,
but Postage Labels were printed for each individual item.

Page 63 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

200. In email correspondence of 24 June (E48) [FUJ00097046] at 12.39pm, Penny set out
my suggested note to POL:

“With Horizon counters, the mechanism by which Data is audited has always
worked on the principle that it is acceptable to audit the same data more than
once — in particular if in doubt as to whether or not it has been previously
audited successfully. The Mechanism used on Horizon to retrieve the data
took this into account and only presented one instance of such duplicate data
in the ARQ extracts.

However it has recently been noticed that the HNG-X retrieval mechanism does
not remove such duplicates and a quick scan of the ARQs provided to Post
Office Ltd since the change to the new system indicates that about 35% of the
ARQs might contain some duplicate data. A Peak has been raised to remove
such duplicate data in the future. However until the fix is developed, tested and
deployed, there is a possibility that data is duplicated.

The reliable way to identify a duplicate transaction is to use the <Num> attribute
that is used to generate the unique sequence numbers. Unfortunately, this
attribute is not currently included in the Excel version of ARQ data that has
been passed to Post Office Ltd in the past. This will be included in all future
ARQs until the problem is fixed.

Meanwhile all that can be done on existing ARQs is look for transactions that
appear to be duplicates. Note that we have identified a scenario with Postal
Services transactions where multiple, identical mails items are accepted (ie the
Quantity button is set to greater than 1), but Postage Labels are printed for
each individual item. This results in separate transactions being generated for
each item, which are identical in the ARQ extracts (there is another minor
difference in the raw data apart from the <Num> attribute, but this different

attribute is not currently included in the ARQ extract).”

201. In the same email Penny also provided an update on the situation (noting that a fix
was expected by 29 June 219). She expressed the wish to communicate with her
counterpart in Post Office about this and asked for comments by return. At 5.12pm,
Guy Wilkerson emailed addressing Penny and me to tell us that Alan D’Alvarez and
Geoff Butts should look at it because of the forthcoming Acceptance Board. He
informed Penny that she should hold off until he had spoken to the HNG-X Team.

Page 64 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

202. On the following day, there was some further email correspondence about the viability
of the fix and about Post Office not having raised the issue on a call that morning (E52)
[FUJ00097070]. | emailed making clear my view that, regardless of the workaround,

POL needed to be told and without delay:

“Geoff,

The reason POL have not raised this on the call this morning is that we haven't
told them there is a problem yet. On Guy's advice, Penny has not said anything
to POL until you give us the say so. This was really to allow you to avoid it
becoming an Acceptance Incident.

The work around would require us to tell POL about the issue. Whether they
feel it is acceptable is a different matter. We need to be careful, since this does
relate to evidence used for prosecutions, so | feel that now we know there is
an issue we do need to tell POL about it asap. (The problem was found by
Penny and Alan Holmes earlier this week.)”

203. In terms of the use to which such ARQ data may have been put, Penny’s report (E51)
[FUJ00097058] and emails recognised that we needed to identify which cases
provided with ARQ returns since the HNG-X application had been live had progressed
to prosecution and identify whether duplicate records were included. It was noted that
POL’s involvement was required to ensure all instances were picked up. Whilst this
goes to Phase 4, | did make a witness statement in the case of Mrs Misra which
identified the duplicated data in the transaction logs provided to the defence in her

case.

204. In summary, this issue was acted on as soon as it came to light and the potential
impact of it on spreadsheets that were provided for legal proceedings was immediately
recognised. There was a response to deal with the immediate issues that this
presented and the duplication was fixed. The duplication issues did not affect the
integrity of Horizon or its audit data but rather the extraction of this data into the ARQ

spreadsheets.

Lepton Branch

205. | dealt with Helen Rose in 2012-2013 in relation to a discrete issue which had arisen
at the Lepton branch and which she was investigating. The SPM had complained

about an in-branch reversal which had occurred during system recovery and which he

Page 65 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

denied making. | investigated this issue and confirmed the SPM’s position — the
reversal had been system generated. | am conscious that Mr Justice Fraser was
critical when in email correspondence with Ms Rose on 30 January 2013
[POL00097444] | said that the “system was behaving as it should”. When | made this
comment, | had entirely accepted that the SPM was not at fault. But the reason why
the system was behaving as it should was because when the system failed
unexpectedly, it was not viable to wait until it restarted before deciding what (if
anything) was owed by/to the customer. For that reason, the design of the system
made certain assumptions as to what transactions were deemed to have completed
and what were deemed to not have completed and this was documented. But it was
clearly a complex and rare scenario and | understood that SPMs could get this wrong.
My words were not intended in any way to minimise the situation or attribute blame.
They were only intended to convey that from the technical perspective, what

happened accorded with the design intention.

Reflections

206. | wish to make clear that | have learned a great deal through the documents provided
to me by the Inquiry and by the evidence that | have heard from the SPMs and others.
| am conscious of the gap which existed between my work on Horizon and my belief
that overall, it worked for the great majority of branches, and then the reality
experienced by those who have given evidence to the Inquiry. Reflecting on this and
the broader evidence in the Inquiry, | am struck by the lack of support that was afforded
to SPMs when they got into difficulties. | agree that the time out waiting for lock issues
ought not to have persisted for as long as they did. | can also see, at this distance,
that there would have been a real benefit in having a team whose function it was to
have sight of all issues across the different levels of support and who could have
drawn together PEAKs, had oversight of what front-line support were fielding,
understood the practical ramifications of any issues upon those who worked in the
branches and who ensured that monitoring was working. | have other observations

which are pertinent to phase 4 but will not develop these here.

207. | am aware that the Chair has said that he will keep under review the question of
whether to approach the Attorney General for an undertaking. | maintain my
application to him in relation to Phase 4 of the Inquiry. | understand that this will be

raised in correspondence on my behalf.

Page 66 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

~< GRO

Dated: 01/06/2023

Page 67 of 75
INDEX TO SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF GARETH IDRIS JENKINS

WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

No

URN

Document Description

Control Number

FUJ00079301

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
John Pope and Roger Donato
(cc others) re: EPOSS
Reconciliation

POINQ0085472F

FUJ00079303

Email from Gareth Jenkins re
EPOSS Reconcilliation
Design Version 0.7 21/9/99

POINQ0085474F

FUJ00079304

Email - subject 'Urgent re
EPOSS Reconciliation Design
Version 0.7

POINQ0085475F

FUJ00079488

Pathway Change Proposal re
Cash Account Derivation

POINQO0085659F

FUJ00079333

Email, subject Current Issues
on Cl4 EPOSS

POINQ0085504F

FUJ00126038

Email from Chris Allen to
Ann Clarke, Ben
Gildersleve, Clive Read and
others regarding an invite to
the branch trading -
treatment of suspense (18
Feb 13:00 in room F34)

POINQ0132251F

POL00038916

Draft version of Impact
Release 3 Design
Proposal®Version 1

POL-0035398

FUJ00090393

IMPACT Release 3 Design
Proposal

POINQO0096564F

FUJ00090060

IMPACT Release 3 Design
Proposal

POINQ0096231F

Page 68 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

10

FUJ00126035

Second Corporate Statement
of Fujitsu Services Limited

FUJ00126035

11

POL00028867

Peak Incident Management
System Report

POL-0025349

12

POL00030523

Fujitsu's PEAK Incident
Management System log of
customer call raising issue of
accounting discrepancies and
data tree build issues

POL-0027005

13

FUJ00086360

Fujitsu Test Report for
Functional and Non-
Functional Integration Testing
of BI3 S80 v0.1

POINQ0092531F

14

FUJ00086363

Fujitsu SV&l High Level Test
Plan for S81 v0.1 with
comments from Gareth
Jenkins

POINQ0092534F

15

FUJ00086368

Minutes of Fujitsu "Prayers"
meeting on 16/08/05

POINQ0092539F

16

FUJ00086490

PEAK PC0146170

POINQ0092661F

17

FUJ00083564

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
John Balletyne re:
PC0057478

POINQ0089735F

18

FUJ00083548

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Mark Jarosz and Brian Orzel
re: PC0057478

POINQ0089719F

19

FUJ00083564

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
John Balletyne re:
PC0057478

POINQ0089735F

20

FUJ00083544

Email from Mark Jarosz to
Gareth Jenkins re: PinICL
PC0056922

POINQ0089715F

Page 69 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

21

FUJ00083582

Email from Mark Jarosz to
Gareth Jenkins re:
PC0057957

POINQ0089753F

22

FUJ00083568

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Mark Jarosz re: PC0057957

POINQ0089739F

23

FUJ00083582

Email from Mark Jarosz to
Gareth Jenkins re:
PC0057957

POINQ0089753F

24

FUJ00075544

Peak Incident Management
System - Copy PC0057957
FAD260801 - Timeout
occurred waiting

POINQ0085136F

25

FUJ00083600

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Mark Jarosz re: PCOO65665

POINQ0089771F

26

FUJ00083621

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Mark Jarosz re: PC0075892

POINQ0089792F

27

FUJ00083634

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Mark Jarosz re: PC0087709

POINQ0089805F

28

FUJ00083640

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Brian Orzel, Simon Fawkes
and Barbara Longley re:
PC0087709

POINQ0089811F

29

FUJ00083592

Email from Chris Wannell to
Gareth Jenkins and Mark

Jarosz re: PinICL Client Call
Summary list 21 March 2001

POINQ0089763F

30

FUJ00083596

Email from Brian Orzel to
Gareth Jenkins re: priority of
Escher-Dev PinICLs

POINQ0089767F

31

FUJ000837 12

Email chain between Anne
Chambers, Gareth Jenkins
and Penny Thomas on
Callender Square bug

POINQ0089883F

Page 70 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

32

FUJ00083721

Email from Anne Chambers to
Gareth Jenkins re: Callendar
Square bug

POINQ0089892F

33

POL00028911

Management report summary
re: Callendar Square / Falkirk

POL-0025393

34

FUJ00081602

Fujitsu Portable Appliance
Testing Branch Roll Out v1.1

POINQ0087773F

35

FUJ00081220

Spreadsheet with data of
receipts and payments
mismatch with affected
branches

POINQ0087391F

36

FUJ00083353

Report by Gareth Jenkins on
Correcting Accounts for "Lost"
Discrepancies

POINQ0089524F

37

FUJ00082443

Email from Mark Wright to
Gareth Jenkins re: the
receipts and payments
mismatch issue

POINQ0088614F

38

FUJ00081135

Email from Mark Wright to
Mike Stewart and Steve
Bansal re: receipts and
payments

POINQ0087306F

39

FUJ00081211

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
John Simpkins and Mark
Wright re: branches affected
by the receipts payments and
discrepancies issue

POINQ0087382F

40

FUJ00081137

Email from Mike Steward to
Gareth Jenkins, Mark Wright
and Steve Bansal re: receipts
and payments mismatch issue

POINQ0087308F

4

FUJ00081584

Receipts/Payments Mismatch
issue notes

POINQ0087755F

Page 71 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

42

FUJ00081527

Report by Gareth Jenkins on
the Receipts and Payments
Mismatch

POINQ0087698F

43

FUJ00081544

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Rod Ismay, Will Russell and
Antonio Jamasb re receipts
and payments call- questions

POINQ0087715F

44

FUJ00081545

Email from Will Russell re
receipt and payments issue

POINQ0087716F

45

FUJ00081550

HNG-X System: Receipts and
Payments Mismatch (25 Feb
2011)

POINQ0087721F

46

FUJ00081584

Receipts/Payments Mismatch
issue notes

POINQ0087755F

47

FUJ00081214

Email from Mike Woolgar to
Mark Wright, Gareth Jenkins
and John Simpkins re:
receipts and payments issue

POINQ0087385F

48

POL00029718

Email chain between Steve
Parker, Mark Wright, Andrew
Winn, Emma Langfield and
Gareth Jenkins Re: ISSUE -
Receipts & Payments
mismatch

POL-0026200

49

POL00098016

Email from Andrew Winn to
Steve Bansal dated 16/04/13
re: investigation into receipts
and payments problem in
2010

POL-0097599

50

POL00029719

Email chain between Gareth
Jenkins, Emma Langfield,
Rod Ismay, Paul Dann,
Simpkin John, Mark Wright,
Pete Newsome, Andrew
Winn®Re: Branches affected
by Receipts Payments and
Discrepancies Issue®

POL-0026201

Page 72 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

51

FUJ00081214

Email from Mike Woolgar to
Mark Wright, Gareth Jenkins
and John Simpkins re:

receipts and payments issue

POINQ0087385F

52

FUJ00083375

Note authored by Gareth
Jenkins titled ‘Local Suspense
Problem’ v0.5

POINQ0089546F

53

FUJ00085882

Report by Gareth Jenkins on
Duplicate Remittances

POINQ0092053F

54

FUJ00083379

Fujitsu presentation on
Branch Outreach Issue (Initial
Findings)

POINQ0089550F

55

FUJ00126035

Second Corporate Statement
of Fujitsu Services Limited

FUJ00126035

56

FUJ00086720

PEAK PC0208335

POINQ0092891F

57

FUJ00081770

Peak Incident Management
System - PEAK PC0187425

POINQ0087941F

58

FUJ00080537

Report: report regarding the
apparent loss of audit trial of
Giro Payments

POINQ0086708F

59

FUJ00080536

Email from Andy Winn to
Gareth Jenkins and Craig
Tuthill re Giro Payment Report

POINQ0086707F

60

FUJ00080526

Fujitsu Report: Horizon Data
Integrity v1.0

POINQ0086697F

61

FUJ00080534

Fujitsu Report: Horizon Online
Data Integrity

POINQ0086705F

62

FUJ00121073

Rem Misbalance Report

POINQ0127265F

Page 73 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

63

FUJ00121072

Email from Gareth Jenkins GI
to Gary Blackburn. cc'd Mike
Stewart and Anne Chambers
re: Rem Misbalance

POINQ0127264F

64

FUJ00121074

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
lan Trundell, from a forwarded
email from Gary Blackburn re:
RE: Rem Misbalance

POINQ0127266F

65

POL00001264

PEAK - PC0129767 -
reversals of foreign currency
transactions

VIS00002278

66

FUJ00081870

Peak Report RE: FAD126109
Pouch remmed in on two
counters at same time

POINQ0088041F

67

FUJ00121083

Email from Claire Drake to
Anne Chambers, cc'd Gareth
Jenkins and Steve Parker re:
Recovery into wrong TP/BP.

POINQ0127275F

68

FUJ00075614

Peak Incident Management
System - Lost transaction
following SCO
replacement®®

POINQ0085212F

69

FUJ00121077

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Barry Evans, cc'd Will Russell,
Mark Andrews and others re:
BTS issues 14/04/10

POINQ0127269F

70

FUJ00095095

Email from Gareth Jenkins to
Graham Allen re: BIMs
process

POINQ0101266F

71

FUJ00097058

Report called "Duplication of
transaction Records contained
in ARQ returns - 22 June
2010 by Penny Thomas

POINQ0103229F

72

FUJ00097046

Emails between Guy
Wilkerson, Geoff Butts & Alan

POINQ0103217F

Page 74 of 75
WITNO00460200
WITNO00460200

Alvarez re duplication of
transaction records

73

FUJ00097070

Email chain between Gareth
Jenkins, Geoff Butts, David
Cooke and others, RE: ARQs

POINQ0103241F

74

FUJ00097058

Report called "Duplication of
transaction Records contained
in ARQ returns - 22 June
2010 by Penny Thomas

POINQ0103229F

75

POL00097444

Email chain from Helen Rose
to Gareth Jenkins re:
transaction log

POL-0097027

Page 75 of 75
