                                                                                         WITNO5460100
                                                                                       WITNO5460100




                                                          Witness Name: David Smith

                                                      Statement No: WITNO5460100

                                                             Dated: 23 February 2024




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




                  FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF DAVID SMITH




I, David Smith, will say as follows:




    1. I am providing this statement following receipt of a letter from the Post Office

       Horizon IT Inquiry dated 28 November 2023, which made a request for

       information pursuant to Rule 9 of the Inquiry Rules 2006 — Request number

       1, regarding matters falling within Phase 6 of the Inquiry: Governance.



    2. I have followed the news in relation to the Horizon issues and understand the

       importance of the Inquiry. Whilst it cannot change what the Sub-Postmasters

       ('SPMs') went through, I hope that it will assist in bringing them some peace

       and a better understanding around what happened and I am pleased to be

       able to participate. This statement is written to the best of my recollection

       and with my deepest sympathies to everyone who was and continues to be



                                       Page 1 of 36
                                                                                       WITNO5460100
                                                                                   WITN05460100




      affected by the Horizon IT issues and the related legal action taken against

      them. I only held the role of Managing Director for 7 months and

      subsequently left the Royal Mail Group ('the Group') in 2011. Inevitably my

      recollection of this short period in office has been limited by the passage of

      time but I have done my best to answer the Inquiry's questions to the best of

      my knowledge.


   3. I can confirm that I have had legal assistance in producing this statement

      from Ashfords LLP. When seeking to obtain legal assistance, I was initially

      assisted by Post Office Limited to confirm the availability of insurance

      coverage to cover the associated legal costs.

Background

   4. I graduated from Kent University with a degree in Accounting and Economics

      and qualified as a Chartered Accountant with The Institute of Chartered

      Accountants in England and Wales in 1989. By the time I joined the Post

      Office Limited ('POL') in 2010, I had around 25 years of experience in

      finance and general management across various sectors. My career history

      leading up to joining the POL was as follows:

     •   October 1986 — May 1990: Audit Senior at Spicer and Oppenheim

         (Deloitte Touche)

     •   June 1990 — April 1994: Mercury Communications (Cable and Wireless

         PLC) UK Start up Utility

             o   1990 — 1992: Management Accountant

             o   1992 — 1994: Financial Planning & Analysis Manager




                                    Page 2 of 36
                                                                                   WITN05460100
                                                                              WITNO5460100




  •   May 1994— October 1999: Birmingham Cable (Telewest PLC) (£100m

      Business)

             1994 — 1996: Financial Controller
         o




             1996 — 1999: Finance Director
         o




  •   May 1999 — October 2001: RS Components UK (Electrocomponents PLC)

      (£400m Business)

             1990 — 2000: Finance Director
         o




         o 2000 — 2001: Head of Business Development

  •   August 2002 —2010: Royal Mail Group PLC (£9bn business)

             2002: Finance Director Business Sales and Solution
         o




             2003 — 2006: Finance Director Parcelforce
         o




             2007 — 2009: Managing Director Parcelforce
         o




             2010: Managing Director ("MD") POL
         o




5. 1 took the role of MD at POL from April 2010 and left towards the end of that

  same year, although I cannot recall the precise date_ My time as MD of POL

  was around 7 months in total. As a main Board director, I also held a number

  of subsidiary directorships on behalf of the Group and when I left POL, I

  moved back to the Group to become Chief Customer Officer. Paula Vennells

  took over as MD after I left, although I remained a director at POL for around

  a further 7 months, until July 2011 when I also left my role as Chief Customer

  Officer at the Group.




                                 Page 3 of 36
                                                                                      WITN05460100
                                                                                    WITNO5460100




    6. Having left, I became Chief Executive Officer ('CEO') of City Link, a

      subsidiary of Rentokil Initial PLC and remained in this role until December

      2014. During the following year and a half I carried out various short-term

      consulting assignments at F22 Consulting until June 2016, when I became

      CEO at Bellrock Property and Facilities Management until June 2022. From

      October 2022 to March 2023, I was Interim Managing Director at Serco

      Environmental Services. Starting in July 2023, I became CEO at Lifetime

      Training, a UK market-leader as an apprenticeship training provider and I

      remain in this role to date.

Role as Managing Director at Post Office Limited

   7. As noted above, I commenced my role as MD of POL in April 2010 and

      remained in the role until around the end of the same year.



   8. In terms of my appointment, I can recall that I was interviewed by Donald

      Brydon, Chair of the Group at the time, as well as a Government Shareholder

      Executive, although I cannot recall their name. It was a full external process,

      following which I was appointed.



   9. At the time, POL was one of the UK's largest retailers with around 12,000

      branches, 8,000 employees and circa 11,500 SPMs. As MD, I was

      responsible for the overall running of the business and I had full Profit and

      Loss accountability. At that time POL was approximately a £900m turnover

      business. During my time as MD, I still reported to the CEO of Group, Moya

      Greene.



                                     Page 4 of 36
                                                                                       WITNO5460100
                                                                                   WITN05460100




10. My priorities at the time were to steer POL through the 2010 general election

   and start work on the privatisation of the Post Office, helping to establish a

   strategy for separation. The financial position of POL was poor, which was

   exacerbated by the banking crisis in Ireland given that all of our financial

   services were linked to Irish banking. My primary goal was to steer the

   business through this difficult time and stabilise its financial position,

   including obtaining a financial settlement with the government and support

   for the State Aid claim through the European Union.


11.The Board was responsible for the roll-out of the upgrade of `Horizon' to

   `Horizon Online' and therefore this was ultimately my responsibility. I feel it

   important to point out that, in light of the major issues facing the business

   outlined above, my primary focus was on keeping the business afloat in a

   financially precarious time and, as a result of this, and the fact that the roll-

   out was already well underway, Horizon Online was a lower priority.



12. When I joined POL I knew very little, if anything, about its role in respect of

   prosecutions. However, I am almost certain that when I joined I had a briefing

   from the head of each department to inform me about what they did and how

   they worked. Sue Crichton (Company Secretary) was Head of Legal at the

   time and therefore she would have given me an outline of the role of the

   Legal Department and I assume that this briefing would have covered the

   criminal enforcement work but I am unable to recall any specific details.




                                   Page 5 of 36
                                                                                  WITNO5460100
                                                                                WITN05460100




13.As MD, I had oversight of all of the departments including Legal, IT, Problem

   Management and the Security/Investigation department. However, they were

   all headed up individually and I did not manage any of them directly or have

   any involvement in day-to-day activity or departmental decisions. My

   responsibility was to make sure that the teams were adequately resourced

   and carrying out their duties in line with the agreed departmental

   responsibilities.



14.All of the heads of department would give monthly Board reports, providing

   an update on their department. For example, in Legal's monthly report, they

   would provide an update on outstanding cases. My knowledge and

   involvement in the investigation and prosecution of SPMs was limited to

   these reports and having a general oversight of the department, with the

   primary responsibility for prosecutions lying with the head of department. I

   have not been provided with any of the Legal Board Reports for the time that

   I was MD and I am unable to recall any details but anything major or any

   specific problems would have been reported up to the Board. I only held the

   role of MD for around 7 months and during this time, no material changes

   were made to the involvement of the Board in legal matters.



15.1 cannot recall any changes to policies, guidelines or practices followed by

   POL in respect of criminal prosecutions or civil proceedings, including

   investigating alleged offences and the process of disclosing documents. I

   had no involvement in the establishment of the practices and policies that

   POL adopted in respect of suspending or terminating SPM's contracts. All of


                                 Page 6 of 36
                                                                                      WITN05460100
                                                                                    WITNO5460100




      the mechanisms were already in place when I arrived and did not change

      during my short time in the role. From what I can recall, as a subsidiary of the

      Group, most of the policies and procedures of POL were derived from and

      identical to those used by the Group.



   16. Where any changes to policies, guidelines or practices were required, a

      specialist in that area would draft them and present them to the Board, who

      would review and adopt them. For example, I can recal► that Health and

      Safety and GDPR policies were reviewed annually by the Board.



   17. 1 had no involvement in the conduct of audits of SPM's branch accounts.

Horizon


   18. When I first arrived in April 2010, the Post Office was rolling out a new

      generation of the Horizon system. Within my first week, it was clear that the

      new system was causing problems at branches where it had already been

      rolled out as there were issues with freezing of accounts which meant that

      individual branches could not trade. I can recall that I was asked by the

      Operating and IT Teams to escalate the problems we were having to Senior

      Fujitsu team, to see if they could expedite a fix_ I can remember holding a

      discussion, where I asked Fujitsu to sort out the issue otherwise we would

      have to roll back to the old system. I cannot remember the details but the

      specific issue which I had been asked to raise was quickly resolved and we

      then continued with the roll out to the new Platform. The report of Rod Ismay

      (POL00107129 - discussed further below) later addressed the issue of



                                     Page 7 of 36
                                                                                        WITNO5460100
                                                                                  WITNO5460100




   freezing of accounts, in light of concerns about accounts integrity when

   transactions were cut off mid-flow. The report states "transaction alerts were

   in place and revised operational instructions have now been issued to enable

   branches to complete or to cancel the accounting entries dependent on

   whether they physically completed the cash transaction with the customer."

   (P.8 of the report). In light of this report, I do not recall being concerned that

   the freezing of accounts was causing or contributing to a lack of integrity to

   the Horizon IT system as, in my mind, it had been resolved.



19. Later on, in around June or July 2010, I remember that some questions were

   raised regarding Horizon, in light of a parliamentary question from Ms Patel

   (Member of Parliament) and a Channel 4 news report which was looking into

   the losses that SPMs were experiencing. I believe that the Board were asked

   by the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills ("BIS") (now known as

   the Department for Business and Trade) to pull together answers to these

   questions and conversations were subsequently held between management

   Board members — Mike Young, Mike Moores, Paula Vennells and myself —

   on looking into whether the system was robust. I believe that Sue Crichton

   and other senior management would have been involved in these

   conversations as well.



20.1 cannot recall precisely what happened next but I can remember that we

   asked for confirmation as to why we were being told that the system was

   robust. This resulted in a report being written which I understand has been

   named 'the Ismay Report' by the Inquiry. I have discussed the report in


                                   Page 8 of 36
                                                                                        WITNO5460100
                                                                                      WITN05460100




      further detail below but had the report given any sense that there was a

      problem, we would have done a deeper dive into the system. However, it was

      unequivocal in telling us that the system was robust and providing reasons

      as to why.




POL corporate structure and governance

   21. My role as MD and company director at POL was no different to any other

      CEO or director role. I had a fiduciary responsibility to the stakeholders to

      manage the business in proper financial and regulatory terms and to produce

      and execute a strategic plan which supported the aims of the shareholders.



   22. Underneath these overriding duties, I had a responsibility for allocation of

      budget and resources and making sure that the right control systems were in

      place for risk management and finance. These were all in place when I

      arrived and I do not think that I changed anything material about the

      governance of the business when I was there.



   23. The Inquiry have asked me to set out my understanding, at the time I joined

      POL, of what risks and/or compliance issues could arise from POL

      prosecuting SPMs for theft and false accounting and pursing civil litigation

      against them to recover alleged shortfalls in branch accounts. I do not recall

      now exactly what my understanding of the risks and/or compliance issues

      was at the time but I have attempted to set out below an explanation of what I




                                     Page 9 of 36
                                                                                     WITN05460100
                                                                                 WITN05460100




   believe my understanding would have been and what my thoughts are on it

   now.



24.As a Crown Office, POL dealt with public money and therefore had a

   responsibility to protect the public purse. This included making sure that all

   of the monies were properly accounted for and protected with one of the

   most obvious risks being money stolen from tills. In order to discharge this

   responsibility, the organisation needed to have a system of checks and

   balances in place, such as daily and weekly balance checks and internal

   audits. These systems were already well established long before my arrival.

   So too, was the practice of prosecuting those who had demonstrably been

   shown to have stolen from the organisation or shown to have falsified

   accounts. I cannot recall thinking that any risk or compliance issues arose

   from POL undertaking this role, but with the benefit of hindsight, and in light

   of the wrongful prosecutions, I can see the inherent risks in the prosecutions

   taking place 'in house' and not by an independent enforcement authority.



25. The below summarises what my views were on the responsibilities of a

   Board of Directors in the operation of a company solely owned by HM

   Government, in respect of:



     a. oversight of criminal prosecutions brought in the name of the company;

      b. oversight of civil litigation brought by or against the company;

      c. oversight of the company's IT;




                                 Page 10 of 36
                                                                                   WITNO5460100
                                                                                 WITN05460100




      d. oversight of any accounting system the company used to collate

         individual transactions, cash or stock declarations etc. used for the

         purposes of preparing management and statutory accounts; and

      e. oversight of the company's compliance with the Race Relations Act

         1978 and/or Equality Act 2010.




  Oversight of criminal prosecutions brought in the name of the company and

  oversight of civil litigation brought by or against the company

26. My views on 'a' and 'b' above are the same and are as follows: it was the

   responsibility of the Board of Directors to make sure that we were identifying

   potential risks to the business of loss of assets. This included having a

   robust set of investigation processes and procedures to include taking

   reasonable and proportionate legal action where the investigation justified

   such action being taken. The Board would receive monthly reports from the

   Legal Team and had a responsibility to ensure that any issues raised in

   those reports by the Head of Legal were addressed and that the team was

   appropriately resourced. Head of Legal, Sue Crichton, had responsibility for

   the day-to-day running and oversight of civil and criminal prosecutions.

  Oversight of the comoanv's IT

27_At the time, Mike Young was the director responsible for operation of the

   back office, including IT. Under him there was an IT director, Lesley Sewell.

   As with all departments, the IT team would produce monthly reports to the

   Board, providing an update on the day-to-day functions of the systems, any


                                 Page 11of 36
                                                                                    WITNO5460100
                                                                                  WITNO5460100




   data changes and activities of development of the system. The Board had a

   responsibility to fund, install and maintain appropriate IT systems to run the

   Post Office. There would have been an annual technology strategy which

   would say where IT investments were needed in the business and which

   would be signed off by the Board. Mike Young would then report back to the

   Board the progress on new installations and upgrades, as well as general IT

   progress. As with all departments, the Board would receive monthly reports

   from IT and any major issues would be reported up to the Board, with the day-

   to-day oversight lying with Mike Young. The Board had a responsibility to

   respond to any issues identified in these reports and ensure that the team

   was adequately resourced_

  Oversight of any accounting system the company used to collate individual

  transactions, cash or stock declarations etc. used for the purposes of

  oreaarina manacement and statutory accounts

28. 1 cannot recall having any involvement in this aspect as the physical system

   was managed by an IT function. Use of the accounting system was managed

   by Mike Moores (Financial Director) and the finance team. Operational use

   of the Horizon system would have been managed by Paula Vennells, (Chief

   Operating Officer), whilst maintenance of the IT estate more generally was

   managed by Mike Young and the IT Team. However, as with our oversight of

   IT, the Board had a responsibility to fund, install and maintain appropriate

   systems and controls to allow the team to carry out their role. The Board

   would also receive monthly reports which gave them a general oversight of

   the accounting system so that they could respond to any issues raised and

   ensure that the team was appropriately resourced.

                                 Page 12 of 36
                                                                                    WITNO5460100
                                                                                 WITNO5460100




  Oversight of the company's compliance with the Race Relations Act 1978

  and/or Equality Act 2010

29.At the time, the Human Resources director was Debbie Moore and therefore

   I think that this would have been her responsibility. As with all departments,

   the Board would review the team's monthly reports and had a responsibility

   to ensure that any issues raised in those reports were addressed and that

   the team was appropriately resourced. The Board would establish policies,

   procedures and a reporting structure and appropriate training to ensure that

   the business discharged its legal responsibilities under the Act_ I believe

   that these were closely linked to, if not identical to, the Group.



30. The Inquiry have asked me to summarise the corporate structure of POL and

   the Group when I joined POL as director. I cannot recall much detail as it

   was very complicated but in simple terms, POL was a subsidiary of the

   Group and all of the POL subsidiaries reported up into POL.



31_The Group, as a matrix organisation, had a Public Limited Company Board

   with a Chair, a number of Non-Executives, a Group CEO, Group Chief

   Finance Officer, Company Secretary and Group Functional Leads, such as

   Human Resources and a set of Divisional Managing Directors, including Post

   Office and the international subsidiary, 'GLS'.



32. There was a separate POL Board, generally Chaired by the Group

   Chairman. It too, had a non-executive member, and I believe the Group CEO

   and CFO, plus the Post Office MD, Post Office FD and COO.


                                  Page 13 of 36
                                                                                    WITNO5460100
                                                                                WITN05460100




33. Both Boards would meet typically monthly, and all meetings were minuted.

   The leadership style at both meetings was very similar and typical in my

   experience of a Corporate Board with a suitable balance of debate,

   challenge and opportunity for people from different standpoints to provide

   input.



34. The Group had sub-committees in place as you might expect around other

   matters, such as Treasury, Audit, Remuneration, Nominations and Health

   and Safety. POL as part of the Group would input as appropriate to those

   sub committees, and I believe also had its own Audit Committee. Their

   meetings were less frequent as directed by the main Board but I would

   expect from memory that they would have met at least quarterly.



35. Once it became clear that the Government intended to separate Royal Mail

   and Post Office it became necessary to put in place a clear line between the

   two organisations. I remember for example that the then CEO of the Group,

   Moya Greene stepped off the POL Board, and that we started to recruit an

   independent Chair, Alice Perkins, who joined just after I left the Group.



36. In terms of the operations of the POL Board, I believe that they met formally

   monthly, and the Executive Team would have most likely met weekly. The

   monthly meetings followed a strong set formula and agenda which would be

   signed off by a combination of The Chairman (Donald Brydon), other Board

   members and myself. There was also a rolling agenda to look at all parts of


                                 Page 14 of 36
                                                                                   WITNO5460100
                                                                                 WITN05460100




   the business across the year. So for example, we would inspect the Sales

   performance and plan maybe twice a year.



37.As referenced above, the monthly POL Board meetings would include an

   update from the different departments, as well as each of the Board

   members. Dependent on what was going on at the time, we would then have

   a deep dive into specific subjects that were tabled. We spent a lot of time

   discussing business strategy because we needed a new strategic plan to

   take to Government. This included discussions around the general financial

   position of the Post Office Group that at the time was financially weak and

   we needed a new settlement with the Government. We also spent a lot of

   time on working through the implications of the separation of POL and the

   Group.



38. The Executive Team of POL met less formally in weekly meetings which

   discussed the day-to-day and weekly operations of the business. These

   would discuss upcoming issues that we needed to prepare for, any

   operational challenges and general updates in each director's respective

   area. The general purpose of these meetings was to communicate what was

   happening on a week-to-week basis and check in if anybody needed any

   help.



39. The weekly meetings were much more operational and would not have been

   attended by the Chair, Group CEO or non-executives. Attendees would have

   generally been my first report team including individuals such as Mike


                                 Page 15 of 36
                                                                                   WITNO5460100
                                                                                WITN05460100




   Moores, Paula Vennells, Sue Crichton, Mike Young and Debbie Moore, as

   well as myself.



40. In terms of reporting, each department produced their own report which

   would measure their Key Performance Indicators and would look at the

   Change Agenda that they were managing and identify any areas of risk and

   concern or opportunities that they wanted to flag. There would be a standard

   finance report each month and a standard `change programme pack' that we

   would go through on a monthly basis. I think that there was also a general

   KPI pack, as well, giving the headlines of the operating metrics of the

   business. I cannot remember if this was a separate pack or included as part

   of reports. Sitting alongside this, investment cases were typically presented

   to the Board for any new investments that people wanted to get approval for.

   There would also be standard items such as minutes from the previous

   meetings and action points.



41. If a member of the Executive Team did not attend POL Board meetings, then

   they would still provide a report and sometimes send a substitute. It a

   substitute could not attend, then the Board would report back to them after

   the meeting just as you would expect in any other company.



42. POL was a subsidiary company and therefore I would also report to the

   Group on a monthly basis and sat on the Group Board where we would have

   a standing item to talk about POL for part of the session and provide an

   update on whatever was relevant.


                                 Page 16 of 36
                                                                                    WITNO5460100
                                                                                 WITN05460100




43. The POL Board had differing levels of IT expertise, depending on their ro►e

   and responsibilities, but central to that, Mike Young and Lesley Sewell were

   subject matter experts and had day-to-day responsibility for IT. The rest of us

   were not experts in the systems but were obviously aware of their importance

   from an operation and strategic perspective.



44. The Inquiry have asked me to set out to what extent, if at all, the POL Board

   discussed the Horizon IT system and the bringing of prosecutions or civil

   proceedings against SPMs, whilst I was MD. Without the Board meeting

   minutes I cannot answer definitively but it is my recollection that these issues

   would have been discussed by the Board. The monthly report from IT would

   have talked about the Horizon system upgrade roll out and the monthly

   report from Legal would have talked about prosecutions and civil

   proceedings. Separately, we had questions raised through the Summer of

   2010 following the Channel 4 programme and Parliamentary Questions

   about the Horizon system that we were talking about. Beyond this general

   overview, I cannot recall exactly what was discussed.



45.1 do not know and cannot comment to what extent, if at all, other teams,

   groups or departments within Post Office Limited discussed these matters.



46. It was my opinion at the time that the corporate structure of POL and the

   Group was adequate to fulfil its responsibilities. It was also my view that

   POL's overview of these responsibilities was adequate.


                                 Page 17 of 36
                                                                                     WITNO5460100
                                                                                   WITN05460100




47.As far as I can recall, there was no material change to the governance

   structure during my time. We were starting to prepare for the separation of

   the Group and so we were starting to think about how we would have to work

   differently with the shareholder executive and BIS because the interests of

   the Group and POL were no longer aligned. Towards the end of my time as a

   director we did commence the recruitment of an independent Chair, which

   was established during July 2011 in contemplation of separation. However, it

   was a significant amount of time after I left that the separation took place.



48. In terms of how the Government maintained oversight of POL, I can recall

   that we reported to the Government Shareholder Executive, providing regular

   updates on performance and finance etc. although I cannot recall the exact

   nature of the reports. As discussed above, I had periodic meetings with the

   minister (Ed Davey) where we would discuss a range of things, but the vast

   majority of these meetings concerned the strategic plan around privatisation,

   refinancing, state aid and the Irish banking crisis. I would also have had

   regular dialogue with the Civil Service Team at the Department of BIS,

   supporting the minister through a series of regular phone calls and email

   correspondence.



49.At the time, I thought that the oversight was good and the Government were

   very supportive. There was a challenge in that, following the election, we had

   the first coalition Government in years and both sides of the Government had

   different agendas for what they wanted to do with the business meaning that


                                 Page 18 of 36
                                                                                      WITNO5460100
                                                                                   WITN05460100




      there were some challenges in terms of understanding what the direction of

      travel would be. Therefore, a lot of my time was spent discussing what we

      wanted the Post Office to be and how we would fund it effectively. The

      Government also recognised the potential conflict of interests between the

      Group and POL and were supportive in the establishment of an independent

      Chair.




Knowledge of Horizon

   50. When I commenced employment at POL, the only knowledge that I had of

      the Horizon IT System was that it was the main operating system of the

      business. I was not aware of any bugs, errors or defects within Horizon, that

      there was a lack of integrity within Horizon, or of any complaints in respect of

      the same.



   51.1 do not believe that I had any training on the Horizon IT System as this was

      not needed because I was not operating it on a counter.



   52. When the integrity of the Horizon IT System was challenged, questions were

      raised with Fujitsu and later on, I requested a report to look into these

      challenges (the Ismay report). I have discussed this report in more detail

      below. These questions were not personally raised by me to Fujtisu but I

      cannot recall who did have direct contact with them. I also went out and

      about in the business and saw the system first-hand and became more

      aware of its functionality.


                                    Page 19 of 36
                                                                                          WITN05460100
                                                                                      WITN05460100




   53. The Inquiry have provided me with document POL00041564 — Rebecca

      Thomson's article published in Computer Weekly on 11 May 2009. I cannot

      remember whether I read it before the Inquiry provided it to me although it

      was written before I joined POL and I do not recall being briefed on this

      article specifically when I joined the business. It is my recollection that I was

      aware of the existence of a Computer Weekly article by Summer 2010 which

      was when I had taken steps to ask questions about Horizon within the

      business.

Horizon Online

   54.1 have considered document FUJO0174292 — email from Gavin Bounds to

      Gilbert Roger on 9 April 2010 and POL00001615 — Forward one2eleven

      Programme document for 9 April to 15 April 2010.



   55. When I joined POL, it had already started the extensive rollout of the next

      generation of the Horizon IT System. This is reflected in document

      POL00001615 with p.3 confirming that "the Horizon Online pilot continues to

      run at 614 branches, but further branch migrations remain suspended due to

      the series of live service interruptions which have occurred since 26 March."



   56. 1 cannot recall having seen the email dated 9 April 2010 (FUJO0174292)

      before. Upon review, it is reflecting on a call that I had with the Fujitsu senior

      team in my first couple of weeks to facilitate the fixes to the screen freeze

      issues which were identified within the Horizon IT system. This was the


                                     Page 20 of 36
                                                                                          WITN05460100
                                                                                     WITNO5460100




      extent of my direct involvement with the management or oversight of the pilot

      and roll out of Horizon On►ine.



   57. In terms of the acceptance process for Horizon Online, there was a

      programme set up to roll it out which had started before I joined. I recall that

      there was an acceptance criteria for 'go' and 'no go' which the Project team

      had set up. This would have been brought to the Management/Executive

      Board to discuss and we would have agreed as a team what steps were

      needed to fix it in order for us to say yes, you can now roll it out further. The

      acceptance was a team decision, instead of any individual making the

      decision.



   58. At the time I joined, I was not satisfied that Horizon Online was an adequate

      system because it was having issues with freezing and needed to be fixed.

      Once these issues were fixed and it had gone through extensive trials in the

      pilot phases and we were happy that it demonstrated that it did what we

      wanted it to do, we were satisfied that it was an adequate system. I did not

      directly set any of the criteria or do any of the testing.

Concerns raised by SPMs, MPs and journalists

   59.All concerns raised by SPMs, MPs and journalists would be received, and

      dealt with, by our Executive Correspondence Team. Anything that would

      have come from an MP or a Stakeholder, which was addressed to me, would

      be managed by that team. This includes the letter dated 5 June 2010 from

      Mrs Stubbs (POL00004669). The Executive Correspondence Team would



                                      Page 21 of 36
                                                                                   WITNO5460100
                                                                                 WITNO5460100




   deal with the specifics of any questions and raise relevant enquiries of the

   business to answer them. They would then draft a response, obtain sign off

   from a stakeholder and send it to me if I needed to sign the letter.



60.1 did not have any involvement in the day-to-day running of the legal cases

   and any complaints which were of a legal nature would have been handled

   by the Executive Correspondence Team, through the Legal Team. I may

   have subsequently heard about them in the monthly Board report if they were

   material.



61. We would often get letters from local MPs worried about Post Offices in their

   constituencies closing and from local stakeholders worried because we were

   in the middle of a strategic review. Therefore, it was not unusual to have a

   letter coming in from an MP saying that they were worried. I cannot

   remember the numbers but I think that we would have received a few letters

   a day from various stakeholders including MPs. This was higher than in other

   sectors and industries that I had worked in, but the public focus upon the

   Post Office was amplified and different to anywhere else I had worked due to

   community responsibility and involvement. I can recall seeing letters from all

   manner of people in public office, including David Cameron. Generally these

   were letters about 'save our Post Office' or asking for extra services. From

   memory, I do not recall seeing any relating to the Horizon IT System

   specifically and I do not recall seeing any in respect of criminal or civil

   litigation. Again, all of this correspondence, would be dealt with by the

   Executive Correspondence Team.


                                  Page 22 of 36
                                                                                  WITN05460100
                                                                               WITNO5460100




62. Our policy in respect of complaints was generally to reply to everybody who

   wrote to us but each case was individual and had to be treated as such. We

   did not have a cookie cutter template which said the answer that we would

   provide.

  Concerns raised by Pamela Stubbs

63. In respect of the concerns raised by Pamela Stubbs, I have reviewed the

   following documents:



      i. POL00004669 (letter from Pamela Stubbs dated 5 June 2010);

      ii. POL00004866 (letter from Simon Smith to Pamela Stubbs dated 8

         June 2010);

      iii. POL00106847 (bundle regarding Barkham Post Office date 18

         February 2011).



64. I cannot recall reading the letter from Pamela Stubbs to me dated 5 June

   2010 (POL00004669) prior to having received it from the Inquiry and it

    appears to have been answered by Simon Smith, part of the Executive

   Correspondence Team (POL00004866). This reaffirms my recollection that I

   did not deal with these matters but that they were dealt with by the Executive

   Correspondence Team.



65. I cannot recall and the documents do not assist me in knowing, what

    investigation took place. I am therefore unable to comment on whether Ms

   Stubb's case was handled differently to usual.

                                Page 23 of 36
                                                                                        WITN05460100
                                                                                      WITNO5460100




66. The Executive Correspondence Team were set up to answer all complaints

    and they would have enquired with the relevant departments to understand

    the issue and draft a response. If appropriate, the answer might appear on

    my desk to cast an eye over but this did not always happen. I do not know if

    it happened in this case and cannot recall having seen either letter prior to

    receiving them from the Inquiry.



67. I had very limited involvement in dealing with individual complaints and in

    this case, the letter is not signed by me which means it is unlikely that I

    would have had any involvement. It is fairly standard in large businesses for

    a team to be set up to deal with correspondence to the MD.



68. I do not recall this complaint and therefore have no knowledge of the issues

    raised within it relating to shortages caused by the Horizon IT System.

  Concerns raised by Priti Patel MP

69. 1 have reviewed document POL00001762 (letter to Priti Patel MP on 20 July

   2010). The letter is signed by me and states the following:

   "there has been no evidence found that shows that the Horizon system has

  caused accounting errors. I am satisfied that there is no evidence to doubt the

  integrity of the Horizon system and that it is robust and fit for purpose. "



70.1 have not seen any information to assist me in relation to the work

   undertaken in order to provide this letter. It is likely that either myself or a


                                   Page 24 of 36
                                                                                      WITN05460100
                                                                                    WITNO5460100




   member of the Executive Correspondence Team would have approached the

   Legal Team, the IT Team and the Operational Team to ask for their opinions

   and rationale as to why our stance was that the Horizon IT System was

   robust and why we are certain of this view. This is a letter from an MP raising

   serious concerns and would have been something which I took very

   seriously. I am confident that I would not have written my response without

   being satisfied at the time with what we were saying, and based on the

   provision of relevant information. I appreciate that this is an incomplete

   answer, noting too that this was sent before the review by Rod Ismay. I

   appreciate that the Inquiry may be concerned as to how I was able to make

   those representations prior to that review being carried out. I would like to

   assist the Inquiry further, but in order to do so, I would need to see further

   information, including relevant Board level reporting and minutes,

   correspondence within the Executive Correspondence Team,

   correspondence between the Executive Correspondence Team and the

   Board (including myself) and any other relevant information.



   Channel 4

71.1 have reviewed my email to Mike Young and others on 21 July 2010 at p.3 of

   POL00120481.



72. Leading up to this email, various questions were being raised in respect of

   the Horizon IT System, including a Parliamentary Question from Priti Patel.

   We were also made aware that Channel 4 would be running a news item on




                                  Page 25 of 36
                                                                                   WITN05460100
                                                                                 WITNO5460100




   the same issue. I have not seen any minutes around this subject matter and

   so cannot be certain on the detail, but I recall that the questions caused us

   as a Board to talk through concerns and agree what we should do in

   response to them.



73. My email is addressed to Mike Young (Head of IT), Sue Huggins

   (Operational lead) and Mike Moores (Finance Director) and it looks from the

   email like we met and chatted to work our way through our responses. Due to

   the passage of time, I cannot say why these particular questions laid out in

   my email were asked, but they are likely to be a combination of what I was

   asking, what the team was asking and the Parliamentary questions. In brief,

   these questions ask why were we confident that Horizon was robust. These

   questions are not an attempt to set up a formal internal investigation into

   Horizon but were designed to stress test why our stance was the way it was

   in terms of our defence of the robustness of the system and, from there,

   judge if we needed to go further in our investigations.



74.1 believe that after this email and the general conversations around these

   questions, the Board needed somebody to carry out the review and I asked

   Mike Moores to take the lead. Mike and I agreed that Rod Ismay would be a

   good person to carry out the exercise which he did, resulting in him

   producing a report back to the Board (POL00107129). I cannot recall the

   specifics as to why Rod Ismay was selected but he was a senior member of

   the team, being one level down from the Board, had been in the business for

   many years and had extensive knowledge of Horizon as a Department Head,


                                 Page 26 of 36
                                                                                          WITNO5460100
                                                                                     WITNO5460100




      responsible for the running the accounting for Horizon. He was also an

      auditor by training and well-respected in his role.



   75. There was a strong desire from all parties to produce an answer quickly and

      an internal review was the first step to achieving this. Had this report given

      any suggestion that there needed to be an independent review, I am

      confident that we would have requested one, but the report was unequivocal

      in saying that the Horizon IT system was robust and providing reasons as to

      why. There was no suggestion that it could be tampered with or that there

      were any aspects of it which suggested fault and needed further

      investigation.


   76. In respect of the above, I feel it important to add that my recollection is very

      limited due to the passage of time. I would have expected that there were

      formal parliamentary questions which, in the normal course of events, would

      have been relayed to us by BIS. I would also expect that there would be

      internal correspondence within the Executive Correspondence Team,

      between the team and the Board of Directors including myself, as well as

      correspondence between them and relevant parts of the business where they

      have sought information in order to respond to correspondence received.

      However, I have not had sight of any of this correspondence or any related

      Board minutes. Should any additional documents in respect of these subject

      matters be forthcoming, I would be happy to review and assist further where I

      can.

Receipts and Payments Mismatch Bug



                                     Page 27 of 36
                                                                                          WITN05460100
                                                                                     WITNO5460100




   77.1 have reviewed document FUJ00081584 (Receipts/Payments Mismatch

      issue notes). I did not work directly with any of the individuals listed in this

      note. This document is undated and so I am unsure as to whether it was

      produced during my time. However, I cannot recall being aware of the bug

      described in this note.

The Ismay Report

   78.1 have reviewed document POL00088957 (email chain on 2 August 2010)

      and POL00107129 (the Ismay report dated 2 August 2010)_



   79.As noted above, the report was requested in response to the concerns raised

      around the robustness of the Horizon IT System, including a Parliamentary

      Question raised by Priti Patel. It was not intended to be a full investigation

      into Horizon, but to answer the questions being put to POL about the Horizon

      issues.



   80. I do not recall who gave Rod Ismay the direct instructions but it is likely that

      he would have spoken to both our Finance Director, Mike Moores and myself

      about it and we would have provided the context of why it was needed. I

      would have said that the Board felt uncomfortable that we were saying the

      Horizon IT System was robust in light of the complaints raised and that we

      wanted him to provide a paper on whether the system was robust or whether

      there were any issues that should concern us.




                                     Page 28 of 36
                                                                                      WITN05460100
                                                                                    WITNO5460100




81.A formal terms of reference was not provided but the email dated 21 July

   2010 at 19:04, contained in document POL00120481, lists the questions that

   the report was asked to cover.



82. It is not clear from what is presented if more formal instructions were laid out

   and signed off. With the benefit of hindsight a better defined set of terms may

   have been useful, but it is clear from what is presented that the key issues

   are questioned and would have covered those issues being asked at the

   time. I also believe that I spoke with Rod Ismay to further explain the context

   for the request for him to carry out a review. I cannot say for definite but I

   expect that I asked him to produce an answer for Parliament and to provide a

   response to the Channel 4 news item and therefore I wanted to get

   something which would quickly but effectively confirm what our position was

   and if it was incorrect. At no time did I or the Board steer Rod to a specific

   answer to any of the questions in the report.



83. The report is unequivocal in saying that the Horizon system is robust and

   that any accounting errors are attributable to user error. It states "We remain

   satisfied that this money was missing due to theft in the branch — we do not

   believe the account balances against which the audits were conducted were

   corrupt" It also says that "the integrity of Horizon is founded on its tamper

   proof legs...". This is something that I had been told many times i.e. that

   nobody could get into the system to tamper it.




                                  Page 29 of 36
                                                                                     WITNO5460100
                                                                                   WITNO5460100




84.1 cannot recall how we used the report once we received it and whether we

   circulated the entire report to respond to the questions or drafted responses

   based on the report.



85.1 have not received any meeting minutes and am unable to recall any briefing

   that we received with the report or meetings to discuss the same. However,

   believe that the Board sat down with Rod and went through the report in fine

   detail. The report is addressed to the entire Senior Management Team

   across the business for their input and comments upon the document. As

   such, it would have been reasonable for the Board to assume that all

   material elements had been reviewed and that any dissenting views were

   captured.



86.At the time, I do not think that we thought that there was any merit in

   commissioning a further report by an IT expert or a forensic accountant or

   similar to test the reliability of Horizon as the report was clear-cut in its

   position. There was nothing in it which suggested we should investigate

   Fujitsu or Horizon further. Following the report, the case of Seema Misra put

   the Horizon IT System to the test at trial and the expert evidence was tested

   by the defence. This gave the same result that the Horizon IT System was

   robust and I do not think that the issue was raised materially again during my

   time.


87.1 have read Rod Ismay's statement dated 13 January 2023 (WITN04630100)

   and note that he says that he was asked to summarise existing conclusions.



                                   Page 30 of 36
                                                                                      WITN05460100
                                                                                 WITNO5460100




   This is simply not my recollection and I do not believe that this is inferred by

   the email correspondence which sets out the basis upon which I requested

   the review to be carried out (POL00120481). I also disagree with the

   comments that he made during the course of his live evidence to the effect

   that I was only seeking one side of the story.

R v Misra

88.1 have reviewed POL00169170 (email from Rod Ismay to Jarnail Singh and

   others on 22 October 2010). Within this email chain there is an email from

   me dated 21 October 2010 at 15:17 to Rod Ismay, Mike Moores, Mike Young

   and Paula Vennells saying "Brilliant news. Well done. Please pass on my

   thanks to the team."This email was sent in response to Jarnail Singh

   reporting back on the case of Seema Misra, that she was found Guilty of theft

   after a lengthy trial. It was intended to be a congratulatory email to the team,

   knowing that they had worked hard on the case.



89. However, knowing what I do now, it is evident that my email would have

   caused Seema Misra and her family, substantial distress to read and I would

   like to apologise for that. My comment of `brilliant news' was in relation to me

   thinking that it was brilliant news that, in my mind, Horizon had been proved

   to be robust following the testing of the expert evidence in the trial. Even if

   this had been a correct conviction, I would absolutely never think that it was

   `brilliant news' for a pregnant woman to go to prison and I am hugely

   apologetic that my email can be read as such. Regardless of the result, I

   would have thanked the team for their work on the case. However, seeing



                                  Page 31 of 36
                                                                                         WITNO5460100
                                                                                    WITNO5460100




      this email in the light of what I know now, I understand the anger and the

      upset that it will have caused and sincerely apologise for that.




   90.1 had no involvement in building or running the Misra prosecution although it

      was reported through Sue Crichton's team to the Board on a regular basis

      and so I was aware of it. I can recall that it was seen as significant following

      the Channel 4 news item, because it was the first time that the robustness of

      Horizon would be put to the test in Court, with expert evidence involved.



   91.The case ran parallel to a time when the Board were preoccupied with

      sorting out the refinancing of the Group and securing a £1.5bn investment

      from government and supporting in the subsequent State Aid approval

      process. Therefore, although we were aware of the case, at Board level we

      were not heavily focused on it as our attention was on keeping the business

      running.

Resignation

   92. In around November / December 2010, it became clear to me that the

      direction that the government wanted to take the POL in was not the same as

      the direction that I wanted to take it in. At this same time, I had the

      opportunity to move back to the Group as Chief Customer Officer which was

      a promotion and so I took that opportunity. I was still director of the POL

      Board for 6 or 7 months following but handed over the day-to-day running to

      Paula Vennells.

General

                                     Page 32 of 36
                                                                                    WITNO5460100
                                                                                  WITN05460100




93.Although my time within POL was brief, I have spent a lot of time reflecting

   on it and whether there is anything that I would have handled differently. I

   think that this is something that everybody has thought about and it is

   impossible not to feel a huge sense of regret and remorse, regardless of

   ones own involvement.



94. When concerns were brought to light around the Horizon IT System, I

   requested a review which was carried out by Rod Ismay which was

   unequivocal in its answer. We were never provided with any suggestion that

   the Horizon IT System could be tampered with and always reassured of the

   opposite. Had we known that this was not true, we would have approached

   things differently. Knowing what I do now, I should have asked for an

   external, independent review to take place even if that meant not being able

   to respond quickly to news reports or questions about Horizon. At the time

   we were repeatedly given reassurance that the system was robust.




95_ In the period I was there, it was a time when there was growing concern

   around the separation of the business, coupled with a banking crisis which

   had the potential to bring down the Group. These were incredibly weighty

   matters and my priorities at the time were on the survival of the business.

   Because of this, maybe the Board were not as focused as we could and

   should have been on the Horizon issues.




                                 Page 33 of 36
                                                                                      WITNO5460100
                                                                                    WITN05460100




96. Looking back, I think that there was an institutional bias to not interrogate

   further what was being said by SPMs and the public about Horizon. At the

   time, the Board took comfort from knowing that there were systems and

   processes in place for the management of cash and stock. Looking back,

   there were potential opportunities missed at the time of the lsmay report to

   dig deeper, or to consider an external investigation. However, if the

   fundamental position of Fujitsu remained that is was tamper proof, the

   Investigation Teams were not raising any issues identified during

   investigations, and Legal were not raising any issues regarding the safety of

   taking legal action, it is not clear to me that during my short time, the Board

   would have necessarily acted any differently at that time.



97.1 had no involvement in prosecutions and therefore do not feel that I am able

   to comment on the approach to prosecutions or related disclosure. However,

   it is important for any public organisation to demonstrate that the public

   purse is safe and I think from that angle, I would have expected the Post

   Office to use its powers to prosecute where there was robust evidence of

   theft or false accounting provided that the prosecutions proceeded in

   accordance with a robust enforcement policy and any other relevant legal

   framework or guidance. I cannot comment on disclosure as I did not have

   any involvement in any of the cases.



98. Having reviewed the documents provided to me by the Inquiry and having

   followed the news around the Horizon IT System, my overarching view is

   threefold: firstly, that for my short time, there were many other priorities


                                  Page 34 of 36
                                                                                             WITNO5460100
                                                                                        WITNO5460100




          critical to the survival of the business which I think meant that POL was not

          as focused on Horizon as it could have been; secondly, that we did instigate

          a review to stress test the organisation's position regarding the reliability of

          Horizon but that review was insufficient and it meant that the Board did not

          reach the correct conclusion; thirdly and most importantly, that I hold a huge

          sadness that this happened. I am fully aware of just how long Campaign for

          Justice has been going on for and I can only look on with huge regret that it

          took so long to uncover and then begin to right the suffering caused.




Statement of Truth

   99.1 believe the content of this statement to be true.

          Signed:      '+RO
          Dated: 23rd February 2024

Index to First Witness Statement of David Smith


No           URN                Document Description          Control Number

     1.      POL00107129        Memo from Rod Ismay to        POL-0105437
                                Dave Smith Mike Moores
                                and Mike Young Re
                                Horizon - Response to
                                challenges regarding
                                system integrity


     2.      POL00041564        Bankruptcy, prosecution     POL-0038046
                                and disrupted livelihoods -
                                Postmasters tell their
                                story; reported by
                                Rebecca Thomson -
                                Article

                                         Page 35 of 36
                                                                WITNO5460100
                                                              WITNO5460100




3.   FUJO0174292   Email chain from Gavin     POINQ0180473F
                   Bounds to Duncan Tait,
                   RE: Post Office


4.   POL00001615   Weekly Highlight Report - VIS00002629
                   Forward one2eleven
                   Programme - F1-000 - By
                   Sue Whalley, Dave Smith
                   & Neil Ennis


5.   POL00004669   Letter from Mrs P J        VIS00005737
                   (Pamela) Stubbs to Mr
                   Smith (Post Office Ltd)
                   re: Horizon Issues and
                   Shortfalls


6.   POL00004866   Letter from Simon Smith    VIS00005934
                   to Mrs P J Stubbs RE:
                   Response to letter dated
                   5 June


7.   POL00106847   Email chain between        POL-0105155
                   Security - Fraud Team
                   personnel concerning
                   investigation into SPM
                   Stubbs - Barkham Office


8.   POL00001762   Letter from David Smith    VIS00002776
                   (POL Managing Director)
                   to Priti Patel MP,
                   responding to
                   Parliamentary Question
                   re Horizon


9.   POL00120481   Email chain from Mark      POL-0126172
                   Burley to Mike Young,
                   Sue Huggins cc Nick
                   Beal and others re: RE:
                   Urgent channel 4 horizon
                   issue


                          Page 36 of 36
                                                                 WITNO5460100
                                                               WITNO5460100




10.   FUJ00081584    Receipts/Payments         POINQ0087755F
                     Mismatch issue notes


11.   POL00088957    Email from John Breeden   POL-0080918
                     to Angela Van-Den-
                     Bogerd cc: Sue Huggins,
                     Tracy Marshall and Lin
                     Norbury RE: Horizon
                     Integrity final report


12.   WITNO4630100   Statement of Rod Ismay    WITNO4630100
                     dated 13 January 2023
13.   POL00169170    Email from Rod Ismay to   POL-0167423
                     Jarnail A Singh, Mandy
                     Talbot, Hugh Flemington
                     and others re Regina v
                     Seema Misra - Trial
                     result




                            Page 37 of 36
