WITNO2650100

Witness Name: Mr Mark Kelly
Statement No: WITNO265_01
Exhibits: none

Dated..2

THE POST OFFICE HORIZON INQUIRY

WITNESS STATEMENT OF MR MARK KELLY

1, MR MARK KELLY WILL SAY as follows:

INTRODUCTION

4. | am grateful to the Chair to be invited to provide a “human impact” statement,
concerning the physical, psychological, emotional, reputational and financial
consequences to me and my family of being held responsible for shortfalls shown by
the Horizon IT system and Post Office Limited’s acticns toward me and my family.
The initial paragraphs below provide a brief summary of my background, and provide
context to the detail of the human impact of the Horizon scandal on me and my
family. This statement does not reflect a full account of my experiences or those of

my family and if necessary or required | will provide further witness statement

evidence.
BACKGROUND
2. | am 43 years old. | have been caring for my mother almost full time, as she has been

very unwell. | assist my wife in her retail business.

3. After school | went to Cardiff University to study for a degree in Computer Science.

After leaving university, | assisted my parents in our family post office. | also worked

part time at Lloyds Bank.

Page 1 of 20
WITNO2650100

4. Before | was appointed as Subpostmaster, my mother was subpostmistress and later
my father was subpostmaster. While my parents ran the Post Office, there was an
armed robbery which caused my mother to be very unwell as a result. | then took on

the Post Office from my father.

5. My parents gifted the Post Office to myself and my wife. This provided the equity

that the bank wanted for the business loan we needed to take on the post office.

6. | was a Subpostmaster of Brondeg Post Office, 71 Manor Road, Mandelson, Swansea

SA5 9PD from 16 January 2003 to 20 July 2006.

7. | signed a document entitled ‘Conditions of Appointment’ when | took on my role as
Subpostmaster. | vaguely recall that this was a 1-2 page document including the
opening hours and the address of the branch. This was not the full 100 page
contract and | did not even know that there was a contract of this size. Mark Baker of
the Communication Workers Union later told me there was a fuller and more

comprehensive contract at a later date.

8. ! lived in the post office premises and | operated a retail business from the premises.
| initially sold greeting cards and stationery. During my time in branch, | stopped
selling greeting cards and moved into providing DVD rentals, pet supplies, computer
repair, handbags and confectionary. The pet store was becoming a really a viable

business when | lost my position.

9. | employed two assistants, Catherine Ball from 16 January 2003 to 2005 and my wife,
Olga Kelly from 16 January 2003 to 20 July 2006.

Training and Support

10. There was one day of training in a hotel room near our post office. They had a demo

Horizon computer and they talked us through certain transactions.

Page 2 of 20
ny

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

WITNO2650100

As | say, my parents took over the post office in 1997, and | did initial training with
them because | worked with them as a clerk. It was in this role that | undertook the

initial Horizon training in 1999 when the system was introduced.

My mum struggled with the new system, but | thought that I picked it up quite
quickly, which | think in part was aided by my having studied computer science. As a
clerk, | was just by the trainers told how to do the sales and transactional aspects,
such as selling a stamp. There was no guidance on the balancing in any great detail.

My mother and | were the last to leave, as she was struggling to pick up the system.

1 do not feel that this was an adequate introduction to the new computer system,
especially bearing in mind that some of the subpostmasters were not computer
literate, and this was their first introduction to computers. Prior to this training day,
many subpostmasters, including my parents, had spent years using the old paper

method of balancing, which was a stark difference to the computerised system.

| attended a 5 day course in or around 6 — 10 January 2003, which was held at 47 —
49 Albany Road which was a Crown Post Office at the time. The training was held in

one of the offices at the back of the building.

We covered things such as customer service and we did one balance. | felt that this
was more tailored to how to compete transactions and sales. The trainers did not tell

us how to correct any mistakes made on the system.

In fact, during the training it was necessary to teach the trainer how to do certain
things, such as how to go back and correct a mistake. We also had to guide the
trainer in regards to parcels: if you weighed the parcel in a certain way it would not
correspond properly with the system, and there was another way of doing it which

would better translate onto Horizon. | had to teach the trainer this.

Page 3 of 20
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

WITNO2650100

The trainer also did not know how to use the APC (electric key tokens). This related
to bill payments an issue that could often cause an issue if customers changed their

mind at the last minute about paying the bill.

Ordinarily {if not using a key token) the way the transaction worked with bill
payments and the like was that if a customer came to pay a bill, you processed the
transaction, and if the customer then said they did not in fact have the money to pay

the bill, the transaction could be reversed.

However, with an electronic key token, if the transaction was put through as a top
up and customers then changed their mind about completing the transaction then
the system did not allow reversals. Instead, money had to be taken before
processing the transaction to make sure it went through and no shortfall was caused
as a result. | had to tell the trainer that this was the correct way to complete the

transaction and explain the problem with the system not allowing a reversal.

The training offered no guidance as to what to do should there be problems when
balancing. We were told to just call the helpline and they would see if they could put

any losses into suspense.

After the initial training | had a person who monitored how we work in the branch

for one week and help with any process that was required.

This trainer mainly shadowed us to make sure we were doing the transactions
correctly. She often focused on the paperwork behind the scenes, as opposed to
using Horizon. This trainer stayed and did one balance with us. There was no issue

with this balance.

We had joint venture training when the Post Office entered into business with the
Bank of Ireland. This was to do with financial services such as mortgage services and

the like.

Page 4 of 20
WITNO2650100

24. Post Office Operational Focus updates were sent every week and we had to read

these to understand any new processes with the system.

25. Crown Office would close between 9am-9.30 once per week to allow for practice on
the system, and to learn about new updates. However, we were not allowed to close
to undertake such training. Those in the Crown Office had up to half an hour to train
on the new processes, however we did not get to benefit from time such as this and

had to be open to trade instead.

Helpline
26. | estimate that | contacted the Helpline more than 5 times per week with regard to

problems relating to alleged shortfalls and /or balancing.

27. The Helpline just seemed like they were reading from a script. They often told me
that | was the only one having these issues, and | got the impression that they were
deliberately trying to make me feel isolated and as though my issues were stand

alone.

28. Often the Helpline would tell me that the problem would sort itself out. | had many
experiences with the Helpline throughout my time as subpostmaster and below |

have listed those that | recall t the best of my ability.

29. In mid-January 2006, | called the Helpline to inform them about a bug on the system
when using the smartpost stamp function in conjunction with bankcards. The bug

was affecting these specific transactions and could cause significant losses.

30. 1 had a phone call 3 February 2006 from the Helpline to confirm that Fujitsu had
identified the bug and confirmed that this was the cause of discrepancies. Ordinarily,
if there was a bug, the Post Office or the Helpline would send a memo to other
subpostmasters to let them know that there was an error. However, the person that

rang me told me that there would not be a memo circulated.
Page 5 of 20
31,

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

WITNO2650100

They also confirmed that other postmasters had also contacted them with the same

problem.

On 4 January 2006 | called the Helpline for assistance with balancing in regards to an
alleged shortfall, (1 do not recall the amount). | had put a green giro onto system at
7.02pm, which the system did not register and hence created a shortage because it

does go through as a transaction.

it seemed like there was a cut off time for transactions to be processed by Horizon,
in that if you put something through the system after 7pm it would not be accounted

for on Horizon until weeks later.

The Helpline told me they would cancel the transaction out. They also mentioned

that there were currently many other Post Offices having the same problems.

Three months then passed and nothing came through regarding this error and
shortfall, instead the alleged loss popped up on system as a shortage. | had to then

accept the alleged shortfall and pay it back in order to open and trade the next day.

When | called the Helpline about this, they offered no assistance and told me to
contact Alliance & Leicester and not themselves as they claimed that the problem
was with A&L. The Helpline told me that it was Alliance and Leicester who were

issuing the error notices, not the Post Office.

When | subsequently called Alliance and Leicester, they were shocked that | had
called them and said that it was the Post Office’s internal system was generating

error notices.

| experienced two armed robberies at my post office. The first armed robbery was in

November 2003. The robbers threaten me with a gun and a rock.

Page 6 of 20
35

40.

41.

42.

43.

WITNO2650100

1 was notified by the Post Office of an alleged shortfall of £5,754.14 on 16 December
2003. This was eventually cancelled by the Post Office. This was also a result of an
armed robbery. The Post Office alleged that | had not adequately safeguarded the
Branch during the robbery and that insufficient precautions were taken, and so | was

held to be responsible to pay the above amount.

The robber had a large rock and threw it through the counter. We had to move
ourselves out of the way so that the stone did not hit us. We then left the store and
called 999 from our house. However, the panic button was below the counter and to
press it, we would have had to move closer to the armed robber and towards the
rock being thrown. The Post Office tried to pursue me for the above money and
claimed that | had breached safety precautions by not pressing the panic button. The
only way to press the panic button was if we had moved towards the stone being

thrown.

The second armed Robbery occurred on Tuesday 16 November 2004 and the Police

attended. Around £47,000 was stolen.

In fact, the police were able to track down and charge one of the robbers, who was
convicted of this robbery; he received 7 years imprisonment. The police asked the
Post Office if they wished to make a claim for their losses against the defendant. The
Post Office declined this offer, but then sought to recover the £47,000 from me. This
caused us great distress and worry over a period of some months in which the Post
Office sought to force me to pay for the monies that were stolen, including my
having to attend a meeting with a very senior Post Office manager in Bridgend.
Eventually the Post Office desisted in their attempts make me personally liable for

the losses caused by the robbery.

| feel that this is a good example of the way in which the Post Office treated
subpostmasters. Even when there was proof positive that a robbery had occurred,
and the robber was convicted, the Post Office sought to recover the money from the

subpostmaster rather than the convicted robber.

Page 7 of 20
WITNO2650100

44. Auditors came on Wednesday 17 November 2004 to check what was stolen and

spoke with the Police and insisted that we open the following day.

45. The auditors then zeroed the losses so that no shortfall was showing. We were then

closed, and we reopened the next day.

46. Horizon generated a loss of approximately £2,000 between the time the auditor and
the police were there and the day we reopened. The system said that | could not roll
over unless | accepted the loss. | refused to accept that loss since the Post Office was
closed between the time of the audit and when the loss was generated. Therefore,

the loss could not have been generated by any action of mine.

47. The Helpline eventually agreed to put the figure into the suspense account to let it
roll into the next balancing month where | think it stayed until the Post Office finally

closed down, and it became part of the final total alleged loss (detailed below).

48. | also contacted the Helpline because I had an alleged loss in relation to a currency
order. The loss was £600 and made using a debit card. The payment then got lost on

the system and the £600 was registered as a loss.

49. The Helpline just told me to investigate this myself. We asked the customer who said
that they did not have the card anymore and so we could not trace the loss. The
customer did confirm that they had paid the amount but the transaction had not

processed on the system. | think this occurred in or around 2005.

SHORTFALLS

50. In this section, | set out in very brief detail my experience of shortfalls arising from
deficiencies in the Horizon IT System, and Post Office Limited’s actions as a result.
This is only a brief introduction to those matters, in order to provide necessary

context for the explanation of the human impact which follows.

Page 8 of 20
51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

WITNO2650100

| would estimate that throughout my position in the branch, | paid (or Post Office
deducted) in excess of £3,000. | set out below examples of the shortfalls that

occurred.

£40 on 18 February 2004. | repaid this in full. | declared these shortfalls by following

the Post Office procedure.

£61.08 on 24 March 2004. | repaid this in full. | declared these shortfalls by

following the Post Office procedure.

£300 on 18 June 2004. | repaid in full. | declared this shortfall to the Helpline.

£11.50 on 25 August 2004. | repaid in full. | declared this shortfall to the Helpline

£600 on 15 October 2004. This was in regards to a pre-order foreign currency. | paid
in full but cannot remember how | paid. | checked back through my records and
transaction history then called the Helpline. They advised that | transfer the amount

to a suspense account. | eventually repaid the alleged loss in full in order to balance.

£2,000 on 17 November 2004. This was a cash loss after the armed robbery. | was
audited and then the alleged loss was generated between the audit and reopening

of the branch.

As | have said, Horizon generated a loss of approximately £2,000 between the time
the auditor and the police were there and the day we reopened. The system said
that | could not roll over unless | accepted the loss. | refused to accept that loss since
the Post Office was closed between the time of the audit and when the loss was

generated. Therefore the loss could not have been generated by any action of mine.

The Helpline eventually agreed to put the figure into the suspense account to let it
roll into the next balancing month where | think it stayed until the Post Office finally

closed down, and it became part of the final total alleged loss (detailed below).

Page 9 of 20
WITNO2650100

60. £384.59 on 10 October 2005. | repaid this in full. This had been declared to the
Helpline

61. £12,000 on 20 July 2006. | knew about some of this shortfall, but did not know
about the remainder. This shortfall was inclusive of the £2,000 that was still in the

suspense account following the robbery.

Audit and investigation

62. Not including the audits following the two armed robberies, nor the audit on hand
over day when I became the subpostmaster; | had about 3 - 5 audits between 2004
and 2006.

63. | suddenly started getting audited around the time that the Post Office made it clear
that they wanted to close one of the branches in my locality, as part of the Network
Transformation Programme. The Post Office did not have an office in the area that
would close voluntary, and so | got the impression the Post Office had singled mine
out for closure and this is why we then started to have more regular supposed losses

and audits.

64. Most of the time just one auditor (the same person each time), arrived first thing in

the morning and left by lunch time.

65. 1 recall that on one occasion, the auditor seemed surprised or disappointed that he
did not find a large shortfall. Everything during this audit balanced and he acted as
though he was surprised that this was the case and he checked the figures multiple

times, which he had never done before.

66. The final audit was on 20 July 2006. This audit was conducted by Fiona (I do not
recall her surname) from Post Office head office. She told me she was attending my
branch because the Post Office had made several attempts to terminate my

contract. Fiona said that a customer had complained that there was a lavender smell

Page 10 of 20
67.

68.

69.

70.

71,

72.

73.

WITNO2650100

in the office. A customer also came in and wanted to send a guaranteed service to
Russia, at the time this could not be done, because there was an embargo on certain

types of mail in Russia, and so this customer had apparently made a complaint.

After inspecting my office, Fiona then counted the stock and the cash and this is

when she found a shortage. | believe that she found an alleged £9,000 loss.

| was then audited again the following day by two auditors, and they maintained that
they found an additional £3,000 shortfall; making the total alleged loss £12,000. |

was suspended immediately.

Fiona told me that the Post Office would prosecute me. She then told me said that if
| resigned, they would not proceed any further with a prosecution, and it would look
better for me to the Post Office if | resigned. She also said that they would not

pursue the money.

Following the audit on 20 July 2006, | was interviewed by the Post Office Security
team under caution. They also searched my branch and requested my financial

information, such as bank statements, which | provided.

The Post Office were planning to charge me with theft and false accounting.

1 went for two interviews; one was cancelled because | was very unwell. On the same
day as the interview | was admitted to hospital under the Mental Health Act and was

in treatment for the next 6 months.

This was not a pre-existing condition, and | believe that it was brought on by the
constant stress caused by the Post Office and as a result of trying to find the errors in
the Horizon system, the robberies and the constant impression given by the Post

Office that | was the only one in this situation.

Page 11 of 20
WITNO2650100

74, | had the second interview around 6 months later, after | was released from care
under the Mental Health Act. This took place after Post Office had already

terminated my appointment.

75. The Interview was conducted in a Police Station by Post Office investigators. It was

therefore very frightening.

76. 1 do not recall very much about this interview except that they looked at my bank
statements, and saw that there was no money, which would correspond with the

losses in the branch.

77. | had taken screen shots of the bug on the Horizon System, relating to the smart
stamps and had shown these to the Post Office previously. My solicitor at this time
then told the Post Office that we would use this evidence to show that Horizon had

flaws.

78. The Post Office then dropped all the allegations and took no further action in

relation to the prosecution.

79. | emphasise that the Post Office did not inform me that they were dropping the
prosecution, they simply took no further action. As a result, | live under fear of

prosecution for a very long time.

80. For example, | was party to the Group Litigation against Post Office Ltd. | was afraid

that if we lost that case, the Post Office would restart their prosecution of me.

Suspension and Termination

81. | was suspended immediately following the audit on 20 July 2006 when the Post

Office found alleged shortfalls. The branch was closed from 20th July 2006 onwards.

82. | asked for a temporary subpostmaster in office (with me paying their salary). | was

told this could not happen because the false roof behind the counter was not

Page 12 of 20
83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

WITNO2650100

completed by a Post Office approved supplier, due to fitter passing away and other

official suppliers having backlogs.

Following the audit, the Post Office locked the counter and Post Office Limited staff
took the key. A few weeks later, someone from Post Office came to collect all the

paperwork from branch and Horizon.

| feel that the Post Office subjected me to constant harassment from the robberies
to the date of that audit and beyond. They were looking for anything to terminate

my contract.

During the final audit, the Post Office manager, Fiona, encouraged me to resign, and

assured me that doing so would prevent prosecution.

l resigned around 6 months later, just before the second Post Office interview under

caution.

in addition, | felt that | had constantly been harassed by the Post Office and they
were looking for any reason to terminate my contract as they wanted my branch to
close as part of the Post Office National Transformation Scheme plan. For example,
on 10 May 2005, | received a phone call from Dave Hazell who was the Head of Area
and told me that I-was in breach of contract because | was not displaying a poster
advertising Post Office products such as travel insurance and currency. Mr Hazell
claimed that this was in breach of page 54, section 5 of my contract (which | the time

| did not have a copy of) and therefore gave me 3 months’ notice.

| contacted Mark Baker of the Communication Workers Union, and this matter was
resolved after Mark pointed out that this was not a contractual obligation. In fact,
the reason | had not displayed the poster was because | had never been sent them

by the Post Office; a fact which | told them.

1 would like to emphasise that Mr Mark Baker was hugely helpful to me. At that time

he was a representative of the National Federation of Subpostmasters. He was the

Page 13 of 20
WITNO2650100

only National Federation representative who stood up for subpostmasters. Mr Baker
left the National Federation and became a union reprehensive with the

Communication Worker Union.

90. There were multiple instances such as this. This behaviour towards me by the Post
Office, plus the behaviour of the Post Office following the final audit and Fiona’s

insistence that | resign led to my decision to resign.

91, Furthermore, | was deeply unwell as a result of the stress the Post Office placed me

under. | felt backed into a corner and just wanted the situation to be over.

92. | was not able to sell or transfer my business, because | became very ill and was
under the care of the GP. Because of this, the bank would not liaise with me and my
wife, who was not named on the deed or the bank account. Therefore, the business

was sold in 2009 at auction for £78,000 after being repossessed.

Civil and Criminal Proceedings

93. The Post Office did not pursue civil or criminal proceedings against me for recovery
of the alleged shortfalls. However, they threatened to prosecute me, and this threat

hung over me for a very long time.

Losses

94. | repaid in excess of £3,000 to Post Office Ltd in alleged shortfalls. | was led to
believe that | had no alternative but to pay the shortfalls such shortfalls no matter

what the cause.

95. | lost the value of the business (Post Office and retail shop) but am unable to
quantify this without expert valuation evidence. 1 paid the following for the

purchase of the branch: £145,000 for the purchase of the freehold (the existing Post

Page 14 of 20
WITNO2650100

Office and retail property) Going by records found including my business plan the
total value of business including freehold was at the time £142,000. £45,000 of this

was gifted to me by my parents. I paid £300 for the purchase of the stock

96. Both the business and the residential property were repossessed when the Post
Office closed. There was a clause on my bank loan which said that when the Post

Office closed, they could recall the loan which they ultimately did.

97. This also closed my pet store business, which was becoming very profitable.

98. | was suspended for approximately 6 months, and therefore lost £12,600 in
remuneration. Had | been given paid notice by the Post Office | would have been
due £6,300, for 3 months’ notice, or £12,600 for 6 months’ notice or £25,200 if | had

been given 12 months’ notice.

99. If it were not for the events that occurred, my future plans in my role were to
increase the retail side income on the pet supplies, which at the time was becoming

ever more profitable and turnover was constantly increasing.

100. The main income would become the retail side, with the Post Office being used to

increase the footfall to the retail business.

101. At about this time (2017) the business loan would have been coming up for maturity,
which would have given me an extra £792 per month income. This would also give us

full control of the freehold asset again.

102. So we would have used this time to look at either starting a family, buy another
property which we would rent out, or buy another business etc. This is so we could

start saving towards our pension fund in 20 - 30 years’ time from then.

103. 1 would have expected to continue to work in the post office until retirement; |

would have expected to earn at least £982,800 from the branch salary.

Page 15 of 20
WITNO2650100

104. | have not found subsequent employment as | have struggled with my mental health
and have become too afraid to take on another position of responsibility. | help my

wife out with her retail business but | do not earn a salary.

HUMAN IMPACT

105. My family and ! had run our post office since 1997. It was not just our business, but

our home.

106. | knew that there were problems in the Horizon System, as a result of my aptitude in
computer science, which | studied in university. This enabled me to find and produce
evidence of a bug “Smart label” which would record ghost transactions in the Horizon

System, which | produced to the Post Office and subsequently to Fujitsu.

107. | had reported this bug to the Post Office. They acknowledged that the bug was
present in the system. The Post Office told me that they would not circulate a memo
to other subpostmasters about this bug. | later informed the Post Office that if they
did not circulate a memo regarding this bug | would inform other postmasters myself,

via the National Federation.

108. Not long after this, in July 2006 the Post Office undertook a surprise audit and
maintained that they had found an almost £13,000 shortfall in the Horizon account
and | was suspended. | am sure that the shortfalls in the Horizon accounts were

caused by flaws and bugs in the Horizon System.

109. As | say, | highlighted a bug to the Post Office and Fujitsu. However, after the second
armed robbery where the Horizon system generated a negative figure in the Horizon

Account, this was a clear example of further flaws in the Horizon System.

110. It was impossible for me or anyone else to have removed this money from the Horizon
System, as my terminal had been locked by the Post Office auditors at the time of the

robbery in the presence of the police.
Page 16 of 20
WITNO2650100

111. | became so paranoid about the Horizon System, that we ran our own system to

mirror all transactions as a double entry checking system.

112. The constant stress and anxiety of where the errors were coming from made me feel
like a failure and trigger my panic disorder as random figures were generated by the

Horizon System.

113. Despite there being obvious flaws in the Horizon System, the Post Office sought to
prosecute me for theft. | was subjected to Post Office investigations, where they
looked into my personal finances, and | was interviewed under caution at a police

station by Post Office investigators.

114. Although my then solicitor made it clear to the Post Office that she would use the
evidence | had developed to demonstrate the flaws in the Horizon System, the fear of
prosecution continued, as the Post Office never told me that them would not proceed

against me.

115. Despite the mental health collapse caused by the Post Office action against me, the
Post Office still insisted on interviewing me under caution. | felt isolated, worthless
and suicidal. All the Post Office was interested in was getting their money. Money,

which in my view did not even exist, but was a figment of the Horizon System.

116. Indeed, years later, when | as a party in the Group Litigation against Post Office Ltd, |
was afraid that if we lost that the Post Office would restart a criminal prosecution of

me.

117. As a result, of the Post Office action against me | suffered from depression, anxiety
and panic attacks. | was cared for under the Mental Health Act for six months, and
have very little recollection of this time. | was so unwell that | could not even

remember my name, date of birth, nor even my wife’s name.

118. Due to Post Office’s actions, the property that was my home and office was

repossessed by the bank in 2009.

Page 17 of 20
WITNO2650100

119. Since this time, | just cannot handle any stress, targets, pressure etc. | have become

too afraid to take on another position of responsibility.

120. | often blame myself for what has happened. | have had thoughts about ending my life
many times. | have felt that my wife, friends, and family would be better off without

me.

121. My reputation has been damaged in the community, where my family and i have been
known for so long. My wife she recalls people saying in the area that we organised the
two armed robberies to steal the money from the Post Office and this was the reasons

why we closed.

122. The Post Office action has deeply affected my relationships with my family. My mental
health and shame made me withdraw and break contact with my wider family and

friends.

123. When | became a party to the Group Litigation, | realised that | was not alone, and that
many other people had had experiences like mine with the Post Office. Knowing this
helped me to realise that the destruction of my life, and the life of my family, was not

my fault.

124. The Horizon System and the Post Office destroyed my dreams. My wife and | wanted
to start a family, but after the ordeal of the Post Office | was in no mental, physical nor

financial state to do so.

125. | have lost my business and my home. | have also lost my future work and career, as |
intended to continue running the post office (handed down to me by my parents) until

retirement.

126. 1 now feel that | have let down my parents and my wife, who now has to shoulder so
much of the responsibility in our lives, down, as | just can no longer function as | did

previously.

Page 18 of 20
WITNO2650100

CONCLUSION

127. 1 would like those responsible at the Post Office to be held to account for what

happened to me and other subpostmasters.

128. | would like to be compensated for the loss of my home, business, income and future

and also for the harm that the Post Office action caused to me.

129. As|I give this statement to my solicitor there are announcements on the TV and Radio
about a compensation scheme for subpostmasters. However, that scheme only
benefits people who were wrongly convicted and have been through the long and
difficult process of having their ‘convictions overturned. There are only a small
number of subpostmasters who have yet been able to go through the process of
having their convictions quashed. There are therefore many hundreds of people who

were wrongly convicted, but who will get no compensations.

130. Furthermore, this scheme does nothing to help subpostmaster like myself, who were
threatened with prosecution, but not prosecuted; but whose lives were still

devastated by the Post Office.

131. I simply do not understand why the Post Office and Government will not simply do

the right thing for the victims of this scandal.

132. | would like the Post Office to genuinely acknowledge what went on and what went
wrong. | would like the Post Office to demonstrate that they have learnt their lessons

from this, and guarantees that this will not occur again.

133. | would like the Inquiry to investigate the role that Fujitsu played in this scandal and

for Fujitsu to acknowledge the role that they played in this scandal.

134. 1 would also like the Post Office to publish an apology in the local media in my

community, so that | and my family can regain our good name.

Page 19 of 20
WITNO2650100

Statement of Truth

| believe that the facts stated in this Witness Statement are true.

Signed.

Page 20 of 20
