                                                                                    WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




                                    Witness Name: Warwick Henry Patrick Tatford

                                                    Statement No: WITN09610100

                                        Exhibits: WITN09610101 - WITN09610104

                                                           Dated: 25 October 2023




                       POST OFFICE HORIZON IT ENQUIRY



                         FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF

                      WARWICK HENRY PATRICK TATFORD




   I, WARWICK HENRY PATRICK TATFORD, barrister of Foundry Chambers, 5-9

      Quality Court, Ground Floor, Chancery Lane, London, WC2A IHP, will say as

      follows:


   1. I was requested to provide a witness statement pursuant to Rule 9 of the

      Inquiry Rules 2006 on 21 September 2023.


Education


   2. I read Classics (Lit. Hum) at University College, Oxford between 1987 and

      1991, graduating with a First. I did the Common Professional Examination as

      my law conversion course at Nottingham Polytechnic in 1991-2. I attended the

      Inns of Court School of Law in 1992-3 and was called to the Bar in 1993.


Career at Bar




                                    Page 1 of 61
                                                                                        WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITN09610100




   3. I did a 12 month pupillage at the Chambers of Edmund Lawson QC, 4 Paper

      Buildings and became a tenant there in October 1994. I have remained at the

      same set ever since, though it has changed name (and location) twice — first

      9-12 Bell Yard and then Foundry Chambers.


   4. I have practised at the Bar without interruption. I have worked almost entirely

      in the field of Criminal Law (prosecuting and defending), but I have done quite

      a lot of Local Government prosecutions and very occasional Regulatory work

      at the GMC and Law Society (both defending). For over 10 years I appeared

      pro bono in Bar Disciplinary Tribunals (mainly presenting but also defending).

      I am a member of the CPS Advocates General Panel, at level 4, the highest

      grade. I am a member of the Rape and Serious Sexual Offences (RASSO)

      and Serious Crime Panels (at level 4) and the Fraud Panel (at level 3). A

      great deal of my practice now involves prosecuting serious sexual offences,

      often involving vulnerable complainants and defendants, but I continue to

      appear across the spectrum of the serious criminal cases in which senior

      juniors prosecute and defend.


Privilege


   5. In the light of correspondence I have received from the Inquiry I am

      proceeding on the basis that legal professional privilege had been waived by

      those who originally instructed me, the Criminal Law Division, Legal Services,

      Royal Mail.


Experience working with the Post Office/Royal Mail.




                                      Page 2 of 61
                                                                                     WITNO9610100
                                                                                WITN09610100




6. Throughout a significant part of my career I prosecuted cases on behalf of the

   Post Office and Royal Mail. Many of my colleagues in Chambers did the

   same.


7. I remember prosecuting 2 trials of theft by sub-post office employees which

   predated the Horizon system, where the deficiency was hidden by manually

   inflating figures for pension and allowance vouchers. I prosecuted a number

   of Horizon theft cases as guilty pleas. I am unable to determine the exact

   number because of insufficient case information on my Chambers' Lex Diary.

   In addition to the Horizon cases about which I have been asked detailed

   questions, I remember prosecuting 2 Horizon-based theft trials: Abiodun

   Omotoso at Luton Crown Court (trial dates 17-21/9/07) and Ian Kirk at

   Bournemouth Crown Court (3-6/12/07). From my researches I know that

   Abiodun Omotoso's conviction was overturned in Ambrose & others [2021]

   EWCA Crim 1443. I remember very little about the facts of Omotoso and have

   not been provided with any papers for it. The Ambrose judgment indicates

   that there was some kind of challenge to the integrity of Horizon, but I cannot

   remember any of the details, other than I do not think there was any reference

   to any problems at other sub-post offices and I do not think there was any

   expert evidence in the case. I do not know if Ian Kirk has sought to appeal his

   conviction. I remember that Mr Kirk's defence involved an acceptance of the

   deficiency, but the assertion that it had been caused by a theft by an unknown

   person(s). I believe the case of Seema Misra (2010) is the last Horizon trial I

   prosecuted.




                                  Page 3 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                     WITN09610100




8. I continued to prosecute occasional Royal Mail cases after that, often

   instructed by the late Juliet McFarlane (who is the author of document

   POL00053954). The Royal Mail criminal law department was by this stage

   entirely separate from Post Office Ltd and its cases did not relate to Horizon

   or sub-post offices. The last Royal Mail trial I was involved in was Didier

   Nyamakolo (theft by postman, Blackfriars Crown Court) on 21-25/11/16.


9. I will now focus on the cases about which I have been asked detailed

   questions. The cases are all from a significant time ago and I have long since

   disposed confidentially of all my papers, notes, documents and almost all

   emails in relation to all 3 cases. I have found a handful of emails concerning

   Misra. I do remember the Page and Misra cases reasonably well, though

   there is plenty of detail that I now cannot remember. I had very limited

   involvement in the case of Rudkin and cannot really assist with that case

   beyond the documents I have been given.


10. In my statement I have indicated various documents that I know to have been

   created but which have not been provided to me. I will provide a list of such

   documents to assist the Inquiry to locate those documents, if they still exist.


11. I have never previously prosecuted a case that has been stayed as an abuse

   of process, let alone one involving such an appalling abuse of process as

   described in Hamilton & others. I feel ashamed as a barrister when I read the

   judgment. I am deeply troubled by the possibility that there might have existed

   computer bugs, relevant to the cases I prosecuted, which ought to have been

   disclosed. I am very sorry that Seema Misra and Carl Page did not receive fair

   trials and I am sorry that I played an unwitting role in this. I was completely




                                   Page 4 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




      unaware of the existence of any Horizon computer bugs at the time of the

      Page case in 2005-6, or indeed that any problems had ever been raised. At

      the time of the Misra case I ensured that the Callendar Square bug was

      disclosed and made it very clear to those instructing me that enquiries should

      be made with Fujitsu about any other problems and any other bugs should be

      disclosed. I made this clear also to Gareth Jenkins, the expert instructed by

      the Crown, and I made it very clear to Mr Jenkins that he was under a duty to

      provide frank disclosure of Horizon problems to the defence expert instructed

      in that case, Professor McLachlan.


   12. In this statement I can only set out how I remember things. No particular

      disclosure failings on my part have been brought to my attention and it is not

      clear to me what, if any, criticisms are being made of my conduct in the cases

      I prosecuted. I note that the reprehensible failings so starkly reported in

      Hamilton & others appear to relate largely to a time after the cases I

      prosecuted.


The Prosecution of Carl Page


   13. 1 have reviewed the documents sent to me and listed between paragraphs 5

      and 19 of the annex to the letter of 21 September 2023 and have considered

      the questions put to me in that letter.


   14. My role in the case of Carl Page may not have been fully understood from the

      available paperwork. I have been asked why I was instructed as new Counsel

      for the retrial, which is incorrect. I was not new Counsel. My former colleague

      from Chambers, Stephen John, now a retired Judge, prosecuted the case

      initially alone but, as the case became more complicated, he requested and



                                      Page 5 of 61
                                                                                       WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




   was granted a junior. I was instructed as junior and performed that role

   throughout the first trial of Page & Whitehouse.


15. The first day of the trial of Page & Whitehouse was at Wolverhampton Crown

   Court on 6/6/05. The trial was immediately transferred to what was then called

   the West Midlands Fraud Centre, a converted office building near Dudley. The

   trial took place there between 7/6/05 and 22/7/05 before HHJ Wood QC. On

   22/7/05 both Mr Whitehouse and Mr Page were acquitted on count 1,

   conspiracy to defraud. Carl Page faced count 2 alone, theft of £282,000. The

   jury was unable to reach a verdict on that count and was discharged. A retrial

   was ordered which was eventually listed at Stafford Crown Court on 14/11/06.

   The retrial only justified one Prosecution Counsel. Stephen John was

   unavailable, so I was instructed, on the basis that I had a very full knowledge

   of the case from the first trial.


16. There seems to have been a misunderstanding in the Court of Appeal in

   Hamilton & others as to the facts of count 2. Paragraphs 277-285 seem to be

   incorrect in a number of important respects, unless other information was

   presented to the Court of Appeal which does not appear in the judgment.

   Although this is not related to issues surrounding Horizon, I thought it would

   assist the Inquiry if I went into the detail. Count 2 only ever related to Carl

   Page. The offence was quite separate from count 1, which involved a

   conspiracy between the 2 Defendants relating to foreign currency: Mr Page

   sold euros to Mr Whitehouse at preferential rates; Mr Page went against the

   rates suggested to him centrally, which he was not permitted to do, and gave

   Mr Whitehouse such good rates that Mr Whitehouse was able to make a




                                       Page 6 of 61
                                                                                     WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




   substantial profit simply by converting the euros back into sterling at other

   bureaux de change, something that in normal circumstances should result in a

   heavy loss. That in very simple terms was the case on count 1 and count 1

   essentially had nothing to do with the Horizon system, the equipment used for

   foreign exchange being a Forde Moneychanger.


17. Count 2, against Mr Page alone, did relate to Horizon. When an audit

   (essentially a stock-take) took place at Mr Page's sub-post office it revealed a

   shortfall of £282,000. The Horizon records suggested £282,000 worth of

   foreign currency was being physically held at the branch in the 'AM' stock (the

   drawer holding cash, receipts, stamps, vouchers etc for which Carl Page was

   responsible). No such amount of foreign currency money was present in the

   drawer (stock). The Crown's case was that Mr Page had put false figures into

   Horizon over a period of time so that the computer records would fail to reveal

   that money was regularly going missing. The hole in the accounts would

   become bigger as the theft continued over time, so, it was alleged, the only

   way Mr Page could balance his office's accounts was to pretend that there

   was an increasing sum of cash in his stock that corresponded exactly to the

   money he was stealing. It was an imaginary sum of foreign cash. The true

   position could only be discovered when an audit took place and the stock was

   physically examined and no such money was found.


18. The case on count 2 was made more complicated by the account Mr Page

   gave in interview. The auditor found a cheque for £278,181.82. This cheque

   hadn't been put through Horizon. In interview Mr Page claimed that he had

   loaned euros, to this sterling value, to Mr Whitehouse. This seemed at first a




                                  Page 7 of 61
                                                                                       WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




   good explanation for the £282,000 deficiency because it suggested that the

   sum wasn't an imaginary sum but was a real amount of foreign currency that

   had been in the office but was now in the possession of Mr Whitehouse. The

   trouble with this version of events was that it was going to be disproved in the

   trial by Mr Whitehouse's evidence. So, when Mr Page gave evidence at the

   first trial he admitted this part of his interview was untrue. This can be seen in

   the partial transcript of Carl Page's evidence (POL00067005). I am afraid that

   I can no longer remember the full details of the new explanation Carl Page

   gave for the deficiency in his evidence and a complete transcript of his

   evidence doesn't appear to be available. I do remember his explanation

   related to what he said was his incompetence and that of his employees. I

   don't remember him ever saying there might have been a computer glitch.


19. 1 have tried to set out the facts of counts 1 and 2 in a relatively simple way

   because I know they are not straightforward. When I was preparing the trial it

   took a long time for me to understand the evidence on count 2. Stephen John

   and I prepared an expanded opening note for the trial which was meant in

   part to explain count 2 more clearly. It appears that expanded opening is no

   longer available, but the reason I drafted a Revised Opening Note

   (POL00066717) for the second trial was so that the Crown's case on the sole

   allegation at the re-trial was as clear as possible. In paragraph 32 of my

   Revised Opening I set out reasons why the loan story of Mr Page's interview

   could not be true. I set out the reasons there because Mr Page no longer had

   the disadvantage of a co-Defendant and it would be important, at an early

   stage, for the jury to appreciate the interview account appeared untrue.




                                   Page 8 of 61
                                                                                      WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




20. It follows from all this that the criticisms made by Holroyde U in Hamilton &

   others [at 279] about the Crown changing its case between the 2 trials are

   perhaps, I am afraid, incorrect. I do not know how the Court of Appeal came

   to this view as I had no involvement in the appeal and was not asked

   beforehand any questions about the Page case. The Crown's allegation

   remained the same for both trials - the deficiency in the 'AM' stock - £282,000

   worth of supposed foreign currency, a fictitious sum of money.


21. I hope it is clear that in seeking to make these corrections I am taking nothing

   away from the sound reasons for the quashing of the conviction which

   obviously relate to the reliability of Horizon and disclosure failures over many

   years.


22. Following the first trial I remember submitting a short report to our instructing

   solicitor, Rob Wilson, setting out the views of Stephen John and me about the

   verdicts, any lessons to be learned and whether a retrial for Mr Page was

   appropriate. I have not been sent this document by the Inquiry and do not now

   have a copy myself, but I do remember drafting it and sending it by email. Our

   overall view was that the trial had gone reasonably well for the Crown and that

   the Defendants might have had the good fortune of an ultra-cautious jury. The

   evidence on count 1 seemed stronger against Mr Whitehouse. To prove that

   conspiracy it was necessary to prove the guilt of both Defendants, so if the

   jury thought that a guilty Mr Whitehouse had used Mr Page as a dupe it would

   have to acquit both Defendants. There seemed no reason not to seek a retrial

   for Mr Page. This view was fortified when, in the months that followed the trial,

   the Post Office received information to suggest that Carl Page may have




                                   Page 9 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITN09610100




   perjured himself in an aspect of his evidence in the trial. He had spent some

   time in his evidence in the first trial setting out his military record and he

   claimed he had served in a secret capacity which he could not divulge. Rather

   naively we had not considered that he might have been telling lies on this

   point and we did not investigate the matter during the trial. This was a

   mistake. In fact the CV which Mr Page supplied to the Post Office, when first

   seeking a role as a SPM, referred to no military background; rather it

   suggested he had a reasonable amount of accounting experience. Perhaps

   he had hoped to create sympathy with the jury, from a military record, and had

   hoped to hide accountancy experience, which wouldn't have sat well with his

   defence of incompetence. My recollection is that the Crown served, in a notice

   of additional evidence which has not been provided to me, evidence that

   could potentially prove these apparent lies at the re-trial.


23. I did not give any advice on evidence or the merits of prosecution in the run-

   up to the first trial. Any such advice would have been given by Stephen John.


24. I am asked about the involvement of Customs and Excise in the investigation.

   They had begun the investigation because there was a natural suspicion that

   Mr Whitehouse's transporting of large amounts of cash was connected with

   money-laundering. Once it was discovered that, in fact, the cash was euros

   purchased from Mr Page's bureau de change at preferential rates, then the

   interest of Customs and Excise ceased and it was investigated as a fraud on

   the Post Office. Stephen John inspected the papers held by Customs and

   Excise and advised there was nothing to disclose. There were no audits

   carried out by Customs and Excise as far as I am aware.




                                   Page 10 of 61
                                                                                          WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITN09610100




25. I am also asked about the police's involvement in the investigation. They had

   some limited role in the investigation but did not investigate the case in any

   detail. This was a common feature of Post Office prosecutions for many years

   before the existence of Horizon. The police might become involved in a case,

   e.g. because Post Office investigators did not have a power of arrest, but the

   role of the police tended to be very limited. Post Office investigators usually

   came from a work background within the Post Office and were familiar with

   complicated Post Office work practices whose detail would be difficult for a

   police officer to understand without a great deal of preparation. The police

   were generally very happy for a Post Office investigator to take over all

   aspects of an investigation, e.g. by asking almost all the questions in a PACE

   interview, while a police officer sat in relative silence. I have considered the

   letter at POL00045921 which was sent to John Whitehouse on 7/5/03. I

   recognise this letter and would have seen it in my review of the unused

   material as I prepared the case for the first trial, after my instruction as junior.

   The letter indicates that the Post Office would take the lead in the

   investigation but the police agreed to carry out some limited parts of the

   investigation — analysis of phone contact and bank accounts. The letter

   betrays the limited understanding the police had of the case: the letter wrongly

   states that John Whitehouse had been alleged to have stolen money from the

   Post Office, colluding with Carl Page — this is a very garbled way of describing

   the foreign currency conspiracy. The police's conclusion in the letter that "as

   the above enquiries have not provided any clear evidence of criminal conduct

   either by, or between, the two men, Staffordshire Police decided not to press

   any charges against them" properly had no sensible impact of the Post




                                   Page 11 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITN09610100




   Office's eventual decision to prosecute. It seemed to me at the time that the

   police had a very limited understanding of the evidence and they only

   investigated a specific part of the case. The fact that nothing suspicious was

   found in phone calls and bank accounts was an important piece of disclosure

   for the trial, but the police knew nothing of the extraordinary foreign currency

   purchases that were the real reason for the conspiracy charge. The police's

   opinion is particularly irrelevant to any Horizon issue because there is nothing

   to suggest that the Staffordshire Police knew anything about Horizon and

   Horizon had nothing to do with John Whitehouse's alleged criminality — the

   equipment he, indirectly, made use of was the Forde Moneychanger.


26. I am asked to explain the role of Manish Patel. He was the investigator for the

   Post Office. He conducted the whole investigation, using his detailed

   knowledge and experience of the complicated workings of a sub-post office,

   expertise that a police or Customs officer could never hope to match. He

   provided highly detailed statements and schedules that essentially set out the

   whole case. I have not been provided with many exhibits from the case and

   without these exhibits Manish Patel's statements are difficult to follow. Mr

   Patel conducted all the significant PACE interviews. I think he took many of

   the witness statements. His role was very similar to that of a police "officer in

   the case", where that title applies to a highly competent officer who has been

   involved in an investigation from the start. By the time of the trial Mr Patel had

   had a change of career (I seem to remember that he had become a

   professional pilot). This meant that we did not have his assistance for much of

   the trial, only those days when he was required as a witness. This was a

   significant disadvantage for us but another very experienced investigator,




                                  Page 12 of 61
                                                                                     WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   Trevor Lockey, took over the role of "officer in the case" and he was present

   throughout the trial. We had detailed discussions with Manish Patel before his

   evidence, as would be entirely normal with any key investigator. I had not had

   any dealings with him before the case, but I knew Stephen John thought

   highly of him. I was impressed by what I saw of Manish Patel in the course of

   the first trial. He had investigated a complex case which was initially confusing

   to those who looked at it (not least because of the £278,181.82 cheque and

   the account Mr Page chose to give of that cheque in interview). Stephen

   John and I took pains to ensure that both Defence Counsel had every

   opportunity to gain from Mr Patel's deep knowledge of the case.


27. I have been asked to consider the expert reports of David Liddell, an

   accountant, at POL00045867 and POL00045868. I would have seen the

   reports shortly after they were served. I remember Mr Liddell from the first

   trial. He was a rather unusual expert who provided a new theory to explain the

   £282,000 deficiency in the witness box without, as I remember it, setting that

   theory out in a report. I am afraid I cannot now remember the details of that

   extra opinion, but I do remember thinking at the time that it was rather poorly

   considered and not difficult to refute. The conclusion at paragraph 2.7 of

   POL00045867, that a large surplus of euros could not have built up in the

   'AM' stock or elsewhere, was agreed by the Crown. But nobody ever

   suggested that there was a large amount of euros that Carl Page had stolen

   and there would be no reason for there to be a large amount of euros in the

   'AM' stock because they should have been in the bureau de change stock. Mr

   Liddell seemed to have completely misunderstood the Crown's case on count

   2. The 'AM' stock was just the part of the branch accounts where the inflated




                                 Page 13 of 61
                                                                                        WITNO9610100
                                                                                      WITN09610100




   figures were entered by Mr Page. The Crown's case was that he was stealing

   over a protracted period of time and he would hide the increasing hole in the

   accounts by pretending he had a corresponding sum of foreign currency at

   the branch, a sum that didn't exist. By filling the hole in the accounts in this

   way, the Crown said he was able to achieve the necessary weekly balance.

   The opinion in 2.7, therefore, did not undermine in any way the theft count.


28. The opinion offered in paragraph 2.8 of Mr Liddell's report, that a delay,

   between a euros transaction by Mr Whitehouse being entered on Horizon and

   his physical collection of the euros, might have caused a shortfall, involves a

   similar misunderstanding of the Crown's case. Mr Liddell was again working

   on the assumption that the deficiency in euros related to a real missing

   amount of euros. It did not. The deficiency, on the Crown's case, was the

   difference between Carl Page's figures and the stock physically present on

   audit.


29. The criticism in paragraph 2.25 of Mr Liddell's supplementary report that "the

   work carried out did not constitute an audit in the sense that data was not

   verified back to source documentation nor critically examined" is essentially

   correct, but is based on a misunderstanding of the terminology used by the

   Post Office. A Post Office "audit" isn't a complicated accountancy exercise. It

   is a stock-take. The stock at the office (stamps, cash, foreign currency etc) is

   physically counted and the resulting figures compared against the various

   printouts that Horizon can produce. The figures should, of course, match. The

   Post Office use of the word "audit" is a little pompous, but the importance of a




                                  Page 14 of 61
                                                                                      WI TN09610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




   stock-take, as in any shop, is very great. Only a physical count of the stock

   can determine if the accounting records of the shop are accurate.


30. I am asked about the reason for the change in Defence experts between

   trials. My understanding, though it is only an inference from conversations

   (which I may have misinterpreted or have misheard) with Nicholas Leviseur,

   Defence Counsel instructed for the retrial, is that Mr Page instructed a new

   expert, and indeed new Counsel, because he was dissatisfied with the

   performance of Mr Liddell and was generally unhappy at the way his case had

   been defended at the first trial. I remember there was a different solicitor's

   representative present for the re-trial as well. Mr Taylor's report (he was an

   accountant with KPMG) at POL00061214 was certainly a much more serious

   piece of work than the reports of Mr Liddell. Mr Taylor's report showed a good

   understanding of how the accounting procedures at a Post Office worked and

   he fully understood the Crown's case on count 2. He accepted the increasing

   deficiency identified by the investigator, Manish Patel, but pointed out that if

   the correct missing figure was £282,000 and the accounts had been falsified

   to hide this figure, then the deficiency must have been hidden in a more

   complicated way than the Crown had so far managed to identify. Mr Taylor

   correctly stated at p.20 of his report that "the Prosecution rely on the

   assumption that the figures in Horizon are those recorded by Rugeley Post

   Office staff themselves and that the Horizon system was working correctly

   throughout the indictment period". This is a statement of the obvious. It is also

   the only occasion I have found that Horizon's reliability was raised as any kind

   of issue in the course of either Page trial. As far as I remember Mr Page did




                                  Page 15 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




   not raise any concerns about computer error. His defence was the

   incompetence of himself and other staff members, not computer glitch.


31. I was going to ask Manish Patel at the retrial to consider Mr Taylor's report,

   with a view to see to what extent we could challenge it. I was not overly

   concerned about the report and I did not think it would be very difficult to show

   that Mr Page might have chosen a variety of locations for inflated figures in

   his accounts. Before that could happen, I was approached at Court by

   Defence Counsel, Mr Leviseur, with a formal offer of a basis of plea. I think

   this was on the first day of the listed re-trial. I don't think the process had

   begun to select a jury. I was formally asked whether the Crown would accept

   a plea to theft on the basis of a loss of £94,000. This figure was based on Mr

   Taylor's report — he cast doubt on the deficiency figure prior to 28/8/02 but

   agreed with Manish Patel at 5.4.8 that the deficiency then increased from

   £188,000 to £282,000, an increase of £94,000, the figure suggested in the

   Defence offer. I took instructions, probably from Rob Wilson, but my memory

   is not entirely clear on whether I spoke to him or another lawyer. Together we

   decided that the basis of plea offered was acceptable, because of the long

   history of the case and because it was felt that this clear admission of

   significant theft met the justice of the case: to reject the offer and have

   another trial would not have been in the public interest. This was my view,

   which I communicated to the lawyer, who agreed, after we discussed the

   matter, and instructed me to accept a plea on the offered basis. I am asked

   about my reaction to the guilty plea. I was not surprised that there was an

   offer of a guilty plea. The case on count 2 seemed to me to be strong and

   would have been stronger if a jury was permitted to hear of Mr Page's



                                   Page 16 of 61
                                                                                          WITNO9610100
                                                                                      WITNO9610100




   seeming perjury at the first trial. I did not think it was in the public interest to

   hold out for a larger value for the theft, which I did not think would make a

   significant difference to sentence, given the long history of the case. I thought

   a Judge would not be inclined to hold a Newton hearing to try and decide the

   exact amount, but would consider that the Defendant had admitted enough to

   allow the Judge to pass an appropriate sentence.


32. My recollection is that nothing further happened on that first day of the trial

   and that Mr Page reflected on matters overnight and entered his guilty plea on

   the second day. I don't believe any           was sworn, but this is presumably
                                          jury




   something that can be checked if necessary.


33. I am asked what my view was of the amended Defence Statement,

   UKG100012306. The simple answer is that I thought it was a good summary

   of a potential defence speech, but that it seemed not to understand the

   Crown's case on count 2. The Defence Statement seems also to have been

   drafted before receipt of the evidence of Mr Page's possible perjury about his

   military record. I have a vague recollection of re-drafting the opening note in

   the hotel room where I was staying in Stafford to help Mr Leviseur understand

   the case better, but I am not sure of this. It may be that this amended Defence

   Statement is the origin of the mistaken view held in the Court of Appeal that

   the Crown had changed the way it put its case on count 2. I am a loss as to

   why so many people seem to have misunderstood count 2 over such a long

   period of time. I found that once the penny dropped (which for me took a long

   time, when I first prepared the case) it was not difficult to understand.




                                    Page 17 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




34. I note that there does not seem to be any reference to the possibility of

   computer error in the Defence Statement. I make this not as a criticism. It was

   for the Crown to prove the case and, if in possession of material to undermine

   the integrity of Horizon, to disclose that material, whether it was requested or

   not. But the absence of any reference to a computer bug is a good illustration

   of how far away this issue was from the parties' minds in 2006.


35. Sentence was adjourned for a pre-sentence report (PSR). I would have read

   the contents of that report but do not remember them now. The PSR would

   have included the Defendant's account of the offending and I do not

   remember anything to suggest that the plea was equivocal or was not a clear

   admission of guilt.


36. Disclosure was largely complete before I was instructed. It had been

   supervised by Stephen John. It was obvious to me that there had been

   considerable and very full disclosure. The correspondence I saw was at times

   a little bad-tempered but it seemed clear to me that the Crown was taking its

   obligations seriously and the Defence was taking a very active role in

   ensuring the Crown discharged its obligations. I do not remember the issue of

   computer reliability being raised by any Barrister or indeed anyone else at any

   stage in the case. No computer expert was instructed by either side. It is

   important to remember that this was an early Horizon case. I do not know,

   because I was not privy to the disclosure in the Hamilton Appeal, what it is

   suggested should have been available to be disclosed in a case of this date. If

   there was evidence available in 2005/6 of a Horizon bug capable of creating a

   phantom deficiency, then obviously that should have been disclosed. All I can




                                  Page 18 of 61
                                                                                         WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




      say is that it was a topic not mentioned, as far as I can remember, by anyone

      in either trial.


  37. I am asked for my reflections on the way the investigation and prosecution

      was conducted. At the time both of the first trial and the second when Mr

      Page pleaded guilty, it did not occur to me that any abuse of process might be

      happening. I joined the case late but that allowed me to have a fresh

      perspective and I saw nothing that caused me concern. I have to accept that

      the Court of Appeal has taken a very different view of the Page trials, from all

      it knows of the Horizon disclosure history, and that view is much more

      informed and important than mine. I am simply doing my best to remember

      what I experienced at the time of the trials.


Prosecution of Seema Misra


   38. I have reviewed the documents sent to me and listed between paragraphs 21

      and 44 of the annex to the letter of 21 September 2023.


  39. I was first instructed in this case after the case had been committed to the

      Crown Court. As was common with Post Office briefs at the time I was

      required to settle the indictment, which was to be lodged by 10/3/08, so I must

      have received the brief before 10/3/08, perhaps at the end of February or

      beginning of March.


  40. My initial brief would have included the Instructions at POL00044585, the

      various backsheets at POL00044585 (with their enclosures), the Summary of

      Facts, POL00044613, the Schedule of charges at POL00045010 and

      POL00045220, the schedule of unused at POL00050750 which shows Jon




                                     Page 19 of 61
                                                                                       WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   Longman was the disclosure officer, the Sensitive Schedule (nil) at

   POL00050751 and the investigation report of Adrian Morris, the original

   investigator, at POL00044541.


41.As instructed I drafted the indictment - see the email sending the indictment at

   POL00051092, dated 10/3/09. I don't think the indictment at POL00051149 is

   the one I drafted but a proposed indictment sent to me by my instructing

   solicitor. I did not provide a written Advice on evidence at this stage: this was

   not unusual in a case where, as here, I had been provided with all the

   necessary paperwork and the case appeared properly prepared. At this stage

   Seema Misra was not making any allegations about the reliability of the

   Horizon IT system.


42. The PTPH took place on 20/3/09. I have a recollection of being asked by

   Andrew Castle, the solicitor advocate for Mrs Misra, whether pleas to false

   accounting would be acceptable. I had anticipated being asked this question

   as it was obvious from the papers that such an offer was going to be made. I

   had formed a view, before the enquiry from Mr Castle, that such an offer

   should not be accepted, because the suggestion that Mrs Misra had been

   entering false figures over a considerable period, only to cover the thefts by

   members of staff, seemed clearly refuted by the fact that her false figures

   continued to rise long after the dismissal of the alleged thieves. The figures

   would simply reach a false plateau if the source of the loss ended. Instead

   they continued to rise, suggesting that the loss was continuing in spite of the

   sackings. The obvious inference to me at the time was that the hole in the

   accounts was growing because Mrs Misra was stealing money. It seemed far




                                  Page 20 of 61
                                                                                   WITNO9610100
                                                                                 WITN09610100




more rational that Mrs Misra would use false accounting to hide a hole

created by herself than by others. My experience from other cases was that a

SPM whose shop was struggling might "borrow" money from the funds of their

sub-post office to put into their shop, hoping in due course that they would be

able to return money into the sub-post office before an audit occurred. In the

absence of an audit the SPM could hide the hole in the accounts by false

accounting. Only the stock-take involved in an audit could reveal the true

deficiency. That was my opinion, but as I only act on instructions it was

essential for me to discuss the plea offer with my instructing solicitor. My

recollection is that, whilst at court before the hearing, I telephoned my

instructing solicitor, Jarnail Singh, to discuss this. He agreed that that the

pleas were not acceptable. I do not remember exactly what was said in this

conversation, but the advice I would have given would have been along these

lines: the account the Defendant had given in interview, that she was the

victim of thefts by former employees did not fit the evidence — the apparent

hole in the accounts increased after the dismissal of the stealing employees; I

thought it did not make sense that Mrs Misra would cover up, by false

accounting, a loss caused by the dishonesty of others — a desire not to lose

the sub-post office did not appear to explain false accounting on such a scale,

because there would be no point keeping hold of a business that was

haemorrhaging so much money; the Defendant said in interview that she had

only reported a tiny fraction of the thefts to the police — this did not make

sense to me because she was obliged by common sense and by her contract

to report the theft and if she was prepared to report the theft, why not report

all of it?




                               Page 21 of 61
                                                                                      WI TN09610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




43. 1 have been asked to explain my email exchange (POL00051539) with Phil

   Taylor on 22/5109. Phil Taylor's email seems to be a follow-up to his letter

   dated 13/5/09 (POL00051441). As I believe is clear from Phil Taylor's email

   timed at 16:55:03 he had limited knowledge of the case and he seems to have

   been unaware of the discussions I had previously had with Jarnail Singh on

   20/3/09 about why the pleas to false accounting were not acceptable. Phil

   Taylor's role was essentially that of a case worker. He was immensely

   experienced, but he was not a lawyer, and his work was focussed on case

   preparation. On the date of this email exchange it was still completely

   unknown to me that Mrs Misra would later seek to challenge the integrity of

   the Horizon system. My opinion that the evidence was "strong" related to what

   I understood to be the evidence at the time, in particular that the apparent

   hole in the accounts could not be fully explained by the explanation given by

   Mrs Misra in interview, because the hole continued to grow after the alleged

   thieves had been dismissed. I have already set out my opinion of the

   evidence in the preceding paragraph, so I will not repeat it again in full. My

   opinion that "confiscation would... be a non-starter" is simply an inelegant

   reference to how s.6 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 might apply to the

   case. If pleas to false accounting were accepted it would have been

   impossible to argue, I thought, that Mrs Misra had benefitted from her

   particular criminal conduct, pursuant to s.6(4)(c). I was not seeking to express

   the view that confiscation was a reason in itself to pursue the theft count. I

   have always taken the view that confiscation is irrelevant to any charging

   decision. It is simply a consequence that can arise after a conviction. Phil

   Taylor replied to my email on 27/5/09 at POL00051586.




                                  Page 22 of 61
                                                                                        WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




44. My attention has been drawn to POL00051441 and I am asked about my view

   of the public interest in continuing with the trial. When I gave advice on the

   acceptability of pleas I naturally had regard to the public interest, as well as to

   whether there was a reasonable prospect of conviction. Stealing a large

   amount of money as a SPM, in breach of trust, is plainly a serious offence. I

   would have considered that it was very much in the public interest for such an

   allegation to be tried, even where significant pleas to false accounting were

   being offered. The latter would often merit a suspended sentence or even a

   community order, whereas the former would usually require a sentence of

   immediate imprisonment.


45.A Defence Statement was served and the case was prepared for trial on the

   basis of the issues that first Defence Statement raised. That first Defence

   Statement is mentioned in the trial transcripts but I have not been provided

   with a copy. I had considered the Non-Sensitive Unused Schedule

   (POL00050750) when I first received the papers. I was satisfied that

   disclosure was being dealt with properly at this stage, on the basis of the

   issues that we understood them to be, namely that somebody else was

   stealing the money. I did not advise specifically on disclosure until after the

   issue of Horizon reliability was raised, which did not happen until 3/6/09.


46. The trial was placed in a warned list and the case eventually listed for trial on

   3/6/09 before Rec. Bailey. It was on this day that concerns were raised for the

   first time in the case about the integrity of Horizon.


47. The attendance note of Jarnail Singh at POL00051773 seems to set out

   accurately what happened on 3/6/09 when Mrs Misra's trial was listed. I don't




                                   Page 23 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




   think I saw the attendance note at the time. I was often attended upon when

   prosecuted Post Office cases and it was not unusual for the reviewing lawyer

   to attend on the first day of a trial. If a representative of the Post Office was

   present I would usually not send an attendance note myself. Even if I was

   unattended it was often not necessary to send an attendance note; a

   telephone call would often suffice and the call might be recorded in a written

   attendance note by the person taking the call. Such an attendance note would

   not necessarily be sent to me.


48. Until I saw the attendance note at POL00051773 I had believed that Defence

   Counsel on 3/6/09 was Keith Hadrill. This was a mistake on my part because

   of Mr Hadrill's later role as trial Counsel. I was involved in a couple of cases

   with Mr Cousens (I am unsure of the correct spelling) around the late 90s and

   early 2000s and I do now think he was trial Counsel on 3/6/09, but I am not

   100% sure. I do remember clearly that Defence Counsel produced a

   photocopy of a Computer Weekly article about alleged problems with Horizon

   and complaints by various SPMs. This was the first time in the case that I was

   made aware of the issue of Horizon IT reliability and the first time I was

   informed about problems at the various sub-post offices referred to in the

   Computer Weekly article. The complaints made by SPMs in the article were a

   topic that had never been mentioned to me before by the Post Office, an

   investigator or any barrister colleague. I was not aware then of the Castleton

   case.


49. I am asked what I thought was the significance of these allegations about

   Horizon reliability at this time, early June 2009. I was first of all very surprised.




                                   Page 24 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




   This was an entirely new issue and there had been no previous hint of it in the

   case. Looking at the transcript of Mrs Misra's evidence at her eventual trial

   (UKGl00014845 at p.136B-D) it is clear what the explanation was for this

   issue arising so unexpectedly: Mrs Misra in her evidence said that she first

   saw the Computer Weekly article "the day before my first trial", so there was

   presumably no opportunity to bring it to her solicitor's attention prior to the trial

   listed the next day. I have not been given a copy of the Computer Weekly

   article, but from memory it set out complaints by a number of SPMs at

   different sub-post offices. The SPMs referred to included Lee Castleton, Jo

   Hamilton and others. I don't think the article specifically referred to the

   Callendar Square computer bug. I hope the Inquiry will be able to show me

   the exact article. I have researched matters on the internet but there is an

   obvious danger in relying on something that isn't exactly what I saw. From

   memory I took a copy for my instructing solicitor and myself.


50. The Defence eventually decided to apply to adjourn the trial so that this new

   potential issue could be investigated by expert evidence. I decided not to

   oppose that application, even though this was a new defence that had not

   been raised in the defence statement or in Mrs Misra's interview. Some

   prosecutors might have taken a more hardline view and some Judges might

   have been persuaded not to allow an adjournment. I considered, however,

   that the matter had to be properly investigated, even though it had been

   raised very late and without any warning. I thought that fairness to both sides

   required an adjournment. At that stage it appeared to me quite unclear as to

   whether the complaints set out in the Computer Weekly article were of

   relevance to Mrs Misra's case or not. Prior to that day, from the papers I had,




                                   Page 25 of 61
                                                                                    WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITN09610100




   she had not been alleging unexplained deficiencies. On the contrary, she said

   that she had been able to find the cause of the losses — her dishonest

   employees. Her interview had not made mention of her suffering losses right

   from the beginning, in the presence of her trainers while they were training

   her, before any possible theft was involved, which was something she later

   relied on heavily in her evidence at trial. All I did know was this was an

   important new issue that needed to be considered properly by both sides. It

   was therefore vital for there to be an adjournment.


51. I became aware fairly shortly afterwards that a new firm of solicitors had been

   instructed by Mrs Misra, Coomber Rich, and that Keith Hadrill had become

   Defence Trial Counsel. I used to share a room with Keith Hadrill when he was

   at 9-12 Bell Yard. I also knew Issy Hogg, the new solicitor from Coomber

   Rich; she had in fact instructed me in the past.


52. I realised that we were about to embark on a demanding disclosure exercise. I

   was conscious that both sides were treading new ground and the only guide I

   had so far was the Computer Weekly article. As I thought about matters, it

   seemed to me that it would be important to focus on the West Byfleet sub-

   post office and consider whether any Horizon problem had occurred there.

   Complaints from SPMs about problems at different offices might raise

   evidence of a problem that could be examined in relation to West Byfleet, but

   it seemed to me that a simple complaint by a SPM was of very limited

   assistance. There would need to be evidence of what the problem was, or at

   least what its symptoms might be e.g. the location within the office stock

   where the loss appeared to arise. I discussed the way I was thinking with




                                  Page 26 of 61
                                                                                     WI TN09610100
                                                                                 WITNO9610100




   Keith Hadrill and it was decided that there should be a joint visit to the West

   Byfleet sub-post office. From my Chambers Lex diary it appears that this joint

   visit took place on 6/11109, though the diary entry does suggest the possibility

   that the date of the visit may be moved. Issy Hogg and I certainly attended

   and I think Keith Hadrill was there as well. I think Jon Longman was there and

   possibly (though I have no memory of this) a representative from the Royal

   Mail criminal law department, perhaps Phil Taylor. We were shown the

   Horizon equipment in action by the staff who had taken over the running of

   the office after Mrs Misra's arrest. We were additionally able to view the full

   site of the Costcutter shop and the sub-post office inside.


53. The Defence expert, Professor McLachlan, sensibly visited the West Byfleet

   office on 19/11/09 and spent 2-3 hours there — see transcript POL00001856

   at p.105.


54. My work on disclosure began with viewing files held by the Royal Mail criminal

   and civil departments that related to the complaints in the Computer Weekly

   article. I had previously discussed with Defence Counsel what material I was

   going to view and what disclosure test I should have in mind. I suggested that

   unsubstantiated complaints by SPMs that they had suffered a computer glitch

   would on their own be unlikely to require disclosure. What was required was a

   degree of objective evidence of computer error. I was sent relevant criminal

   files (relating to Jo Hamilton and Noel Thomas) which I read between

   25/11/09 and 29/11/09. 1 then attended the civil department twice, on 11/12/09

   and 23/12/09, where I viewed civil files relevant to the article. The civil

   department was quite separate from the criminal department and in a




                                  Page 27 of 61
                                                                                        WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




   completely different building. I drafted a short schedule referring to the files I

   had seen which I sent to Jarnail Singh and the defence. I have not been

   provided with that schedule in preparation for this statement but I was sent a

   copy of the schedule by Mrs Misra's solicitors (I think) while the disclosure

   exercise was being undertaken for the Hamilton appeal and asked questions

   about the document, so the schedule should be readily available to the

   Inquiry. When I visited the civil department I spoke with Mandy Talbot about

   the Castleton case and about the Computer Weekly article. She provided me

   with the Castleton judgment, which I read. I think I would have explained that I

   was looking for any objective evidence of Horizon computer problems, rather

   than unsubstantiated complaints by SPMs. My conclusion from the visits to

   the civil department was that the Callendar Square problem was the only bug

   that needed to be disclosed because there was clear objective evidence for it,

   but that we should keep the subject under continual review. I cannot

   remember exactly how I became aware of the Callendar Square problem, but

   I think I realised that it would require disclosure from the body of the Castleton

   judgment. I think the SPM for Callendar Square, Alan Brown, may have been

   mentioned in the Computer Weekly article but I do not think I would have

   realised that there was objective evidence for this problem until I conducted

   my review of the civil files and read the Castleton judgment.


55. I explain in the above paragraph that I have not been provided with the

   schedule I drafted after viewing the civil files. After searching through my old

   emails I have found a form of the schedule that I sent to Jarnail Singh in

   relation to R v Gurdeep Singh Dhale, a case in which I was not instructed, but

   which seems to have been listed at Bradford Crown Court for trial on 7/2111




                                  Page 28 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




  [WITNO9610101 & WITN09610102]. In order to assist the Inquiry to retrieve

  the schedule I am referring to, I re-produce the schedule I sent to Jarnail

  Singh in an email dated 11/1/11 for the Dhale case. It is clear from this form of

  the schedule that I have updated it somewhat to reflect information about

  Callendar Square that was later provided by Gareth Jenkins, but otherwise I

  think the schedule is very similar to the one that I believe I sent to Jarnail

  Singh after viewing the civil files and which was then sent to the Defence. The

  schedule from this 11/1/11 email is as follows:


Alan Bates                Viewed all papers held by Civil Dept, consisting

                          almost entirely of correspondence. No material to

                          disclose. The debt was written off not because of any

                          problem with Horizon but because not all the

                          paperwork had been retained which would be

                          necessary for a civil action.



Alan                      There was a problem at Callender Square, Falkirk,

Brown/Callender           which was rectified in March 2006. Therefore

Sq                        disclosure of this is only appropriate if the deficiency in

                          the particular case predates March 2006. The best

                          way to provide disclosure in relation to this office is to

                          serve the summary of the Callender Square problem

                          prepared by Gareth Jenkins and attached to his final

                          report for the Misra trial.




                                  Page 29 of 61
                                                                           WITNO9610100
                                                                         WITNO9610100




Jo Hamilton       I viewed the complete criminal file. No material to

                  disclose.



Noel Thomas       I viewed the complete criminal file. No material to

                  disclose.



Rajinder Bilkhu   I viewed the only papers held by the Civil Dept, a

                  small amount of correspondence. No material to

                  disclose.



Anar Bajaj        I viewed the only papers held by the Civil Dept, a

                  small amount of correspondence. No material to

                  disclose.



Lee Castleton     I viewed 4 boxes of material in relation to the High

                  Court case. This was not all the material held in

                  storage and I was asked by Mandy Talbot if I required

                  to see the remainder. Having read the Judgment I

                  decided that there was no need to request any further

                  material. The Judgment is a complete refutation of

                  Castleton's allegations. I advised in Misra that the

                  Judgment in the High Court case be served but this

                  was only because of the mention in that Judgment of

                  the Callender Square problem. Now that we have




                         Page 30 of 61
                                                                                       WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




                           Gareth Jenkins' summary there will be no need to

                           disclose the Judgment in other cases.



 Julie Ford                I viewed the only papers held by the Civil Dept, a

                           small amount of correspondence. No material to

                           disclose.




56. 1 will now set out as fully as I can the history of disclosure requests made

   following the adjourned trial hearing on 3/6/09. I will try to set out clearly in this

   disclosure review what my opinion of the various disclosure requests was. In

   summary, I thought that some requests were onerous but reasonable, others

   far too wide and irrelevant. These very wide requests contributed to making

   the disclosure exercise fractious.


57. The Defence served a s.8 disclosure request dated 30/9/09. The request

   exhibits 3 magazine articles SM/1, 2 and 4 (though I have not been provided

   with these) and an interim report from the Defence expert Professor Charles

   McLachlan (POL00093689). In that report the Professor sets out possible

   hypotheses he would like to examine in relation to the Horizon system:


       a. "The User Interface gives rise to incorrect data entry: poor user

          experience design and inadequately user experience testing can give

          rise to poor data entry quality. In cases that users are working under

          pressure, insufficiently trained or are using a system presented in a

          different language different from their first language the problems of

          data entry can be exacerbated." This is a complicated way of saying




                                   Page 31 of 61
                                                                                       WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




          "manual error in using the screen, because of pressure, poor training or

          language difficulties", i.e. not a computer problem. Professor

          McLachlan suggested he wanted to sit beside a user who represented

          the "kind of user engaged by the Defendant". In later reports the

          Professor would continue suggesting experiments along these lines,

          without, it seemed to me, considering that a first port of call might be

          for the instructions of Mrs Misra to be taken so that she might be able

          to help him in assessing what her problems might have been and what

          losses she might have caused. I felt, rightly or wrongly, that the sort of

          experiments Professor McLachlan proposed were potentially irrelevant

          to Mrs Misra's situation and unrelated to any computer problem.


      b. "The Horizon system fails properly to process transactions: accounting

          systems are usually designed to ensure that accounts balance after

          each `double entry' transaction. In particular, a database technology

          referred to as `two-phase' is used to ensure that either both entries or

          neither entry is recorded on the system." This was a potential computer

          problem. In due course Professor McLachlan was able to satisfy

          himself, with the assistance of Gareth Jenkins, that Horizon did, as he

          in fact already assumed, have appropriate technology to guard against

          this problem (see e.g. transcript POL00001856 at p.22G-23B).


58. The next disclosure request I have in the documents provided to me is

   POL00058503. From the emails it is clear that it follows another similar

   request and is dated around 28/11/09. I have provided a written Advice

   (POL00044557) in response to this Defence request and it may be helpful to




                                  Page 32 of 61
                                                                                       WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




place that Advice alongside the 2 disclosure requests. As can be seen from

paragraph 4 of my Advice I summarise the work I have done in relation to the

civil and criminal files. I set out the test for disclosure that I agreed with the

Defence "when we attended the West Byfleet office on 6/11/09". In paragraph

6 of the Advice I ask for enquiries to be made about what I have discovered

about Callendar Square, from a careful reading of the Castleton judgment. My

words in the Advice seem to confirm that the decision to make enquiries about

Callendar Square, leading to disclosure of that issue, was indeed down to me.

Paragraph 7 of my Advice also appears to be highly significant both generally

and in terms of determining my role in disclosure: "I also think that our

disclosure duty requires us to ask Fujitsu whether they are aware of any other

Horizon error that has been found at any sub-post office. I anticipate that

there will be none, but it is important that the check is made." My suggestion

is clear and deliberately wide-ranging. I assumed, and my assumption

seemed confirmed from everything else I read and heard in the case, that my

very clear request had been complied with and would continue to be

considered by my instructing lawyer and those who provided information to

me and him about Horizon (Fujitsu and Gareth Jenkins). My Advice was naive

enough to suggest these Fujitsu enquiries could be completed quickly and it is

obvious from my remarks that I accepted that what I was being told about

Horizon was right. I always thought that the labelling of Horizon by POL as

"robust" was not an answer in itself, but it always seemed to me that it was

justified. The remarks I made in my closing speech at POL00065708 p. 23G-

24A were meant to show that there was a legitimate basis to the suggestion

that Horizon was "robust" and that this was not an empty mantra. Another




                                Page 33 of 61
                                                                                         WITNO9610100
                                                                                       WITN09610100




   factor in my acceptance that Horizon was robust was that I was told by my

   instructing solicitor that there was an absence of complaints about Horizon

   from Crown Offices, the larger free-standing Post Offices that were not part of

   a shop.


59. Returning to my Advice and particularly the disclosure requests of

   POL00058503. In paragraph 10 of the Advice I explain that the requests in the

   Contract 2) a) and b) sections are far too wide and seem to have no relevance

   to Mrs Misra's case. It is an enquiry like this that is going to cause frustration —

   it is irrelevant and if complied with will waste time that should be spent on

   obtaining and considering relevant disclosure. The disclosure request at

   Paragraph 11) and my remarks at Advice paragraph 15 make for bitter

   reading in the light of Hamilton & Others, from which it is clear that these logs,

   the ARQ data, must be assessed first by the Prosecution fully for bugs and

   then must be disclosed in full, and the Court of Appeal poured proper scorn

   on the objection of the cost of this exercise. I can only say by way of

   mitigation that in 2009/10 much less was known about Horizon problems than

   by the time of the Clarke Advice in 2013 and I personally only knew about

   Callendar Square. The lawyers on both sides in the Misra case were dealing

   with a novel situation and, unlike the Court of Appeal, had no benefit of

   hindsight. The Defence at paragraph 11) of the disclosure request

   POL00058503 only pressed for an explanation of the cost and subsequently

   made no s.8 application for a wider span. The Crown on the other hand felt

   that more focussed enquiries about specific transactions might be more

   helpful. I am still of the view that the efforts to encourage greater specificity

   were justified. I thought, rightly or wrongly, that it was reasonable to suggest




                                   Page 34 of 61
                                                                                     WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   that Mrs Misra, who had had the opportunity to check her office's stock

   against the various available Horizon printouts at any time she chose, might

   have been in a good position to suggests fruitful areas of enquiry. Her

   knowledge of Horizon had been sufficient, according to her, to identify thieves.

   The Crown considered that the Defence should at least try to focus their

   requests on the basis of what their client had experienced at the coalface.

   There are many defence requests that I consider reasonable in my Advice

   and it can be seen (my Advice, paras 22 and 23) that I made the effort to

   contact other barristers instructed to prosecute other cases. The request at

   paragraph 19) of POL00058503 is astonishingly wide. I recommended some

   diplomatic language to be used to respond to this.


60. POL00053723 is the email from Jarnail Singh which asked for my Advice

   (POL00044557). Within the email chain seems to be part of the disclosure

   requests POL00058503 or a very similar document. Also present in the email

   chain is an email from Mark Dinsdale dated 11/12/09 explaining the practical

   difficulties these disclosure requests were going to cause the Post Office

   investigation team. Jon Longman was the investigator (having taken over from

   Adrian Morris) and disclosure officer. He, therefore, had the responsibility to

   reply to the disclosure requests. The point being made in Mark Dinsdale's

   email is that the requests are so demanding that they will not only occupy all

   of Jon Longman's time but they will also paralyse the work of the whole

   investigation team. The Post Office employed a relatively small amount of

   investigators to cover all of its nationwide criminal cases.




                                  Page 35 of 61
                                                                                    WI TN09610100
                                                                                 WITNO9610100




61. I do not seem to have been provided with the Further Request for Disclosure

   dated 30 November 2009 (POL00053646), but infer that it is essentially the

   same document as POL00058503.


62. The first action taken on my Advice (POL00044557) was unfortunately the

   rather brusque letter dated 11/1/10 (POL00053746). The wording used in the

   letter is taken directly from paragraph 2 of my Advice, but I had meant these

   words (as my Advice tried to make clear) to be part of our response to the

   requests, not a stand-alone letter. There was nothing wrong with requiring a

   proper particularised Defence Statement, but I do think this letter set an

   unfortunate tone which contributed to the Defence losing patience and

   deciding to argue abuse of process.


63.There was a much fuller response to the disclosure requests on 27/1/10

   (POL00044553), which largely follows my written Advice together with

   information provided by Jon Longman. The attendance note drafted by Jarnail

   Singh dated 27/1/10 (POL00053849) appears to have been written before the

   27/1/10 letter and it seems that the discussion referred to in the attendance

   note may have prompted that letter: "Counsel said that we should disclose

   everything we can disclose at this stage so the Defence will know where we

   are coming from. We should be seen to be willing." I was anxious that the

   tone of the 11/1/10 letter should not give a false impression that we were

   being obstructive. The 27/1 letter does exactly what I advised in the

   attendance note — it discloses what we could at the time. I was still awaiting

   the matters I raised for Fujitsu's attention in my Advice at paragraphs 6-8

   before responding to the s.8 application. I am asked, with reference to




                                 Page 36 of 61
                                                                                   WI TN09610100
                                                                               WITNO9610100




   POL00053849, what I understood to be the problem, in January 2010, with

   the disclosure of data from the Horizon IT system. I don't think POL00053849

   is suggesting that there was a particular problem. I read the document as

   meaning that Jon Longman will chase up Fujitsu/Gareth Jenkins for the

   answers I requested in my Advice at paragraphs 6-8.


64.1 have found an old email which appears to show that I drafted and served a

   short response to the s.8 application on 29/1/10 [WITN09610103 &

   WITN09610104]. The concluding paragraph of the document I drafted reads

   as follows: "Further enquiries are being made about the "problem" at

   Callender Square, Falkirk, which is discussed at paragraph 23 of the

   Castleton Judgment. Further, more general enquiries are being made with

   Fujitsu." I exhibit the email and s.8 response I drafted.


65. The 27/1 letter was designed to assist the Defence in time for a mention on

   1/2/10. My colleague Elizabeth Smaller (now HHJ Smaller) covered the

   hearing which is recorded in an attendance note by Jarnail Singh

   (UKG100014903). The attendance note shows that a second Defence

   Statement had been served on 21/1/10, as had been requested in the letter of

   11/1 (POL00053746). The Attendance Note suggests that Gareth Jenkins will

   provide a statement dealing with the Horizon aspect of the case, by which I

   understand both the Horizon enquiries in the Defence disclosure requests and

   also those matter raised in my Advice at paragraphs 6-8. I referred to Gareth

   Jenkins, in my Advice paragraph 26, as being the person with whom Jon

   Longman was dealing to answer questions raised by Professor McLachlan.

   My recollection is that this is how Gareth Jenkins came into the case, as the




                                  Page 37 of 61
                                                                                       WITNO9610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




   person with the right expertise to deal with Horizon enquiries and questions

   raised by Professor McLachlan. It was simply impossible to answer defence

   Horizon enquiries without his expert help.


66. 1 have seen a draft reply in email form (POL00054162), dated 22/2/10, to a

   third defence disclosure request. I have not been provided with the third

   disclosure request, so it is not easy for me to deal with this document in detail.

   The document shows that Gareth Jenkins was now being treated as an expert

   witness by the Crown, as it refers to 2 experts. There is an important

   concession to note in paragraph 11, that the Crown will review its position on

   the acceptability of pleas if analysis by the experts of the logs, i.e. the ARQ

   data, suggests the deficiency may have been caused by mistakes rather than

   theft. Reading through the document my impression is that I would have

   advised, probably by telephone, both before this document was written and

   after it. I note that the wording of the email when it was eventually sent out

   seems to be the same as the draft, though the layout is slightly different (it

   appears in the email chain in POL00054248, dated 24/2/10). I was regularly

   giving advice to Jarnail Singh over the phone about disclosure matters after

   my written Advice. I cannot remember the precise details of this non-written

   advice because of the lapse of time, but one of the main purposes of my

   written Advice of 5/1/10 was to set out some clear parameters to assist Jarnail

   Singh with what I considered reasonable and what were unreasonable

   requests.


67. 1 have been asked about Juliet McFarlane's concern, in the letter dated 2/2/10

   (POL00053954), about paragraph 23 of my written Advice. I had advised




                                  Page 38 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   there that the expert report and case papers in Hosi be disclosed. I made

   clear in the Advice that the Hosi report appeared unimpressive (and so

   perhaps of borderline assistance to the Defence in Misra). Juliet McFarlane

   was perfectly entitled to raise the concerns she did in the POL00053954

   letter, particularly that the report was preliminary. I cannot now remember any

   of the contents of the expert report but it is clear from the email POL00054162

   at paragraph 18 that I reconsidered the matter and changed my mind. I hope I

   am sufficiently robust to make that kind of decision myself. I was not brow-

   beaten by Juliet McFarlane who was a gentle person. An open-minded

   prosecutor will from time to time change their mind.


68. I am asked about the Post Office's reaction to my advice on disclosure, not

   just in relation to the small episode with Juliet McFarlane, but generally. I was

   feeling some pressure from the Post Office side about what it saw as

   excessive requests but I never detected any wish on its part to be obstructive

   or to do anything other than comply in good time with the Prosecution's

   disclosure responsibilities. I largely agreed about many of the disclosure

   requests being far too wide. The main impression I had throughout, although

   confess to finding the disclosure exercise a stressful experience, was that

   what the Post Office most wanted was to be helped by me. Jarnail Singh

   regularly contacted me to discuss disclosure, in addition to relying heavily on

   my written Advice. I did not feel the Post Office was fighting tooth and nail on

   every disclosure point. There may have been an unwise frustration from time

   to time, on my part as well as theirs, but that was really because the task was

   novel and difficult. It was a novel task for the Defence as well. They were

   guided by Professor McLachlan, who set out a series of hypotheses and




                                  Page 39 of 61
                                                                                     WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   suggested various experiments and said, in his evidence at trial, that he had

   never spoken to Seema Misra (POL00001856 p. 72C); he thus had no idea

   about how well she could speak English, even though language difficulties

   was a topic he wanted to suggest as a cause of Horizon mistakes. He had

   never looked at her CV (POL00001856 p. 81B). The Professor didn't think

   trying to obtain a list of problems Mrs Misra had actually experienced at West

   Byfleet would have been a helpful starting-point (POL00001856 p. 74E-F). He

   had made no attempt to discover whether Mrs Misra had experienced any of

   the symptoms of the Callendar Square bug (POL00001856 p. 84H-86F). I do

   not forget that, whatever the nature of the requests, the duty of disclosure is

   on the Prosecution and I remain very troubled that paragraph 7 of my written

   Advice should have been answered in a different way - "I also think that our

   disclosure duty requires us to ask Fujitsu whether they are aware of any other

   Horizon error that has been found at any sub-post office. I anticipate that

   there will be none, but it is important that the check is made." However, my

   experience of the Post Office attitude at the time of this huge disclosure

   exercise was that they knew what their duty was and they wanted to fulfil it. In

   the years since I have had many animated discussions with CPS lawyers

   about disclosure; they too demand, correctly, detailed Defence Statements;

   they too query relevance of disclosure requests. The fact that these

   discussions are held does not mean that those lawyers are being obstructive.


69. The Defence dissatisfaction with disclosure culminated in an abuse of

   process argument before Rec. Bruce on 10/3/10 (date from POL00054275).




                                  Page 40 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITN09610100




70. I was disappointed that the Defence had resorted to an abuse argument at

   this stage. The Prosecution had, in fact, disclosed a wide-ranging amount of

   material and answered arduous questions. Our efforts to encourage focussed

   disclosure requests, based on West Byfleet, had largely fallen on deaf ears.

   There was a temptation on the Prosecution side to think that the requests

   were so wide in order that they would be refused in part, and were thus

   designed to lead to an abuse argument. On the other hand, I do acknowledge

   that both sides were in a very challenging situation and more diplomacy in the

   Prosecution's correspondence would have been helpful.


71. I don't seem to have been provided with the Defence abuse skeleton. I

   remember it helpfully set out the full history of disclosure requests and

   Prosecution responses. There are likely to have been disclosure requests that

   I haven't set out in this statement, because I haven't been provided with the

   documents, and the defence skeleton may help complete the picture.


72. There was a strong focus in the Defence abuse argument on the undoubted

   abruptness of the Prosecution responses to disclosure. I considered their

   arguments less strong on the true merits.


73. In my skeleton (POL00054346) I refer, with justification, to the "avalanche" of

   disclosure requests. I have been involved in many complicated and serious

   cases since — e.g. last year an Encrochat cocaine conspiracy (R v Lockyer &

   others) with huge quantities of unused and sensitive material — but I have

   never known a more difficult case for disclosure than Misra.


74. In paragraph 2 of my skeleton I set out relevant facts about West Byfleet —

   Mrs Misra was a longstanding SPM; her successor, Mr Varsani, had had no



                                  Page 41 of 61
                                                                                      WI TN09610100
                                                                                 WITNO9610100




   Horizon problem with the equipment he inherited — in order to show that the

   Defence may have been able to provide more focussed disclosure requests. I

   see a reference to a disclosure request dated 3/2/10 in paragraph 4; this may

   be the request that was responded to by POL00054162, dated 22/2/10, but I

   obviously cannot be sure as I have not been provided with that disclosure

   request.


75. I explain, at paragraph 6 of my skeleton, why Gareth Jenkins has been

   instructed as an expert: "his instruction was a belated recognition that the only

   way fully to comply with our disclosure obligations was to instruct an expert at

   Fujitsu". At paragraph 7-8 I explain that the Crown had decided, at some

   expense, to provide a year's worth of ARQ data. I set out the £20,000 cost

   and the amount of transactions involved (431,490). I explain that the Defence

   had provided no proposal as to an appropriate span of data, other than their

   original suggestion, but I also set out the reasons why that 12 month span has

   been chosen: the Defendant admitted consistent false accounting throughout

   nearly 2 1/ 2 years, so, if this was down to a Horizon problem, it would appear

   to be a long-standing, consistent problem that should be apparent in a

   narrower span of data as much as in the full data; the period post-dated when

   Mrs Misra claimed she had put a stop to thefts by employees, so that span of

   data shouldn't be confused by the alleged theft problem. I have to concede

   that with hindsight this approach to the disclosure of ARQ data was wrong.

   This is clear from Hamilton & others (at paras 91 (i), 131 and 207). Although I

   have been critical of the Defence in terms of some of their disclosure

   requests, on this issue they were entirely correct. I hope it is clear, however,

   that the approach to the service of ARQ data was carefully considered and




                                  Page 42 of 61
                                                                                   WI TN09610100
                                                                                WITNO9610100




   issues such as the Clarke Advice, that informed the Court of Appeal's

   approach and the concessions made by the Respondent in Hamilton & others,

   had simply not happened yet. Nevertheless, POL should still have understood

   its own equipment and quite why it came to be that a large amount of data

   was served without any further information as to Horizon problems other than

   Callendar Square, I cannot say. I was clear in what I said in my written Advice

   at paragraph 7.


76. At paragraph 10 of my skeleton I query the relevance of Professor

   McLachlan's plan to film another SPM in action but the point I seek generally

   to make is that the two experts already seemed to be working well together.

   With their cooperation I genuinely believed that we had all found a way of

   working towards an entirely fair trial.


77. The Recorder gave a judgment on 12/3/10 when he declined to stay the case

   for abuse, largely because to do so is an exceptional course and it seemed to

   him that the alleged unfairness could be cured by the recent developments

   which would allow the experts to work together on the transaction logs. The

   trial date was adjourned to 21/6/10. The Recorder made it clear that he had

   made no finding of fact and he should not be thought of having approved the

   Post Office's responses to disclosure requests. I think the question of costs

   was reserved, which was a sign that he was unhappy, at least in part, with the

   Post Office responses and had had some sympathy with some of the Defence

   complaints.


78.The next hearing was on 7/5/10 before the resident Judge, HHJ Critchlow

   (see my attendance note POL00045565). There was a new disclosure




                                   Page 43 of 61
                                                                                      WI TN09610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   request on this day in relation to the "central Horizon computer system". I

   remember very little about this request, apart from what is set out in my

   attendance note, and have not been provided with a copy. The request had

   been drafted by Professor McLachlan who indicated that his new planned

   work on this material was likely to take 42 hours. I did not see the relevance of

   this disclosure. I told the Defence that I was not prepared to make any further

   disclosure and they would have to make a s.8 application. When HHJ

   Critchlow was shown the document he stated that the suggested 42 hours

   work would be a complete waste of public money. The Defence did not

   pursue the matter further. The 21/6 fixture was broken for Keith Hadrill's

   convenience and the new date for trial was fixed of 11/10/10. The Judge

   ordered that the experts should compile a schedule of their points of

   agreement and disagreement.


79. I am asked to give an account of the abuse or process application made by

   the Defence at trial. On the first day of the trial, 11/10/10, HHJ Stewart gave a

   ruling against a stay for abuse of process (at p.24H — p.27A of transcript

   UKG100014994). The application to stay was renewed again, on 18/10/10, at

   the end of the Prosecution case, by which stage the           had heard evidence
                                                          jury




   from both Professor McLachlan (see paragraph 84 below for the reasons for

   the timing of his evidence) and Gareth Jenkins and so the abuse point was

   understood by all parties with greater clarity. The second ruling is at transcript

   UKG100014845, p.25B — p.27F. I had little memory of this abuse argument

   until I read the trial transcripts that have been provided to me but I can now

   piece matters together.




                                  Page 44 of 61
                                                                                     WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




80. The abuse application was very different from the argument that was heard in

   March. It did not relate to any previous disclosure request and it was not in

   connection with the 12 months of West Byfleet transaction logs. Gareth

   Jenkins in his statement dated 8/10/10 (POL00110275) had given a summary

   of the Callendar Square problem, at 2.4.1, and explained why he thought the

   symptoms of the Callendar Square problem were not evident at West Byfleet

   — there were no calls to the Help Line that matched the obvious symptoms of

   the Callendar Square problem and there were no System Events for West

   Byfleet from 30/6/05-31/12/09 in which a Callendar Square problem was

   visible — see Jenkins's report (POL00110275) at p.19. Gareth Jenkins had

   described the Callendar Square problem in an earlier statement, dated 913/10

   [POL00001643, at p.12]. Professor McLachlan seemed initially to have

   accepted what Mr Jenkins had said in his March statement and seemed to

   renew his interest in Callendar Square only shortly before the trial. On the first

   day of the trial, as the 2 experts discussed Callendar Square as they worked

   together outside court, Mr Jenkins showed Professor McLachlan on his laptop

   a peak incident report containing a summary of the Callendar Square

   problem. Gareth Jenkins had relied on this peak incident report to describe

   the Callendar Square problem in his statements; he was not himself the

   author of the peak incident report. Professor McLachlan suggested he wished

   to see the underlying material for the peak incident report. That underlying

   data was archived but retrievable within a few days.


81. The first abuse argument was set out in a handwritten document which was

   read out at transcript UKG100014994, p.11D and then expanded upon at p.12.

   Time was given for the experts to work together to see if they could reach



                                  Page 45 of 61
                                                                                      WI TN09610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




   agreement but at p.16F-H it can be seen that Professor McLachlan still

   wanted the underlying material which was described by Mr Hadrill as

   "unavailable". I pointed out at p.19Gff that the Crown had alerted the Defence

   to the Callendar Square issue in the first place and Gareth Jenkins gave an

   explanation of the problem in a report dated 8/3/10 which I then summarised. I

   explained that the Crown was seeking the material Professor McLachlan had

   requested "today". I pointed out that it was important to remember that the

   Callendar Square problem was solved in March 2006, so it could only have, at

   the very most, a limited relevance to an indictment period that ended in

   January 2008. HHJ Stewart in his ruling stated that he was quite satisfied that

   the issue of Callendar Square could be fairly explored in the course of the

   trial. If Professor McLachlan remained "of the opinion that his ability to

   express a concluded view is hampered by some lack of information which the

   prosecution should have supplied, he may express that view in the course of

   his evidence...if I conclude that the consequence is that the trial is not and

   cannot be fair then I retain the power to order a stay of the proceedings"

   (p.26B-D).


82. In his evidence at POL00001856 p.47-48, Professor McLachlan explained

   that he had the evidence of the symptoms of the Callendar Square problem

   from the peak incident report but that he would wish to go back and verify the

   symptoms for himself.


83. The application to stay was renewed again, after the close of the Crown's

   case (transcript UKG100014845 p.20-22). I argued (UKG100014845 at

   p.23Cff) that the Callendar Square issue was essentially irrelevant to the trial.




                                  Page 46 of 61
                                                                                        WI TN09610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




   Professor McLachlan himself agreed that he had seen no evidence that the

   Callendar Square problem existed at West Byfleet at all. I pointed out the

   unlikely scenario of the symptoms being misreported in the peak incident

   report. The data Professor McLachlan wanted was archived (transcript

   UKG100014845 p.23F) but could be made available in a couple of days.

   Instead of pressing for the material, which they could potentially have asked

   for long before the trial, the Defence made an abuse application. The Judge

   ruled that Callendar Square "issues can most emphatically be dealt with as

   part of the trial process and if there is any disadvantage to either party.. .that

   is something which the jury can consider and take into account in deciding

   whether or not the prosecution have made them sure that Mrs Misra is guilty

   of the offence of theft" (p.25G).


84. I cannot now remember whether the raw material was finally retrieved.

   Professor McLachlan had asked to give evidence early in the trial because he

   was making a business trip to South America (POL00029406 p.2A), so he

   probably wouldn't have been in a position to consider the material if it arrived.

   In due course it is worth noting that when Mrs Misra gave evidence she did

   not suggest for a moment that she had experienced the Callendar Square

   symptoms at West Byfleet.


85. I am asked to provide an account of Fujitsu's involvement in these

   proceedings and explain the involvement of Gareth Jenkins and Penny

   Thomas. I cannot help on Penny Thomas. I had no dealings with her. Jon

   Longman appears to have liaised with her, and through her with Gareth




                                   Page 47 of 61
                                                                                    WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITNO9610100




   Jenkins, as he attempted to answer the disclosure requests I have previously

   outlined above that could only be answered by somebody at Fujitsu.


86.1 am asked to give my view of the appropriateness of Fujitsu employees giving

   evidence in a prosecution in which the Defence was attributing deficiencies to

   problems with the Horizon IT system. I don't see anything inappropriate about

   Fujitsu employees giving evidence in a trial about Horizon. Some of the

   questions raised by Professor McLachlan could only be answered by

   someone at Fujitsu and the Professor was actively seeking help from Fujitsu

   to see if any of his theories about Horizon, a system of which he had no prior

   knowledge, were relevant or simply misunderstandings on his part. If Fujitsu

   hadn't been involved we would have had a non-ending cycle of interim reports

   containing unevidenced hypotheses.


87.1 am asked whether I considered Gareth Jenkins to be acting as an expert in

   the case and, if so, what discussions I had with Mr Jenkins about the role of

   an expert and the existence and nature of the duty owed by an expert to the

   court.


88.1 did not specifically advise that the Crown should instruct an expert at all, but

   it became obvious that having only Jon Longman liaising with Fujitsu in order

   to answer complex disclosure requests was untenable. Greater technical

   expertise was needed to answer the enquiries raised by Professor

   McLachlan's interim reports. I therefore saw the initial contact with Gareth

   Jenkins as a way to fulfil our disclosure obligations, simply because he had

   the necessary expertise to answer Professor McLachlan's questions. It was

   soon obvious both that Gareth Jenkins had the necessary expertise to be an




                                   Page 48 of 61
                                                                                        WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




   expert witness and that he and Professor McLachlan should be able to work

   together in a cooperative way. It therefore seemed to me that it was entirely

   appropriate that we should use Gareth Jenkins as an expert witness: his

   evidence would be of assistance to the court; he had relevant expertise; he

   seemed to me, from all my dealings with him, to be impartial and able to

   provide unbiased, objective evidence on matters within his field of expertise. I

   bore in mind that he was an employee of Fujitsu and considered very carefully

   whether that presented a conflict of interest that should disbar him from being

   an expert witness in the case. It is well established that a potential conflict of

   interest does not operate so as to disqualify automatically an expert witness

   from giving evidence. The key question is whether the evidence that the

   witness gives is impartial. In R v Stubbs [2006] EWCA Crim. 2312 an

   employee of HSBC, the loser bank, was permitted to give expert evidence

   about the Hexagon system at HSBC, even though it was submitted (see para

   41) that "he lacked the necessary independence to be an expert witness, in

   particular because of the commercially catastrophic effect of one of HSBC's

   employees conceding on oath that the system suffered weaknesses or was

   open to attack in various ways. It was argued that the court should not allow

   the opinion evidence of such a person in respect of the operation and

   reliability of a computer system that he was in effect paid to defend."


89. The key point where there is a potential conflict of interest is complete

   transparency so that the weight of the expert's evidence can be properly

   assessed, and that is what I sought to achieve.




                                   Page 49 of 61
                                                                                     WITNO9610100
                                                                                   WITNO9610100




90. I was aware that Mr Jenkins had not been an expert witness before. I took

   great pains in all my conversations with him to make sure he understood the

   duties of an expert witness. I explained that it was his overriding duty to assist

   the court by giving an opinion that was objective and unbiased. I explained

   that his duty to the court overrode any obligation he might feel to the party

   calling him. I explained that it was his duty to disclose anything that might

   undermine his opinion. I made it clear that he should be entirely open with

   both the Crown and Professor McLachlan about any Horizon problems and

   their symptoms which might be relevant to the case.


91. It is noteworthy that throughout the trial Professor McLachlan was at pains to

   express his gratitude for the expertise and help of Mr Jenkins: see for

   example in transcript POL00001856 p.20E, p.47D, p.48B, p.51D, F-G, p.85A

   (on Callendar Square), p.111A. All their interactions and the evidence they

   gave suggested very strongly to me that they were cooperating in an entirely

   fair and open way. I never had any indication that Mr Jenkins might in any

   way be failing in his duty as an expert witness. He struck me, throughout all

   my dealings with him and from what I saw of him in court, as straightforward,

   modest, open-minded and impartial. I appreciate that some very severe

   criticisms have been made of Gareth Jenkins since. I can only describe what I

   saw of the man and I, at least, have the benefit of having had considerable

   face to face dealings with him.


92. It is perhaps important to consider what the Judge said about both experts in

   the trial. The Summing-Up deals with the experts at POL00065708 p.61G-

   66A. HHJ Stewart described both experts as "experienced and highly




                                  Page 50 of 61
                                                                                     WITNO9610100
                                                                                  WITN09610100




   qualified" (61G). At p.63A the Judge refers to an exchange he had with Mr

   Jenkins (which can be seen at POL00029406 p.138G-139A) about whether

   his employment status might have affected his evidence: "he (Jenkins)

   insisted that that is not the position, and you saw him". Throughout the trial my

   impression was that Gareth Jenkins was genuinely engaged with Professor

   McLachlan in a sincere and open examination of Professor McLachlan's

   hypotheses. That was clearly also the Professor's view, as he said repeatedly

   in his evidence.


93. In the trial I thought Gareth Jenkins gave fair and thoughtful evidence. A good

   example of his appreciation of the role of an expert witness is at

   POL00029406 p.124D-F. His answer "I've no way of knowing whether the

   money loss was due to theft. I don't even know that the money was lost" is

   scrupulously fair and indicative of the engaging and modest way he gave his

   evidence. I obviously cannot comment about Gareth Jenkins outside of the

   context of the Misra trial, but it never occurred to me that he was anything

   other than impartial. I was fully prepared and considered it my duty, if he and

   Professor McLachlan discovered something of significance to help the

   Defendant, to review the prosecution.


94. I am asked whether Mr Jenkins's email POL00054250 had any effect on my

   assessment of Mrs Misra's defence. Mr Jenkins does raise the same sort of

   query as I had been raising long before: "What I still don't understand is

   exactly what it is that the defence is claiming in terms of where exactly

   Horizon might have "lost" this money". I suppose I might have been slightly

   reassured that Mr Jenkins was thinking in similar terms to me, that the




                                 Page 51 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




   Defendant might be able to give some kind of clue as to where losses were

   occurring, but I don't remember this email having any real effect on my

   assessment of Mrs Misra's defence.


95. I am asked about UKG100014898, POL00055100, POL00055150 and

   POL00055146 which I think concern two different requests by the Defence,

   only one of which related to Horizon.


96. The first request concerned an unidentified sub-post office in the Midlands

   where according to Professor McLachlan, who had interviewed the person

   concerned, the SPM, who wanted to remain anonymous, was suffering

   Horizon problems. The full details of Professor McLachlan's investigation into

   that sub-post office are set out in his second interim report, dated 19/11/09,

   (POL00094101) at p.11-17. It can be seen that the Professor obtained a great

   deal of information from the anonymous SPM. My reaction when I read this

   report was surprise that the Professor should go to such trouble to interview

   this SPM but not Mrs Misra. The disclosure request POL00058503, at

   paragraph 16, appeared to request immunity from criminal investigation for

   this Midlands SPM.


97. The second request sought access to the main office at Chesterfield so that,

   as I understand it, Professor McLachlan could examine procedures there, in

   particular in relation to transaction corrections. This second line of enquiry

   didn't seem to relate to Horizon but rather to human error possibilities at

   Chesterfield. Andrew Bayfield gave evidence, amongst other things, about

   procedures at Chesterfield in relation to transaction corrections on day 3 of

   the trial, 13/10/10 (I have read the transcript of his evidence on the internet;




                                  Page 52 of 61
                                                                                        WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




   transcripts of the whole Misra trial have been readily available on the internet

   for some years and my memory of the case would be much poorer without

   their assistance). I can see from the documents, which I list at the beginning

   of paragraph 95, that access was requested and refused in fairly robust terms

   on both sides. I seem to have provided telephone advice to Jarnail Singh on

   this topic on 28/7/10 (POL00055118).The Defence was told (in

   POL00055146) that they could pursue this request by a s.8 application, a

   course they did not follow.


98. I am asked about my view of the outcome of the case at the time. At the time

   of the trial I believed that Mrs Misra had had a fair trial. I wasn't surprised by

   the verdict, but I also would not have been surprised by an acquittal. I thought

   the jury had been given a very full understanding of the issues in the case.

   They had been assisted by nearly 2 full days of expert evidence from experts

   who seemed to be working well together. Professor McLachlan graciously

   conceded theoretical hypotheses, where he accepted they could be shown by

   evidence to be without foundation; but he was also firm and clear where he

   thought there were areas of doubt and the real risk of a computer problem.

   Mrs Misra gave a full account in evidence. I hope I cross-examined fairly and I

   hope that my speeches were fair — they are all set out in the transcripts, so

   others can judge. I did not seek to hide behind the mantra that Horizon was

   "robust". I argued that point on the evidence. I did not suggest that the system

   was infallible and I conceded that all computer systems can have glitches,

   which is a matter of common sense and human experience— one only has to

   look at the recent problem with air traffic control. The Summing-Up was

   detailed and fair. I hope it is not unfair to point out that there were several




                                   Page 53 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITN09610100




   difficulties for the Defence to confront from the evidence: Mrs Misra's

   successor, Mr Varsani, had suffered no significant problem with the same

   Horizon equipment; Andrew Dunks gave evidence about Help Line calls —

   there were none suggestive of a Horizon problem consistent with the degree

   of false accounting employed by Mrs Misra; there were significant omissions

   from her PACE interview — no mention of her problems using Horizon about

   which she gave evidence, no mention of the problems her trainers had

   apparently witnessed, no mention that her losses began right at the start with

   her trainers present, no mention that she had told her area manager, Timiko

   Springer, about thefts by her staff; Mrs Misra claimed to have been

   incompetent in her handling of Horizon, yet was able to falsify her accounts by

   sophisticated means. On the other hand there were plenty of good defence

   points that can be seen in the transcript of Mr Hadrill's closing speech. I

   thought the trial was fair and matters fairly left to the jury.


99. I am asked to reflect about the trial now, particularly in the light of the

   Hamilton judgment. I have thought about this case for many years; that is why

   I remember it much better than other more recent cases. I don't pretend that I

   have come to any clear conclusions. I am very troubled by the case and to an

   extent confused.


100.       I am particularly concerned when I read paragraph 206 of Hamilton &

   others. This refers, I think, to a communication about a specific bug very

   shortly before the Misra trial. I was asked in the disclosure exercise for the

   Hamilton appeal about an email (I think, or possibly a memo) relating to the

   RPM bug and whether I had seen the email/memo. I said I had not seen the




                                    Page 54 of 61
                                                                                      WITNO9610100
                                                                                    WITNO9610100




     document before, which is true. I have not been provided with that document

     by the Inquiry and I have not seen it since I was asked the question. I have

     had to rely simply on the summary of the position in the Hamilton judgment at

     paragraph 206. If I had seen that email/memo at the time of the Misra trial I

     would have insisted on its disclosure and I would also have required a

     rigorous enquiry into the question of any other bugs, because I would have

     feared that the clear instruction I had given in my written Advice

     (POL00044557), at paragraph 7, had not in fact been followed. I don't pretend

     to understand the reason why I did not see this email/memo. It ought to have

     been very clear from my Advice, and, I think, everything I said in the case,

     that I needed to know about computer problems and bugs and that they would

     need to be disclosed. This RPM bug didn't affect Legacy Horizon, so strictly

     speaking it could not have affected Mrs Misra's case, but, quite frankly, that is

     beside the point.


  101.      I have dealt elsewhere in this statement with the reasons for the

     chosen span of ARQ data. I accept the criticisms made at Hamilton & others

     paragraphs 91 (i), 131 and 207. The Court of Appeal, looking at the full history

     of Horizon disclosure failings, has rightly concluded that Mrs Misra did not

     have a fair trial. That is exactly the opposite of what I wished to achieve.


Prosecution of Susan Rudkin


  102.      I had little involvement with this case and only covered the confiscation

     hearing on 19/8/09. The guilty plea in the Magistrates and the sentence in the

     Crown Court had been dealt with by a solicitor advocate, John Dove

     (POL00051231 and POL00051380) who was unavailable for confiscation, so




                                    Page 55 of 61
                                                                                        WI TN09610100
                                                                                     WITNO9610100




     Counsel was instructed for that. Counsel instructed was Henrietta Paget (now

     KC). On the backsheet (POL00052094) her handwriting appears above my

     handwritten endorsement for 19/8/09. It can be seen that she read the papers

     and sent advisory emails. There is reference to the advice about confiscation

     given by Miss Paget (dated 17/9/09 on POL00057602). It appears that she

     gave sensible advice that the amount to be sought in confiscation could be no

     more than the loss; no order could be attached to the turnover of the business

     (see POL00057602, entry for 17/8/09).


  103.      When I appeared on the case the confiscation order was agreed in the

     sum of £35,894.15, the Defendant having already repaid some of the loss.

     Apart from this information that I have gleaned from the documents I cannot

     assist further about this case. I have no recollection of the case independent

     of the documents and I do not seem to have provided any advice.


General


  104.       Finally, I am asked whether there are any further matters that I wish to

     bring to the attention of the Chair of the Inquiry. I have dealt, fully I hope, with

     the cases of Mrs Misra and Mr Page, and apologise for having little or no

     recollection of Mrs Rudkin's case. Otherwise, in these cases, indeed in all

     cases where I am instructed, I strived to do the best job possible while

     following the conduct rules set out in all the relevant guidelines. I am proud of

     my role as a barrister in the criminal justice system and am extremely sorry

     that I played an unwitting role in Seema Misra and Carl Page having unfair

     trials. I am particularly conscious that in Mrs Misra's case I was Prosecution

     Counsel at the head of a difficult disclosure exercise that failed. Over the




                                     Page 56 of 61
                                                                                        WITNO9610100
                                                                                      WITNO9610100




       years, as I have watched and tried to learn from all the Horizon cases, I have

       thought repeatedly about whether there was something different I could have

       done, whether I should have asked more or different questions, whether I

       should have insisted on an independent expert. I cannot see how Professor

       McLachlan could have worked without considerable assistance from Fujitsu

       and someone like Gareth Jenkins, but perhaps there should have been the

       extra precaution of an independent expert on the Prosecution side. I have

       tried to set out in this statement a full account of both the Page and Misra

       cases, the decisions I made and the reasons for those decisions, so that the

       Inquiry can see what happened at the time and judge for itself what went

       wrong and what lessons can be learned. I will obviously assist in any way I

       can.


Statement of Truth


I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed:




          GRO
Dated: 25/10/23




                                      Page 57 of 61
                                                                              WITNO9610100
                                                                          WITNO9610100




Index to First Witness Statement of Warwick Henry Patrick Tatford

No.   URN            Document Description                       Control
                                                                Number
  1 POL00067005      Carl Page case study: Evidence of Karl     POL-0063484
                     Adrien Page (R v Page and another)
                     before Judge W Wood
  2 POL00066717      Carl Page case study: Counsel for the      POL-0063196
                     Prosecution's revised opening note to
                     jury in the re-trial of Carl Page
  3 POL00045921      Letter from DC Deans to Staffordshire      POL-0042400
                     police regarding John Whitehouse dated
                     7/5/2003.
  4 POL00045867      Expert Accountant's Report of David        POL-0042346
                     Liddell In the Crown Court at Dudley - R
                     v Carl Adrian Page
  5 POL00045868      R v Carl Adrian Page, Expert               POL-0042347
                     Accountant's Report of David Liddell
  6 POL00061214      Between Regina and Carl Adrian Page        POL-0057693
                     Report to the Court prepared by T
                     Taylor, a Director in KPMG LLP.
  7 UKG100012306     Carl Page case study: Regina and Carl     UKG1023102-
                     Adrian Page Defence Statement             001
  8 POL00044585      Seema Misra case study - Instructions to POL-0041064
                     counsel to settle indictment and advise
                     on evidence and brief for the prosecution
                     in The Queen v Seema Misra
  9 POL00044613      Summary of facts (POL v Seema Misra)       POL-0041092
 10 POL00045010      POL v Seema Misra - Schedule of            POL-0041489
                     Charges
 11 POL00045220      Schedule of charges - Post Office          POL-0041699
                     Limited v Susan Jane Rudkin
 12 POL00050750      Schedule of Non-sensitive unused           POL-0047229
                     material, R v Seema Misra
 13 POL00050751      Schedule of sensitive material, R v        POL-0047230
                     Seema Misra
 14 POL00044541      POL Investigation Report for Seema         POL-0041020
                     Misra (POLTD/0708/ 0249)
 15 POL00051092      Email from Warwick Tatford to Jarnail A    POL-0047571
                     Singh Re Indictment for Misra
 16 POL00051149      Indictment - R v Seema Misra               POL-0047628
 17 POL00051539      Seema Misra Case Study - Email from        POL-0048018
                     Warwick Tatford to Phil Taylor re Seema
                     Misra Guildford Crown Court Trail - W/L
                     1st -12th June 2009.




                                Page 58 of 61
                                                                           WITNO9610100
                                                                       WI TN 096 10 100




18 POL00051441    Letter from Phil Taylor to Mr Warwick     POL-0047920
                  Tatford. Re: Counsel's advice on criminal
                  prosecution of Seema Misra for theft
19 POL00051586    Email from Phil Taylor to Marilyn          POL-0048065
                  Benjamin to Warwick Tatford RE:
                  REGINA v SEEMA MISRA GUILDFORD
                  CROWN COURT TRIAL - W/L 1ST -
                  12TH JUNE 2009 CASE NO:
                  POLTD1070810249
20 POL00051773    Seema Misra Case Study: Attendance         POL-0048252
                  Note by Jarnail Singh re: Seema Misra at
                  Guildford Crown
                  Court(CRM/258932/JSX)
21 UKG100014845   Regina v Seema Misra, before his           UKG1025638-
                  Honour Judge N.A.Stewart proceedings       001
                  on Monday 18th October 2010 day 6
22 POL00001856    Transcript of Proceedings Day 5 In the  VIS00002870
                  Crown Court at Guilford Before His
                  Honour Judge N. A. Stewart for Regina v
                  Seema Misra.
23 WITNO9610101   Email from Warwick Tatford to Marylin      WITNO961010
                  Benjamin re R v Gurdeep Singh Dale,        1
                  attaching Misra Disclosure Schedule
24 WITNO9610102   Schedule of documents reviewed by          WITNO961010
                  Warwick Tatford to advise on disclosure    2
                  in Misra
25 POL00093689    Exhibit SM3 for R v Seema Misra Case       POL-0093811
                  at Guildford Crown Court. Expert report
                  on Horizon.
26 POL00044557    Advice on requests for disclosure in POL-0041036
                  Seema Misra case
27 POL00065708    Judgment re: HIS HONOUR JUDGE N.A POL-0062187
                  STEWARD REGINA -v- SEEMA MISRA
                  19/10/2010.
28 POL00058503    Email from Warwick Tatford to John         POL-0054982
                  Longman, Re: Misra further disclosure
                  request from the defence.
29 POL00053723    Email from Jarnail Singh to Warwick      POL-0050202
                  Tatford incl em chain from Mark Dinsdale
                  to Rob Wilson re: advice requested on
                  disclosure request in MISRA case
30 POL00053646    Seema Misra Case study: Further            POL-0050125
                  Request for Disclosure - R v Seema
                  Misra




                             Page 59 of 61
                                                                            WITNO9610100
                                                                        WITN09610100




31 POL00053746    Seema Misra case study - Letter from      POL-0050225
                  Jarnail Singh to Coomber Rich Solicitors,
                  RE: R v Seema Misra, Guildford Crown
                  Court, Trial 15 March 2010
32 POL00044553    Letter Jarnail to Singh to Seema Misra's    POL-0041032
                  lawyers regarding Regina v Seema
                  Misra Guilford crown court
33 POL00053849    Attendance note from Jarnail Singh for      POL-0050328
                  Seema Misra dated 27/01/10.
34 WITNO9610103   Email from Warwick Tatford to Fiona         WITNO961010
                  Butler, Coomber Rich, attaching             3
                  response to s.8 request in Misra
35 WITNO9610104   R v Seema Misra - Response to s.8           WITNO961010
                  Disclosure Application                      4
36 UKG100014903   Seema Misra case study: Court               UKG1025696-
                  Attendance Note from Jarnail Singh re       001
                  Seema Misra for Mention dated
                  01/02/10, updated 03/02/2010
37 POL00054162    Email from Jarnail Singh to Warwick         POL-0050641
                  Tatford re Seema Misra Guildford Crown
                  Court - response to Defence's third
                  disclosure request dated 22/02/10.
38 POL00054248    Memo from Issy Hogg to Jarnail A Singh      POL-0050727
                  re. Regina v Seema Misra Guildford
                  Crown Court Trial - 15th March 2010
                  regarding disclosure and application to
                  stay count 1
39 POL00053954    Letter from J McFarlane to the Clerk of     POL-0050433
                  Warwick Tatford Re Regina v Seema
                  Misra
40 POL00054275    Notification of Fixture of Hearing re       POL-0050754
                  abuse of process application at Guildford
                  Crown Court on 10th March 2010 -
                  Seema Misra
41 POL00054346    Seema Misra Case Study: Response to         POL-0050825
                  Defence Abuse Skeleton by Warwick
                  Tatford - (R v Seema Misra)
42 POL00045565    Regina Misra attendance note for the        POL-0042044
                  case listed on 7/5/2010
43 UKG100014994   Seema Misra case study: Record of           UKG1025787-
                  proceedings in the matter between           001
                  Regina and Seema Misra in the Guilford
                  Crown Court (T20090070) on
                  11/10/2020 (Day 1)
44 POL00110275    Witness Statement of Gareth ldris           POL-0108082
                  Jenkins Version 3.0 11/02




                             Page 60 of 61
                                                                            WI TN09610100
                                                                        WITNO9610100




45 POL00029406    Tape transcript of R v Seema Misra Trial    POL-0025888
                  in Guildford Crown Court, 14 October
                  2010 - Evidence of Gareth Jenkins
46 POL00054250    Email from Jarnail A Singh to Post Office   POL-0050729
                  Security, copied to John Longman and
                  Warwick Tatford re. Regina v Seema
                  Misra enclosing expert reports
47 UKG100014898   Seema Misra case study: Email from          UKG1025691-
                  Jarnail A Singh, Andrew Winn, Marilyn       001
                  Benjamin and others re:
48 POL00055100    Emails between John Longman, Jarnail        POL-0051579
                  A Singh and others, re. Regina V Seema
                  Misra - Guilford Crown Court - Trial
49 POL00055150    Email from John Longman to Jarnail A        POL-0051629
                  Singh, Re: West Byfleet-Misra
50 POL00055146    Letter from Jamail Singh to Jon             POL-0051625
                  Longman, Re: Regina v Seema Misra
                  Guildford Crown Court Trial Case No:
                  POLTD/07/08/0249
51 POL00094101    Final version of the 2nd Interim            POL-0094223
                  Technical Expert's Report
52 POL00055118    Attendance Note re Seema Misra - Case       POL-0051597
                  No CRM/258932/JSX dated 28/07/10.
53 POL00051231    Susan Rudkin case study: Letter from        POL-0047710
                  John Dove to Jarnail Singh re mags
                  hearing - guilty plea
54 POL00051380    Susan Rudkin case study: Memo from          POL-0047859
                  Rob Wilson to Fraud Team cc Mike
                  Wilcox, Ged Harbinson and Press Office
                  re: R v Susan Jane RUDKIN - report on
                  final result
55 POL00052094    STAFFORD CROWN COURT -                      POL-0048573
                  CONFISCATION HEARING - 21st
                  AUGUST 2009, THE QUEEN v SUSAN
                  JANE RUDKIN, BRIEF TO COUNSEL
                  FOR THE PROSECUTION
56 POL00057602    Financial Investigation Events Log,         POL-0054081
                  POLTD/0809/0101 Susan Rudkin




                             Page 61 of 61
