                                                                                      WITNO8290100
                                                                                    WITN08290100




                                           Witness name: Christopher Granville Knight




                        I11i Ii   i*:[.i       P4.iuI       !:




      ♦                  11                    r        r   :: it   •   f..   . I




I, CHRISTOPHER GRANVILLE KNIGHT, will say as follows;


  1. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon I-1- Inquiry (the

     "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 request dated 23 October 2023

     (the "Request").



  2. I can confirm I was assisted by the Post Office (PO) in confirming insurance

     coverage for support in preparing my statement. I have also been assisted by

     DAC Beachcroft LLP in the preparation and drafting of my statement.




  3. I am a current employee of Post Office Limited (POL) having joined in January

     1983. I have set out a summary of my career at POL including the positions I

     have held, the dates I held them and a brief description of what each role




                                           1
                                                                               WITNO8290100
                                                                             WITN08290100




a. Jan 1983 — April 1984 - Working for POL as a Postal Assistant grade in

   PO Stores Branch, located in a Head Post Office. I was responsible for

   distribution forms and stationery to Head Office departments that were

   located within the building and also to Crown Post Office branches within

   the geographical area.



b. April 1984 — 1987 — Working for POL as a Postal Officer grade on the

   Head      Office   Counter.   This    was    pre-Horizon ;   or    any   other

   electronic/computer     system,      and   was   all   manual     paper-based

   transactions, i was responsible for serving customers with all Post Office

   transactions that were available at the time. We used to balance our own

   tills weekly.




c. 1987 — 1993 — During this time the Post Office underwent a business

   restructure/change and Royal Mail Letters and Post Office Counters

   became two separate entities. I remained working for the Post Office as

   a Postal Officer grade working in the Cash Remittance Unit (CRU) in the

   Head Office building. The role involved processing business cash

   deposits and sending cash and stock (stamps) to PO branches within

   the catchment area of the Head Office. It also involved receiving cash

   and stock from PO branches within the catchment area of the Head

   Office.




                                 2
                                                                         WITN08290100
                                                                       WITNO8290100




   employment checks of staff applying to join Post Office, Royal Mail or

   Parcelforce by checking applications against a database of previously

   debarred staff as well as general admin duties.



e. 1997 — 2000 — I applied and was promoted within POID to an Assistant

   Investigation Officer (AIO), a manager grade. I underwent the initial

   internal training, which I believe was three weeks, delivered by two

   experienced   POID    Investigators. This covered      the   process of

   investigating suspected criminal offences against Royal Mail (theft of

   mail). The role involved complying with the Police and Criminal Evidence

   Act (PACE). I used POID Investigative forms during investigations. The

   forms included: Friends at Interview, Legal Advice for Persons being

   Interviewed, Searches (person, car and property) and the Health &

   Safety and Treatment of Investigators and Suspects and Witnesses

   during an Investigation. There were a number of teams within POID at

   that time. After training I was assigned to one of these teams and an

   experienced Investigation Officer (10), who was a grade above me,

   acted as my mentor. We investigated counterfeit/re-used postage

   stamps, usually by persons external to the business.



   During this period (1997 — 2000) POID underwent a structure change

   and also changed its name to Post Office Security and Investigation

   Service (POSIS). I moved into a team investigating the theft of Special

   Delivery mail bagslitems within the Royal Mail nationwide pipeline. We

   covered handover points within the network; railways stations, airports


                               3
                                                                           WITN08290100
                                                                         WITNO8290100




     and the Travelling Post Office (TPOs) trains. This team consisted of

     established Investigators and so was a good learning opportunity.



f.   2000 — 2003 — Following a business re-organisation staff were given a

     preference exercise to select which business unit they would prefer to

     work in. Due to my experience of working in the Rem Unit (now known

     as Cash Centres) I opted to move to the newly formed business unit

     "Cash Handling & Distribution" that was an amalgamation of CashCo

     (the in-house Cash in Transit (CViT) service) and the Cash Centres.

     Back in those days the CViT used to service both Post Office branches

     and also small businesses collecting banking deposits from businesses

     and taking them to our Cash Centres to be processed and banked.



     I was initially the lead investigator, conducting investigations into

     possible criminal offences involving CViT and cash centre staff;

     conducting PACE interviews and compiling case papers and files for

     prosecutions which were then submitted to PO Legal Team for advice. I

     would then obtain Summons' and attend Court as necessary. On

     occasions it was necessary for me to report the offences to the Police

     and liaise with them as required during their investigation providing

     specialist business knowledge.




     The role soon became one of physical security as well as the team

     aligned to the current Security Managers. This was both security


                                 4
                                                                                     WITN08290100
                                                                                   WITNO8290100




          equipment as well as processes and procedures within the CViT and

          Cash Centre environments.



      g. Approx 2003 — 2016 — I worked in POL with establ ished investigators

          investigating possible criminal offences within the network. This related

          to both Directly Managed Branches (DMB), formerly known as Crown

          Branches, and also the branch network. I was responsible for conducting

          investigations and all that was involved, as mentioned in my previous

          roles as an AIO. This role was the same grade, just a different job title,

          Investigation Manager. There was also an element of physical security,

          again as mentioned previously.




          Office Security Team. We are the point of contact for POL for Law

          enforcement. We have no involvement in internal investigations.



4. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details in relation to my positions as an

   Investigator, Investigation Manager and my role within the Fraud Team. These

   were slightly different titles for the same role but in different sections/functions

   of the business. The business has gone through numerous re-organisations of

   the reporting line and structure, but the role of `investigator' remained

   predominantly the same as what I have set out below.



5. The Inquiry has asked me to provide further details in regard to my role as an

   Investigator within the Security Team. I became an Investigator in 1997 and


                                        5
                                                                                     WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




   worked in the Post Office Investigation Department ("POID"). I undertook an in-

   house three-week training course (as I recall) that covered the Police & Criminal

   Evidence Act 1984 Codes of Practice (`PACE") and the relevant POID forms

   that were used during an investigation ensuring adherence to PACE. The forms

   included, but this is not an exhaustive list, the Explanation of a Person's Legal

   Rights, Witness Statements and Undertaking a Search.



6. The course also included training on report writing in the context of

   investigations, how to complete a tape transcription, the structure of case

   papers and the appendix envelopes associated at the rear of the case papers;

   Appendix 'A' — Witness Statements; Appendix 'B' — tape transcripts and

   evidential items; Appendix `C' — Miscellaneous.



7. 1 recall that towards the end of 1999 I started an NVQ Level 4 in Investigation. I

   remember I started it while I was working in POID and then when I moved to

   CH&D in 2000, I continued with it but for some reason I did not finalise it even

   though I completed all of the sections. I think the assessor left the business.



8. When I moved into CH&D (2000) there was a mandatory CViT crew training

   course to complete (1 week) in order to obtain a Security Industry Association

   (SIA) licence, a requirement to work in the CViT industry. There was also other

   training in security equipment; vehicles, security equipment and processes

   within both Cash Centres and CViT Depots.




                                        6
                                                                                     WITN08290100
                                                                                  WITNO8290100




9. When I moved to POL in 2004, 1 initially worked with established POL

   investigators. As far as I recall a lot of the investigations were regarding

   Pension & Allowance fraud. As I remember these cases were usually raised

   by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) and there was a lot of

   liaisons with their Fraud Team.


10. During this time, although I cannot recall exactly when, I attended

   Chesterfield future Walk building to receive counter training. The training

   would have given a basic understanding of Horizon i.e., how the system

   performed transactions, not data analysis. There was also a refresher course

   where we were tasked with working in the DMBs for 3 days during the

   Christmas period and again when we were tasked with covering strike action

   in the DMBs (possibly 2006-2008, I cannot recall exactly). We also received

   training on security equipment at various times when I was within POL as the

   role covered both investigative and physical security. I also recall Cartwright

   King giving specific training which covered notebook use, interviewing and

   disclosure to solicitors at interview.



11. The forms used as part of an investigation were numbered and prefixed by the

   relevant business unit. For example, the Legal Rights Form 001 was numbered;

   ID001, GS001. CS001 and POL001. My understanding/recollection of these

   codes being the Investigation Dept, Government Services, Corporate Security

   and Post Office Ltd.




                                            7
                                                                                    WITN08290100
                                                                                 WITNO8290100




12. My role was to investigate possible criminal offences within the specific

   business unit I was working in at the time. I was a manager by grade but did

   not have anyone working to me. I had a Line Manager who would have been

   the grade above me and who changed over the years and as I moved business

   units. The Line managers I can recall are Charlie Bint (POID), Danny Boles

   (POID), Chris Lawrence (CH&D), Manish Patel (POL), Lester Chine (POL),

   Keith Gilchrist (POL), Andrew Daley (POL), Alison Drake (POL), Helen

   Dickinson (POL).



13. I always found my colleagues to be professional and competent and never had

   any doubts about working with them. My Line Managers were again

   professional and competent. Some of my Line Managers had been

   investigators within the Royal Mail/POL whereas others may not have had

   internal investigative experience but had worked in law enforcement. Some

   had ski lls relevant to the business unit I was working in at the time. This would

   have been physical security and not investigative knowledge.



14. As an Investigator we did not cross into the discipline sphere, that would be

   either HR, a Senior Manager or in the case of the Network a Contract Manager.



15. As part of a criminal investigation there would be the general disclosure made

   by the Lead Investigator using the forms 006 (A, B, C & D). These would be

   verified by the Legal Team.




                                       8
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                WITN08290100




16. I was not involved in any Litigation Strategy. I would assume this would be

   done by much more senior people within the business.



17. I would liaise with other Post Office departments when progressing a case.

   This could be the Contract Team, HR and/or the Finance Service Centre, which

   had various teams within it e.g., the Lottery Team, Cheque team, Postal Order

   Team etc. I am sure there were other teams I liaised with, but I cannot recall

   them now.




18. From what I can recall, the Head of Security was John Scott. Below him was

   his Lead Team which I think was Andy Hayward, Dave Pardoe, John Bigley

   and possibly others. They were responsible for ensuring the teams strategy

   remained in line with the business strategy. Below that there would be Team

   Leaders / Senior Managers then the Security / Investigation Managers and a

   small number of admin grade staff. There were Physical Security Managers and

   Investigators, and their roles did not cross at first. As I recall, as I had both

   Physical Security and Investigative knowledge, from my Cash handing and

   distribution CH&D days I would perform these functions when required as

   CH&D, which changed its name to Supply Chain when it came under POL, so

   we were their Security Team (both Physical Security and Investigative).



19. As the years moved on the Post Office had various re-organisations which

   affected other teams not just the Security Team. This usually meant a head

   count reduction. There was one re-organisation where everyone had to work

                                       9
                                                                                 WITN08290100
                                                                               WITNO8290100




   from a 'hub' (which were the main POL locations). I know this affected some

   staff and due to the hugely increased travelling distance they left the Security

   Team. Sometime after we had an intake of approximately six new members all

   recruited externally. I think this would have been around 2011 to 2013 but I

   cannot recall the exact dates.



20. The Inquiry has asked me to explain my role in the development and/or

   management of any polices within the security team. I can confirm that I did

   not have any involvement in the development or management of any policies,

   and this would have been done by more senior members in the team.



21. The Inquiry has also asked me what role I had in the development and/or

   management of any policies, taking into consideration            POL00104909

   (Separation Project — Criminal Investigations Policy for Post Office Ltd),

   POL00123309      (Email   from    Dave    Posnett   dated    09/07/2014)    and

   POL00123310 (Royal Mail Group Security investigation Communication 6-

   2014   Joint investigation protocols RMGS and PO Ltd security), POL00123311

   (RMG 2.2. Joint Investigation Protocols — RMGS and PO Ltd Security July

   2014), POL00123312 (MOU on joint investigation protocols post independence

   involving Royal Mail and Post Office Ltd security) and POL00126976 (Email

   from Dave Posnett dated 11/09/2013), within POL post-separation.       Again, I

   can confirm I did not have any involvement in the development or management

   of these policies, or any policies post separation other than POL0012243 which

   I am listed as author. That was something I was asked to create but it never

   came to fruition and so was never used.
                                      in
                                                                                     WITNO8290100
                                                                                   WITNO8290100




22. The Inquiry has also asked me what legislation, policies and/or guidance

      governed the conduct of investigations conducted by the Security team during

      the period you worked within it. The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984

      (PACE) was the main legislation as all our investigative forms were designed

      to adhere to this. The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA), which

      was for any CCTV, and the Criminal Procedure and Investigation Act (CPIA)

      were also key pieces of legislation.


23. The Inquiry has asked me what the process was for dealing with complaints

      about the conduct of an investigation by the Security Team. I not sure of the

      process or if there was one. I would expect if a SPM had an issue with an

      investigation, they would raise it with their contract manager or the National

      Federation of Sub Postmasters (NFSP) who would then follow up the issue with

      the senior management in the Security Team.



24.     The Inquiry has asked me what supervision there was over criminal

      investigations conducted by Security Managers.         From what I can recall

      between 2004 to 2007 senior managers would view case papers that were

      submitted for Legal Advice via our Casework Team and would add comments

      or give advice to the Investigator. I believe this then grew into the Case

      Compliance process. This was a check list setting out a list of actions to ensure

      everything had been completed correctly. In addition, during my latter years as

      an Investigator there was a monthly Cases on Hand meeting where Security

      Managers would provide updates on their cases and what actions were needed.

      The team leaders would discuss and come back with any recommendations. In


                                         11
                                                                               WITNO8290100
                                                                             WITN08290100




   general, I could always ask my team leader or a peer for advice on a current

   investigation. But my memory of how things changed over the years is not

   complete.



25. As far as I can recall, the investigation and prosecution of SPMs, assistants

   and Crown Office employees was the same. I think that around 2011 or 2012

   there was a change and SPM assistants were not prosecuted. Instead, the

   SPM was advised to report them to the Police. This would have come down

   from the Lead Team.



26. The Inquiry has asked me to review POI 00123743 (Email from Elaine Spencer

   dated 31/07/2015) and POL00123840 (Email from John M Scott dated

   20/01/2016). These documents are dated 2016 by which time I had moved to

   the Intel Team with my colleague Andrew Wise under Elaine Spencer. I was

   not involved in any investigations at this time and by then the appetite for

   prosecution had ceased as it had been slowing down from about 2013. As I

   recall any investigation cases on hand were being closed as NFA (No Further

   Action). I believe this was around the time of the Group Litigation Order.

   Cartwright King were the Solicitors at the time, instead of POL Legal Services

   which was just Jarnail Singh.


27. From what I recall, sometime between 2013-2016 (although I am unsure of

   the date), the investigators were told by John Scott that we would be

   prosecuting again once an SME (Subject Matter Expert) was found and had

   been appointed. This never came to fruition.



                                     12
                                                                                       WITNO8290100
                                                                                    WITNO8290100




Audit and Investigation


   28. In my experience an investigator would attend an audit with the auditors if the

      audit had been requested by the investigator as part of an investigation where

      a PM or branch staff would potentially need to be spoken to. Alternatively, an

      investigator may attend during an audit if this was a general scheduled audit,

      and a large loss was discovered. I believe that as part of the auditor's process

      they had to inform a number of people if a large loss was discovered in branch,

      one being the Security Team Leader for the geographical area of the branch.

      The investigator would not take an active part in the audit but would attend to

      understand the outcome and to follow up with an investigation if necessary.



   29. In the early 2000s an investigator was more likely to get called to an audit to

      enable them to approach the SPM and/or staff and arrange further enquiries.

      In later years this approach diminished as auditors were instructed to write

      down any significant comments made by the SPM or staff. The auditors were

      trained in this and the fact that they should not solicit comments as they should

      not get into an interview scenario. This relates to adhering to PACE (Cautioning

      someone before they were asked or if they were starting to admit to a crime).



   30. In order to determine if an investigation was to take place the information would

      be given to an investigator by the Team Leader. It is my understanding that the

      decision would be made if the loss reached a threshold (from memory I think

      this was £5,000) or there was suspected/admitted dishonesty. If the matter was

      being dealt with by the Contract Team and there was no suspected criminality

      an investigation case would not be raised.


                                          13
                                                                                  WITNO8290100
                                                                               WITN08290100




31. In my experience the recovery of debt was not decided at the outset of an

   investigation. As above, if there was no criminal investigation the matter would

   have been dealt with by the Contracts Team and my understanding is that they

   would deal with the branch and any debt. This process was not part of the

   Investigation Team's remit.



32. Once a criminal investigation had been concluded the Legal Team would

   advise of any charges and if there would be a claim for compensation. I'm not

   sure when but at some point, the PACE was utilised when there was a

   conviction. I cannot recall when but over the years POL had some senior

   investigators (Ged Harbinson, Paul Southin, David Posnett, Graham Ward and

   Helen Dickinson) who underwent training to become accredited Financial

   Investigators. During the investigation of a case the decision as to what crime

   (Theft or False Accounting), if any, had been committed and the points to prove

   would have to be covered. The relevant information would be passed to the

   Legal Team who would have the final decision on whether a case should

   progress to court.



33. When I received a case for investigation, I would start by understanding the

   background including the audit result and why the audit had taken place.

   Usually, the branch was targeted for audit as the branch had come to the

   attention of the Branch Analysis Team (BAT) due to anomalies or concerns.

   For example, this may be because the branch had not returned cash when

   asked to do so or had completed suspicious transactions such as a large


                                      14
                                                                                 WITNO8290100
                                                                              WITN08290100




   number of reversals or excess spoiled postage. I would also obtain the last 3

   months of Credence data to view the updated data in relation to concerns raised

   by BAT. If necessary, further archive data may have been needed via the ARQ

   process.



34. 1 would also obtain a Police National Computer (PNC) person check and a

   credit check. The PNC would be used to complete the Planned Operation Risk

   Assessment (PORA) for when a suspect is to be approached and a location is

   due to be visited.



35. 1 would speak to the relevant Contracts Manager to ensure they know I am

   dealing with the case and the point of contact should we need to update each

   other. As the investigation progressed engagement with the Financial

   Investigator (Fl) may be required dependant on the case.



36. Once the interview had been conducted, I would seek Legal Advice on what

   further action was required. For example, further interviews or statements may

   be needed where more information or clarification was required.




   detail of the PM and any assistants, including their Horizon User IDs.



38. NBSC (Helpline) call logs were also requested to understand if the branch had

   been reporting issues that related to the enquiry.




                                      15
                                                                                  WITNO8290100
                                                                                WITN08290100




39. Following the interview, we would ask for authority to obtain bank statements

   directly from their bank. Other financial details (loans, mortgage) would also be

   request at this time.




40. Once the investigator had concluded the investigation or got to a point where

   legal advice was needed, the case file would be passed to the Legal Team who

   would decide if a case was to be taken to Court. The Designated Authority

   Manager (DAM), a Senior member of the Security Team, would give the final

   consent to continue to prosecution. The Contract Manager would also be aware

   that a criminal investigation was taking place and would manage the contractual

   process. As far as I am aware, the Contract Manger did not have any input into

   the decision making but I do not have a full knowledge of their process.



41. The Inquiry has asked me what test was applied by those making prosecution

   and charging decisions and what factors were considered at the evidential and

   public interest stage. The evidential and public interest decision would have

   been made by the Legal Team. My understanding is there were two parts; was

   the evidence strong enough and was it in the public interest. Once the Legal

   Team had advised of the decision to prosecute, they would supply details of the

   offences to be charged to the Investigator by a memo added to the case papers

   which were returned to the Investigator.


42. The Inquiry has asked me to confirm the circumstances in which steps were

   taken to restrain a suspect's assets by criminal enforcement methods, such as

   confiscation proceedings. and when and who decided to pursue these methods.


                                      16
                                                                                     WITNO8290100
                                                                                   WITN08290100




   The decision to restrain a suspect's assets by criminal enforcement methods

   would be made by the Financial Investigators. In later years they were notified

   at the start of investigations that had a large loss.




43. Every interview regarding a criminal offence was governed by PACE. To that

   end every interview of this nature regardless of whether it was a SPM, SPM

   Assistant or Crown Employee suspected of a criminal offence would follow the

   same format. The interview process has been fundamentally the same since I

   had my initial training in 1997 to be an Investigator.



44. Since my initial training in 1997 there were a number of refresher/additional

   courses dealing with interviewing and taking statements. I don't recall exactly

   when these took place. I remember one piece of training which explained an

   interview strategy called TEDS PIE which is an acronym for Tell me, Explain

   to me, Describe to me, Show me, Precisely, In detail, Exactly.'


45. l recall, but cannot fully remember, that there was some specific training for

   taking witness statements, in addition to the original training I undertook in

   1997. There were various models that were taught for example the 'Peace

   Model' and 'Pelt'. These acronyms stood for Plan, Engagement, Account

   (clarify and challenge), Closure, Evaluation and People, Event, Location, Time.



46. As with interviews, searches were guided by PACE and there were specific

   forms to use that would ensure compliance with PACE. The rules when I was

   initially trained required there to be three people (PO Security staff) at a search.

                                        17
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




   This was later relaxed to two. The search PO Security Rules stated that the

   subject could have a PO friend present. That person had to be a PO employee,

   not involved in the inquiry, or a representative from a recognised union. This

   was later extended to include a friend or neighbour for house searches.



47. Investigators had a duty to investigate a case fully. During an investigation any

   evidence / information that came to light would be looked and assessed and

   reported, whether it pointed to or away from the suspect. Also, every line of

   enquiry that was reasonable would be followed. I would have been aware of

   this process through the polices that were in place and training that was

   provided although I can no longer remember the specifics.


48. In regard to obtaining evidence in the course of an investigation usually a

   branch would have come to the attention of the Branch Analysis Team due to

   abnormal transactions or cash levels that were increasing and a branch not

   returning excess cash when requested, excess spoiled labels or other issues. I

   would check the data requested which usually was the last 3 months of

   Credence to confirm these potential issues. I would also check for suspicious

   transactions, which I had seen previously, such as excessive reversals or

   spoiled postage. In order to have information as evidence a statement would

   need to be obtained in order for it to be allowed in Court. The Legal Team would

   advise if there was something specific needed to satisfy the requirements for

   building a case for prosecution. Fujitsu supplied archive data (ARQ) for data

   older than three months as that could not be obtained from Credence. With a

   request for ARQ data there was a provision that Fujitsu would provide a witness

   statement for the data produced if needed for Court. PO Security had a process

                                       is
                                                                                    WITN08290100
                                                                                  WITNO8290100




      where this could be requested by completing a PO form and submitting it to

      Fujitsu. I would have been aware of how and where to gather relevant data for

      an investigation from my initial training and through knowledge shared by my

      colleagues.



49. As mentioned previously in this statement the investigator disclosure obligation

      would be by discharged by completing the various PO SEC disclosure forms

      006 A, B, C & D. I would have been aware of the disclosure forms from the

      policies that were in place although I can no longer remember the exact policy

      in place during my time in the team. I also received training when I joined the

      team as well as guidance from the Legal Team.


50. In regard to drafting investigation reports the investigator would complete a

      Suspect Offender Report that was in essence a template which needed various

      information completed i.e., the first page needed to be completed with the

      suspect's details and the preamble and then other various points. After the

      report was complete it would be paginated in the green jacket case file with

      other items such as the typed interview summary and the appendix folders A,

      B and C at the rear. This green jacket' would have a red label attached that

      signified it was urgent. It would then be passed to the case file team and on to

      the Legal Team for their advice. Then at some point it would be returned to the

      investigator for either further enquiries, closure (NFA) or to obtain a Summons

      and continue with the prosecution.



51.     The Inquiry has asked me whether I was provided with the Casework

      Management      document     for   either   2000   POL00104747      (Casework

                                           19
                                                                                    WITNO8290100
                                                                                  WITN08290100




  Management Policy (version 1.0, March 2000)) or 2002 POL00104777

  (Casework Management Policy (version 4.0, October 2002).              In relation to

  POL00104747 I do not recall seeing it, but I do recall some of the details. I can

  see POL00104777 covers the practice of preparing two reports, a Legal report

  and a Discipline report. I am familiar with this process so I believe I would have

  seen this document although I cannot recall when.



52. The   inquiry    has asked     me about what       I   understood    to be the

  instructions/guidance given in the second, third and fourth bullet points on page

  2 of the 2000 version (POL001 04747) and the fi rst, second and third bullets on

  page 2 of the 2002 (POL00104777) version and whether I understood this to

  be relevant to PO's disclosure obligations in relation to information about

  Horizon bugs, errors and defects. My understanding of these points is that they

  cover   security   operational   procedures    and   ensuring   weaknesses        in

  transactions and/or procedures were not publicised as this could allow similar

  offences to be committed before a fix was put in place. For example, if there

  was a physical security weakness with something like a door then we would not

  want that to be in the public domain. My understanding is that these points were

  about the products and ensuring that they were protected. At no time was I

  aware of any Horizon, bugs, errors or defects so I would not have disclosed

  anything relating to that. I would assume that disclosure would have been made

  by someone in the relevant area if they were aware (Legal Team or Fujitsu) of

  any Horizon, bugs, errors or defects.




                                      RE
                                                                                    WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




53. 1 cannot recall when compliance checks began for investigations. I seem to

   remember there was a case file compliance check in the early days when I

   joined the POL Security team (after 2004) and then on a number of occasions

   and subsequently the process was reviewed and updated. The purpose, I

   believe, was to ensure there was a common standard that all case files were

   presented in the same way across the team. I don't recall having any role in

   the development, management or amendment of the compliance documents

   referred to in the email from David Posnett dated 23 May 2011 (POL00118096).


54. The Inquiry have asked me for my understanding of paragraph 2.15 of the

   document entitled "Guide to the Preparation and Layout of Investigation Red

   Label Case Files — Offender reports & Discipline reports" (POL00118101). My

   understanding of paragraph 2.15 relates to products that are transacted on the

   counter, such as Car Tax, Mail, Banking etc. I do not believe this distracted from

   POL's obligation of disclosure or the Offender report template as, to me, it

   related to products/supervision and not the Horizon system. As I mentioned

   previously, I would expect any Horizon bugs, errors and defects to be disclosed

   at a more senior level.


55. The Inquiry has asked me about the appropriateness of the identification codes

   ("IC") described in the Identification Codes document (POL00118104). The

   document shows IC codes 1 to 7 which as far as I am aware were used by all

   Law Enforcement. The descriptors contain words that are outdated and

   offensive. I do not know where this document originated from or the author. The

   Security Team investigators had to fill in a form NPA01 - NON-POLICE

   AGENCIES (Notification of Proceedings to Police) that I believed mirrored the


                                       21
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




   Police's process for when someone is arrested and taken into Custody at a

   Police Station. The form had a number of other identifiers; height, whether the

   person was left or right-handed, their build and any scars, marks or tattoos. This

   form would have been completed with the Antecedents Form following the

   completion of a tape-recorded interview with the person. In addition, the IC code

   was always shown on the 1st page of the Suspect Offender Report.




56. During my time in the Security Team before the GLO, I do not recall a SPM.

   SPM assistant or Crown Office employee attributing a shortfall to problems with

   Horizon. Usually, the reason for an audit would have come from another team

   that had found some anomaly with the branch's transactions, for example.

   abnormal reversals or unusual Mail transactions, or how the branch was

   managing their cash, for example, cash in pouches not being despatched, cash

   not being returned when instructed or cash being requested when a branch was

   showing as holding sufficient cash.



57. When required, credence data would more than likely be used as that showed

   exactly the same information as ARQ data. As a rule, I am unsure if Horizon

   data (ARQ or Credence) was provided to the SPM as a matter of course,

   notwithstanding the disclosure obligation during a prosecution. As far as I recall

   my direct contact with Fujitsu was very little. Any request for ARQ data would

   have been via our Casework team.




                                       22
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




58. 1 have been asked by the Inquiry to what extent I considered Gareth Jenkins to

      be acting as an expert witness. whether I understood the rules governing

      independent expert evidence and who advised me in this regard. My

      understanding of Gareth Jenkins was as someone who would provide a witness

      statement on behalf of Fujitsu when ARQ data was required for court. He was

      the expert witness' and his statements went into detail of how the Horizon

      system operated which was far above my knowledge of the Horizon system or

      computers in general.



59.     The Security Team would request the ARQs where necessary for an

      investigation and if a statement was required one would be provided by Fujitsu.

      That was as far as my understanding of an `expert witness' went. I am not aware

      of any specific guidance given in regard to expert witnesses. The only other

      term I remember hearing, but in later years, was SME (Subject Matter Expert),

      which   took to be the same as expert witness as the Security team were told

      that once one had been located POL would continue with prosecutions. This

      would have been around 2014 (possibly) but I am unsure due to the passing of

      time.



60. The Inquiry has asked me about my understanding of the issues in Craigton

      branch and have referred me to the following documents FUJO0157001 (Email

      chain dated June 2018), FUJO0170865 (Email chain dated June 2018) and

      FUJO0170869 (Email chain dated June 2018). I do not believe I had any

      involvement in this matter other than I was copied into the email from Robert

      Daily (FUJ00170865). At that time, I was working in the Intel Team and along


                                         23
                                                                                  WITNO8290100
                                                                               WITN08290100




   with my colleague Andrew Wise would be in essence the admin function for the

   Security Team. We would have requested ARQ data from Fujitsu when required

   and therefore would have contacts at Fujitsu to email for any questions or

   requests like this. My understanding of the Scottish Legal system is that they

   refer to Witness Statements as Certificates. In this case it appears there was a

   Certificate that had been laid out in a different format to the usual Witness

   Statements I have seen supplied by Fujitsu when they produce ARQ data.



61. The Inquiry has provided me with document POL00141218 (Email chain dated

   July 2010) and asked me to explain my understanding of the issue concerning

   duplication of transactions in the ARQ data and any involvement I had in

   addressing this issue.   POL00141218 is an email sent from Jane Owen and

   forwarded on by Andrew Daley, the North Team Leader at that time. I do not

   recall the email and the branches were not ones I was involved in. From reading

   the document and the email from Penny Thomas my interpretation would be

   that the ARQ data could contain duplicate information and not the actual

   Horizon data.



62. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my responsibilities in respect of data

   handling processes. I did not have any responsibilities in respect of the data

   handling processes other than those of everyone who had a responsibility to

   safeguard the physical ARQ discs.



63. My role in the ARQ Disc handling process was only to explain to Moynd Uddin,

   Information Security Advisor, who was reviewing the POL Security Team


                                       24
                                                                                    WITN08290100
                                                                                  WITNO8290100




   process for managing the ARQs, what our green jacket process was and the

   way ARQ discs were handled.       It was not to explain the data or what was

   contained on them (POL00122769 - Email chain dated September 2013). The

   Inquiry has provided me with the following documents POL00122770 (Process

   for secure storage and management of exhibits obtained in the course of an

   investigation conducted by Post Office Limited). POL00122771 (Security

   Investigations Manager's Data Handling Process — Fujitsu Horizon Data

   Request), POL00122773 (Email chain dated September 2013), POL00122774

   (Security Investigations Manager's Data Handling Process — Fujitsu Horizon

   Data Request), POL00122928 (Email chain dated October 2013) and

   POL0010522.2 (Security Investigations Manager's Data Handling Process —

   Fujitsu Horizon Data Request dated 20 September 2013) which also appear to

   relate to this process and the review by Moynd Uddin.


64. The Inquiry has also provided me with four other documents related to ARQ

   data; POL00123286 (Email chain dated May 2014), FUJ00169529 (Email chain

   dated July 2016), FUJ00169557 (Email chain dated July 2016) and

   FUJ00170186 (Email chain dated December 2016).                    1 cannot recall

   P0L00123286, dated 02 May 2014 from Jane Bradbury, or POL00105222

   (noted above). I am aware due to my current role in the Intelligence Team of

   the process for requesting ARQ data and the annual allowance laid down by

   the   contract   between   POL    and    Fujitsu.   I   believe   that   in   2014

   investigations/prosecutions were on the decline if not ceased because the SME

   had not been found and investigations that were open were being closed as No

   Further Action (NFA). I recall I had one investigation where I was due to obtain

   a Summons but was instructed not to continue. I cannot recall which case this

                                      W
                                                                                     WITNO8290100
                                                                                  WITN08290100




   was. From speaking to other investigators at the time they were experiencing

   this also. FUJ00169529, FUJ00169557 and FUJO0170186 are emails from my

   current role and relate to my team's responsibility of requesting ARQ data from

       Fujitsu.



65. The Inquiry has asked me to consider POL00121881 (Email chain dated July

   2012) and describe my understanding of Jane Owen's concern that POL was

   failing in its process for the retention and destruction of ARQ requests. My

       understanding is that this was about the physical discs and not the data they

   contained.
   r




             •




                    •




66. l cannot recall exactly when but around 2014 POL outsourced their Criminal

       Law team to Cartwright King. Previously Mr Jarnail Singh was the last

       remaining POL Lawyer. Therefore, any advice on criminal cases that would

       have gone to Mr Singh now went to Cartwright King.         dealt with Mr Martin

   Smith mainly. This was usually if I needed advice on a case or if he needed

       clarification on a statement or some additional information.



67. Over the next few years Cartwright King supplied training at their Birmingham

   offices for the Security Team. I believe some of the training was Interviewing.

   dealing with Solicitors at interview and notebooks. There were probably other

       training topics, but I can no longer remember them. Cartwright King would also

       provide barristers for cases when needed.




                                          W
                                                                                        WITNO8290100
                                                                                      WITN08290100




68. The Inquiry has provided me with document POL00129192 (Email from Allison

      Drake, dated 14 January 2012) in which Alison Drake notes that I will act as a

      stand in to support with training by Cartwright King. I can no longer recall this

      email or the specific training but as I worked in Future Walk, a POL HQ building,

      where there is a counter training classroom, I would have possibly arranged

      training for Cartwright King with a trainer and/or I would have greeted them at

      reception and taken the classroom. I would not have delivered any training.




69. My involvement in this case was as 2nd Officer. This role was one of support

      to the lead officer (1 Et Officer). Depending on the 1st Officer the 2nd Officer may



      paperwork has been completed at each stage of the interview to adhere to the




70. During the interview the 2nd Officer listens to the questions and replies to ensure

      both are communicating efficiently. For example, an answer being given by the

      interviewee may need clarification or lead to another question that the

      interviewer has not picked up on.



71.     I did not normally work with Mr Robert Daily due to him being based in

      Scotland. I believe this was a rare occasion for me to be assisting him. I would

      have been made aware of the location, date and time of the interview and would

      have attended accordingly.

                                           M
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




72. As I was only the 2nd Officer, I did not have any dealings with the case prior to

   interview or subsequently post interview, other than to provide a witness

   statement (POL00047290) as to my involvement on the day.



73. The Inquiry has asked me for my reflections on the way the investigation and

   prosecution of Mr Holmes was conducted by Post Office with regard to the

   Court of Appeal Judgment in Josephine Hamilton & Others v Post Office

   Limited. From what I can recall I did not have any concerns with the way the

   investigation was run at the time and as 2nd Officer I would have had limited

   involvement in the investigation.




74. I do not recall how I first became involved in the case. The usual procedure

   was for a case to be given to an Investigator by the Security Team Leader.

   Following an audit shortage, the decision to conduct a criminal investigation

   into the loss would be taken by the Security Team leader and the Contracts

   Team. It would then be allocated to an Investigator.



75. In this case I was what was known as the 1St Officer or Lead Investigator.

   Various data would have been obtained from Credence, which gives the same

   data as ARQ but is immediately accessible to download rather than having to

   request from Fujitsu. Credence data covers the 3-month period prior to the

   current date. It's also easier to read than the ARQ data as the Item Long name'

   is shown rather than just an item ID. From Credence you can obtain

   transactional data and event data (back-office items).

                                       ►M.
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




76. The Investigation Report (Legal) (POL00047152) would have been written

   after   the   interview,   from   which   a   typed   summary    was    produced

   (POL00129785). An investigation report (Discipline) would also have been

   produced. The typed summary and discipline report were passed to the PM by

   the Contract Team.



77. With any investigation there would be a number of things that had to be

   completed one being the person not to be employed' form. This would have

   been emailed to Royal Mail for them to record on their system. This list would

   have been checked by HR for future applicants. I am unsure of the process

   other than completing the form.



78. I do not recall the call but from the Investigation Report (POL00047152) it

   makes reference to me having a telephone call with Ms Henderson inviting her

   to a tape-recorded interview and explaining what that meant, including her right

   to have a Solicitor present. I suggested she speaks with her NFSP

   representative, this was their union as she could have a representative present

   at the interview. After the call I posted a letter to her detailing what I had

   explained on the telephone. This would have been standard practice.


79. In order to progress the investigation, the next step was to interview Ms

   Henderson. The timing of the interview is down to the Lead Investigator. It was

   standard procedure to have a 2nd Officer at all interviews. In this case it was my

   colleague Mr Paul Whittaker. I can see that in Ms Henderson's witness

   statement (WITNO1460100) she states, l was allowed to bring my Federation

                                        29
                                                                                      WITNO8290100
                                                                                    WITN08290100




   rep, but he was not allowed to speak during the interview.' As part of PO rules,

   a person being interviewed can have someone from the union present, this is

   only to act as an observer. They are told at the start of the interview of their

   role. They may be permitted to speak if it helps facilitate the interview.


80. Disclosure would only be made to a solicitor not the suspect so that the solicitor

   could advise their client.


81. The Inquiry has asked me to consider POL00047155 (Memo from Rob G

   Wilson to Maureen Moors dated 25 March 2010) and POL00044501 (Memo

   from Chris Knight dated 20 April 2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)) and explain why

   I considered Ms Henderson would have been aware of the loss when

   completing her branch trading statement on 6 January 2010. I considered Ms

   Henderson would have been aware because previous cash declarations had

   shown an initial loss which was similar to the final loss at audit, but no difference

   was shown.


82. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details of any legal advice I obtained

   during the course of the investigation. Legal advice was sort as part of the

   investigation case file submission to progress the case to prosecution. It may

   also be requested if other enquiries were required. This file would have been

   submitted to the Legal Team so they could advise if further actions were

   required or if not then, to see if there was sufficient evidence to charge. On

   some occasions, although I do not believe in this case, legal advice would be

   sort if a situation arose whereby the investigator needed legal advice on a

   specific problem.    For example, this could be advice on getting a person

   arrested, or what to do if a person refused to sign an investigation form.

                                        30
                                                                                  WITNO8290100
                                                                                WITN08290100




83. The charges in this case were provided by the Legal Team, as was the

   charging decision in any investigation case. If the advice from the Legal Team

   was to continue to prosecution, then the DAM decision would be sort and if that

   was given then the investigator would obtain the Summons.


84. In order to obtain a Summons, I would contact the nearest Magistrates Listing

   Office and explained I was looking to book a Court date for a private

   prosecution. I would be given a date approximately six weeks ahead. Once a

   date was booked, I would post the Summons (3 copies; Defendant copy, File

   copy and a Court copy), an Information Sheet and a covering letter. All of these

   documents were from templates created locally, not Court produced templates.


85. As noted above, from memory I considered Ms Henderson would have been

   aware of the loss before the audit as there had been cash declarations for the

   previous month which showed a similar loss figure to that found in the

   subsequent audit. In response to Rob Wilson's memo POL00047155 (Memo

   from Rob G Wilson to Maureen Moors dated 25 March 2010) I replied to him

   on 20 April 2010 (POL00044501- Memo from Chris Knight dated 20 April 2010

   (Ms All ison Henderson). In my report I refer to the fact that the branch is only

   open 3 days a week and that the transactions are small with the largest being

   £400. From the previous Branch Trading (BT) on 6th January 2010 to the audit

   on 10th February 2010 the loss of £12k had occurred if Ms Henderson was to

   be believed that the BT was correct on 6th January and not falsified.


86. I considered Ms Henderson had adjusted balancing figures hiding a loss and

   was there by false accounting. From the defence statement (POL00047195)


                                      31
                                                                                     WITN08290100
                                                                                  WITNO8290100




      there was an acceptance of false accounting although the revised Defence

      Statement did not mention this (POL00044503). I cannot recall if I had sight of

      either one or both of the defence statements.




87.      There is mention in Rob Wilson's email date 16 November 2010

      (POL00055783) that he had `taken instruction from Chris who has confirmed

      that he would be happy to proceed on this basis.' I cannot recall the

      conversation or email exchange, but I would have taken this from Rob Wilson

      as merely a courtesy and not him requesting legal advice, a business decision

      or similar from me.



88. In most investigation cases unless there was a trial, I would not attend Court

      hearings or sentencing. I have done on occasions, but this was in the early days

      of becoming an investigator to gain experience. My role as an investigator was

      to provide information/evidence that enabled a case to progress to Court. POL

      Legal would manage the liaison with external Solicitors as seen in this case and

      decisions on charges or pleas would be down to those parties.



89. Once a case had been finalised at Court, and the appointed Solicitor/Law firm

      reported the final outcome, POL legal would send the result on the usual

      template as a memo (POL00047170- Memo, dated 16 December 2010, (Ms

      Allison Henderson)).




                                         32
                                                                                       WITNO8290100
                                                                                     WITN08290100




    90. The debt (branch shortage) would have been sent to the Agent Debt team from

       the audit and they would hold the loss against the PM for the branch. In this

       case the debt was paid. I would not be involved in this process.


    91. The Inquiry has asked me for my reflections on the way the investigation and

       prosecution of Ms Henderson was conducted by post office with regard to the

       Court of Appeal Judgment in Josephine Hamilton & Others v Post Office

       Limited. From what I can recall I did not have any concerns with the way the

       investigation was completed at the time.

l     IuiUt[.]ii.1itL-1.iiI flu


    92. I do not recall how I first became involved in this case and assume it was

       through the usual process where a case would be given to an investigator by

       the Team Leader. This process followed an audit shortage where the decision

       to conduct a criminal investigation into the loss had been taken by the Security

       Team leader and the Contracts Team. It would then be allocated to an

       Investigator.



    93. In this case I was what was known as the 1Gt Officer or Lead Investigator. That

       means that you lead on the enquiry and build the case up to the point where it

       is submitted for legal advice. This role includes conducting interviews, gathering

       intelligence (banking information, credit checks), searches (if required) and

       taking witness statements.



    94. From the audit the loss would be known and any comments of why there was

       a loss may have been told to the auditors by the PM. As lead investigator it


                                           33
                                                                                    WITNO8290100
                                                                                  WITN08290100




      would be my job to look at those comments and also see if there was an

      explanation.



95. In this case I can see from the Investigation Report (legal) (POL00091063)

      that after writing to Miss Hall to arrange a tape-recorded interview and

      explaining her legal rights she phoned me and said she would like a Solicitor. I

      advised her to contact a criminal law solicitor. A week later Mr Paul

      Normandale, Solicitor with Inesons of Cleckheaton, called me and we arranged

      to conduct the interview at his office.


96. The decision to interview Miss Hall would have been mine and as with all

      interviews it was standard procedure to have a 2nd Officer. In this case it was

      my colleague Mr Paul Whittaker.


97. There would have been no pre-interview disclosure to Miss Hall, but her

      Solicitor would have had the disclosure.



98.      Miss Hall comments in her Witness Statement (WITNO1450100) `the

      Investigators were Christopher Night and Paul Whittaker, they were not

      interested in my material and refused to look at it?" From the typed tape

      summary (POL00090842) just after the time marker 42:27 I refer to some

      paperwork that Miss Hall had brought but I was not in a position to look at but

      would take it away. From the email from Neil Throneycroft dated 14 October

      2010 (UKO100001595) he mentions he has `just finished discussing Hightown

      with Chris Knight'. I do not recall this conversation but from the date of the




                                           34
                                                                                 WITN08290100
                                                                               WITNO8290100




   interview with Miss Hall and the date of this document I would assume I asked

   Mr Thorneycroft about the paperwork Miss Hall supplied at interview.



99. 1 contacted NBSC to see if Miss Hall had made contact for help with losses or

   scratchcards because if she was having problems with them, as she had said.

   I would expect some calls reporting this and/or asking for help. However, there

   were none.


100. 1 contacted a member of the Product & Branch Accounting Team's Lottery

   Team, Neil Thorneycroft, as Mr Thorneycroft dealt with transaction correction

   and other issues between branches and the Lottery product. He was very

   knowledgeable about Lottery transactions and so was the best person to liaise

   with to get information that would assist my understanding of issues that may

   have caused the shortage in branch as Miss Hall had suggested.



101. I cannot recall if I was aware that the branch had been attended by an Area

   Intervention Manager but having read the document POL00091122 (Area

   Intervention Manager Visit (Ms Alison Hall)) if I had I would not have been a

   concerned as although the branch had an issue, they had received some

   support and the matter was rectified. The total visit time 35mins. Although the

   `details of visit' show 'horizon problem' this appears to be a user issue on the

   Horizon system.



102. As with all investigation cases the Contract Team Manager dealt with the

   contract side. In this case it was Mrs Sue Muddeman (POL00091104- Case

   notes for conduct suspension cases (Ms Alison Hall)). From the date of the

                                      35
                                                                                    WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




   document, 15 October 2010, I would consider that this had no bearing on the

   investigation case.


103. I cannot recall the details of this investigation but as with all investigation

   cases this case would be sent to POL's Legal Team at the point when the lead

   investigator was seeking advice, which was usually advice on charges. The

   charges would then be decided by the Legal Team.


104. Once the Legal Team had advised that the evidence was sufficient for the

   charges the case would be referred to the DAM for a decision on whether to

   proceed with the prosecution. i had no input.


105. If there was advice for prosecution, I would await any questions or tasks (i.e.,

   further statements) from the Legal Team. I would obtain a Summons from the

   relevant Court and serve this, usually by post.


106. As mentioned previously in this statement the investigator would comply

   with their disclosure obligation by completing various PO SEC disclosure




107. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the circumstances in which a plea was

   offered and any discussions within the Post Office in respect of whether the

   plea was acceptable. The Inquiry has also asked me to confirm any

   involvement I had in this decision and any conditions that were attached. I

   have reviewed document POL00019111 and can see I was contacted by

   Adrian Chaplin (by phone). I do not recall this conversation but assume he

   would have contacted me because he could not get hold of Mr Wilson. It was


                                       36
                                                                                     WITNO8290100
                                                                                WITN08290100




   unusual for me to speak to a barrister direct and I would not have authority to

   negotiate or agree any charges, or any conditions related to those charges. I

   can only presume that I would have been aware of the agreed position that

   had been taken by POL and would have confirmed that with Mr Chaplin when

   he contacted me. Document POL00091374, a letter to Mr Wi lson from

   O'Garras (writing on behalf of Adrian Chaplin), appears to be an update

   following the Court appearance. This again notes the conversation I had with

   Mr Chaplin. Although it appears in the letter as though I have agreed the plea,

   I would not have been involved in this decision. I expect would have been

   made aware of the decision by Rob Wilson and so when Mr Chaplin

   telephoned me, I would have reiterated POL.'s position. I would have had no

   involvement in making this decision. I have never had any involvement in

   making a plea deal or applying conditions to such a deal and this would be

   outside of my remit as an investigator. I note that in the previous case with Ms

   Henderson, and in document P0L00055783 (Email chain, dated November

   2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)), Mr Wilson notes "Clearly if there were to be a

   plea to false accounting but on the basis that the Horizon system was at fault

   that would not be an acceptable basis of plea for the prosecution." I was

   copied into this email and expect I would have had a similar knowledge in this

   case as Mr Wilson is likely to have kept me aware of progress with the

   prosecution.



108. The Inquiry has asked me to explain my involvement in any enforcement

   proceedings brought in this case. I can confirm that any enforcement

   proceedings, be that recovery under the Proceed of Crime Act or by civil


                                      37
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITNO8290100




   action, would have been dealt with by our Financial Investigator in conjunction

   with the legal team or the Agent Debt Teamn respectively. I would have no

   involvement.



109. Once the verdict of the court case had been communicated to me, I would

   have closed the investigation file with no further action on my part.


110. The Inquiry has asked me for my reflections on the way the investigation

   and prosecution of Ms Hall was conducted by post office with regard to the

   Court of Appeal Judgment in Josephine Hamilton & Others v Post Office

   Limited. From what I can recall I did not have any concerns with the way the

   investigation was completed at the time




111. I have been asked to consider FUJ00190471 (Email chain dated January

   2017) and explain my understand of the issue being discussed and any

   involvement I had in relation to this issue. I can confirm I am not aware of this

   document, or the subject discussed within it. I would suggest that the email

   dated 24 January 2017 from David M Jones to a number of people and cc'd to

   others does not include myself. Due to the layout of the emails, I would suggest

   that the cc's are 'Jay, Christopher' and then Knight, Miriam'. Due to spacing it

   does look like I am a recipient `Christopher Knight'. My email address is actually

   Christopher G Knight.



112. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the purpose of POL00114558 (Memo

   from Christopher G Knight to training team (undated)) and the reasons why I


                                       38
                                                                                   WITNO8290100
                                                                                 WITN08290100




   wrote it. This document was written when I was working in Cash Handling &

   Distribution (CH&D). I do not remember writing it due to the passage of time

   (circa 2000-2004) but the content and focus appears to be to enhance Cash

   Value in Transit (CViT) crew training as I seem to recall we were always

   reiterating the need to check the integrity of cash pouches collected from both

   Post Office branches and (at that time) retail premises. The cash pouches had

   a tamper proof seal that if there was an attempt to pull it apart it showed the

   word void'. Sometimes when sealing the pouch, the person did not align the

   seal and would try and lift and reseal, this could make the word void' appear.

   So, the crewman collecting pouches was to check the serial number and also

   to check the seal and general integrity of the pouch.


113. The checking of the pouch and seal was also taught to the Cash Centre staff

   who ultimately opened the pouch to process the contents. As part of their

   compliance, they were supposed to cut open the pouch at the opposite end to

   the seal. They were also not supposed to just pull (rip) the pouch apart.


114. I have been asked by the Inquiry to consider POL00141237 (Email chain

   dated September 2010) and explain whether I considered theft and false

   accounting to be alternative charges and why I considered that it would make

   things simpler to accept a guilty plea to false accounting and drop the theft

   charge.   In relation to document POL00141237, an email exchange between

   Juliet McFarland and myself, I can see I am asking if it would be easier to accept

   a False Accounting charge as the PM admitted this and had repaid the

   discrepancy. The choice of charges was always made by the Legal Team.




                                       39
                                                                                        WITNO8290100
                                                                                     WITN08290100




   115. I have been asked by the Inquiry to consider POL00145852 (Email from Dave

       Posnett to Jarnail Singh dated 7 August 2013) and describe the discussions I

       had with the Barrister in question about 'Horizon issues' and whether I had any

      discussions with POL about this issue. In relation to the document, I do not

       recall the conversation(s) with the Barrister. This was a Police investigation and

      so I am assuming it is a CPS Barrister. In the document i mention advising the

       Barrister to look at 2nd Sight reporting about Horizon matters. The email goes

      on to say I was meeting the Barrister. I would have put him in touch with Jarnail

      Singh, PO Legal Team and / or Martin Smith, Cartwright King, as issues with

       Horizon / 2nd Sight report were out of my sphere of knowledge.


   116. I do not recall being aware of any robust challenges to Horizon (other than

      the GLO). I dealt with a number of people who admitted their dishonesty and

      so the integrity of Horizon was not at the forefront of my mind. The business

       message was consistent that Horizon was robust so there was never any doubt

      in my mind. I remember that latterly (approx. 2010/2011) that we (the

      investigators) were advised that if someone we were interviewing said the loss

      was due to Horizon, we were to ask how this manifested and obtain details from

      them. We were also asked to cover in the interview what training they had

       received.



   117. There are no other matters I consider to be of relevance to the Inquiry's Terms

      of Reference.



Statement of Truth
I believe the content of this statement to be true.
                                                        WITNO8290100
                                                      WITNO82901 00




Signed.......!     GRD
Date.........23/11/2023.......................




                                                 41
                                                                              WITN08290100
                                                                           WITNO8290100




Na   URN           Document Description                      Control Number
1    POL00129261   CV of Christopher G Knight                POL-0134971
2    POL00127128   One to One Meeting Record                 POL-0133353
                   12/09/2013
3    POL00127129   One to One Meeting Record                 POL-0133354
                   30/10/2013
4    POL00127237   One to One Meeting Record                 POL-0133427
                   12/03/2014
5    POL00104747   Casework Management Policy                POL-0080887
                   (version 1.0, March 2000)
6    POL00104777   Casework Management Policy                POL-0080417
                    version 4.0, October 2002)
7    POL00104754   Rules and Standards Policy (version       POL-0080394
                   2.0, October 2000)
8    POL00030687   Investigation Procedures Policy           POL-0027169
                   (version 2.0, January 2001)
9    POL00104762   Disclosure Of Unused Material,            POL-0080402
                   Criminal Procedures and
                   Investigations Act 1996 Codes of
                   Practice Policy (version 1.0, May
                   2001)
10   POL00030578   Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal             POL-0027060
                   Investigation and Prosecution Policy"
                   (1 December 2007)
11   POL00104812   Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal             POL-0080444
                   Investigation and Prosecution Policy"
                    1 December 2007
12   POL00104806   Royal Mail Group Security -               POL-0080438
                   Procedures & Standards - Standards
                   of Behaviour and Complaints
                   Procedure" (version 2, October 2007)
13   POL00031003   Royal Mail Group Crime and                POL-0027485
                   Investigation Policy" (version 1.1,
                   October 2009)
14   POL00030580   Post Office Ltd - Security Policy -       POL-0027062
                   Fraud Investigation and Prosecution
                   Policy" (version 2, 4 April 2010)
15   POL00030579   Post Office Ltd Financial Investigation   POL-0027061
                   Policy" (4 May 2010)
16   POL00104848   Royal Mail Group Security —               POL-0080480
                   Procedures & Standards: "Appendix 1
                   to P&S 9.5 Disclosure of Unused
                   Material & The Criminal Procedure &
                   Investigations Act 1996"(Version 1,

                                  42
                                                                             WITN08290100
                                                                           WITNO8290100




                   July 2010)
17   POL00104837   Royal Mail Group Security —               POL-0080469
                   Procedures & Standards: "Committal
                   & Summary Trial Papers &
                   Processes" (Version 1, July 2010)
18   POL00026573   Royal Mail Group Security -               POL-0023214
                   Procedures & Standards - The
                   Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 &
                   Financial Investigations" (version 1,
                   September 2010)
19   POL00104857   Royal Mail Group Security -               POL-0080489
                   Procedures & Standards - Initiating
                   Investigations" (September 2010)
20   POL00031008   Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal             POL-0027490
                   Investigation and Prosecution Policy"
                   (version 1.1, November 2010)
21   POL00104853   Post Office Ltd Financial Investigation   POL-0080485
                   Policy (version 2, February 2011)
22   POL00104855   Post Office Ltd Anti-Fraud Policy         POL-0080487
                   (February 2011)
23   POL00030786   Royal Mail Group Policy Crime and         POL-0027268
                   Investigation S2" (version 3.0, April
                   2011)
24   POL00105229   Post Office Ltd PNC Security              POL-0080854
                   Operating Procedures" (August 2012)
25   POL00104929   Post Office Limited: Internal Protocol    POL-0080561
                   for Criminal Investigation and
                   Enforcement (with flowchart)",
                   (October 2012)
26   POL00105226   Undated Appendix 1 - POL Criminal         POL-0080851
                   Investigations and Enforcement
                   Procedure (flowchart)",
                   (October 2012)
27   POL00104968   The undated document entitled "POL        POL-0080600
                   — Enforcement & Prosecution Policy"
28   POL00030602   "Post Office Limited: Criminal            POL-0027084
                   Enforcement and Prosecution Policy"
                   (undated)
29   POL00122143   "Security Operations" (version 1.0,       POL-0128387
                   December 2012)
30   POL00122142   Email from Andrew Daley to                POL-0128386
                   Christopher G Knight 20/02/2013
31   POL00031005   "Conduct of Criminal Investigations       POL-0027487
                   Policy" (version 0.2, 29 August 2013)
32   POL00027863   "Conduct of Criminal Investigations       POL-0024504
                   Policy" (version 3, 10 February 2014)
33   POL00030902   "Conduct of Criminal Investigations       POL-0027384
                   Policy" (September 2018)
34   POL00104900   Separation Project — Criminal             POL-0080532

                                  43
                                                                           WITN08290100
                                                                         WITNO8290100




                   Investigations Policy for Post Office
                   Ltd
35   POLOO123309   Email from Dave Posnett dated           POL-0129508
                   09/07/2014
36   POL00123310   Royal Mail Group Security               POL-0129509
                   Investigation Communication 6-2014
                   — Joint investigation protocols RMGS
                   and PO Ltd security
37   POL00123311   RMG 2.2. Joint Investigation            POL-0129510
                   Protocols — RMGS and PO Ltd
                   Security July 2014
38   POL00123312   MOU on joint investigation protocols    POL-0129511
                   post independence involving Royal
                   Mail and Post Office Ltd security
39   POL00126976   Email from Dave Posnett dated           POL-0134075
                   11/09/2013
40   POL00123743   Email from Elaine Spencer dated         POL-0129929
                   31/07/2015
41   POL00123840   Email from John M Scott dated           POL-0130023
                   20/01/2016
42   POL00104821   "Condensed Guide for Audit              POL-0080453
                   Attendance" (version 2, October
                   2008)
43   POL00129302   "Security Team Training and             POL-0135198
                   Development Policy" (draft, undated,
                   version D1.2
44   POL00129192   Email from Allison Drake, dated 14      POL-0135120
                   January 2012
45   POL00129306   Email from Helen Dickinson to you       POL-0135200
                   and others, dated 11 March 2013
46   POL00129310   Email from Dave Posnett to you and      POL-0135204
                   others, dated 22 March 2013
47   POL00129311   Email invite from Dave Posnett for      POL-0135205
                   Cartwright King Training Day
48   POL00122419   Email from Andrew Scott to you and      POL-0127444
                   others, dated 19 April 2013
49   POL00122860   Email from Andrew Wise to you and       POL-0129089
                   others, dated 20 September 2013
50   POL00123042   Email from Andrew Wise to you and       POL-0129259
                   others, dated 11 November 2013
51   POL00127215   Email from Toni Sless to you and        POL-0133412
                   others dated 10 March 2014
52   POL00123282   Email from Andrew Wise to you and       POL-0129485
                   others, dated 25 April 2014
53   POL00122163   The Grapevine Analysis and Support      POL-0128406
                   Team slides
54   POL00118096   Dave Posnett's email dated 23 May       VIS00012685
                   2011
55   POL00118108   Security Operations Team — Case         VIS00012697

                                  44
                                                                           WITN08290100
                                                                         WITNO8290100




                   Compliance
56   POL00118109   Guide to the Preparation and Layout     VIS00012698
                   of Investigation Red Label Case Files
                   — File construction and Appendices A,
                   B & C.
57   POL00118101   Guide to the Preparation and Layout     VIS00012690
                   of Investigation Red Label Case Files
                   — Offender reports & Discipline
                   reports
58   POL00118102   Offence Form                            VIS00012691
59   POL00118103   Offence Form                            VIS00012692
60   POL00118104   Identification Codes                    VIS00012693
61   POL00118105   Summarising of Tape Recorded            VIS00012694
                   Interviews Guidance
62   POL00118106   Notebooks Guidance                      VIS00012695
63   POL00118107   Electronic Casework document            VIS00012696
64   POL00121881   Email chain dated July 2012             POL-0128140
65   FUJ00169529   Email chain dated Jul 2016              POINQ0175710F
66   FUJ00169557   Email chain dated Jul 2016              POINQ0175738F
67   FUJ00170186   Email chain dated December 2016         POINQ0176367F
68   FUJ00187984   Email chain dated December 2016         POINQ0193701F
69   FUJ00206093   Email chain dated April 2019            POINQ0211814F
70   FUJ00154984   Email chain dated December 2010         POINQ0161179F
71   FUJ00224959   Email chain dated January 2010          POINQ0231074F
72   FUJ00226002   Email chain dated June 2012             POINQ0232119F
73   POL00055189   Memo from Rob G Wilson to               POL-0051668
                   Christopher G Knight dated 19 August
                   2010
74   FUJO0157001   Email chain dated June 2018             POINQ0163196F
75   FUJ00170865   Email chain dated June 2018             POINQ0177046F
76   FUJ00170869   Email chain dated June 2018             POINQ0177050F
77   POL00141218   Email chain dated July 2010             POL-0143659
78   POL00122769   Email chain dated September 2013        POL-0128998
79   POL00122770   Process for secure storage and          POL-0128999
                   management of exhibits obtained in
                   the course of an investigation
                   conducted by Post Office Limited
80   POL00122771   Security Investigations Manager's       POL-0129000
                   Data Handling Process — Fujitsu
                   Horizon Data Request
81   POL00122773   Email chain dated September 2013        POL-0129002
82   POL00122774   Security Investigations Manager's       POL-0129003
                   Data Handling Process — Fujitsu
                   Horizon Data Request
83   POL00122928   Email chain dated October 2013          POL-0129156
84   POL00105222   Security Investigations Manager's       POL-0080847
                   Data Handling Process — Fujitsu
                   Horizon Data Request dated 20

                                 45
                                                                                WITN08290100
                                                                              WITNO8290100




                     September 2013
85    POL00123286    Email chain dated May 2014                 POL-0123286
86    POL00060805    Audit report of 18 September 2008          POL-0057284
                     (Mr Peter Holmes)
87    POL00050208    Transcripts of the interviews on 19        POL-0046687
                     September 2008 (from 14:11 to
                     14:56) (Mr Peter Holmes)
88    POL00050847    Transcripts of the interviews on 19        POL-0047326
                     September 2008 (from 15:06 to
                     15:50) (Mr Peter Holmes)
89    POL00050334    Investigation report (legal), dated 6      POL-0046813
                     October 2008 (Mr Peter Holmes)
90    POL00128950    Investigation report (legal), dated 30     POL-0134173
                     January 2009 (Mr Peter Holmes)
91    POL00050255    Suspect offender reporting form (Mr        POL-0046734
                     Peter Holmes)
92    POL00050997    Schedule of Charges (Mr Peter              POL-0047476
                     Holmes)
93    POL00047290    Witness statement of Christopher           POL-0043769
                     Knight, dated 19 May 2009 (Mr Peter
                     Holmes)
94    POL00054727    Financial Investigation Events Log         POL-0051206
                     (Mr Peter Holmes)
95    POL00054790    Case closure reporting (Mr Peter           POL-0051269
                     Holmes)
96    POL00113278    Judgment of the Court of Appeal in         POL-0110657
                     Josephine Hamilton & Others v Post
                     Office Limited [2021 EWCA Grim 577
97    POL00047152    Investigation report (legal) (Ms Allison   POL-0043631
                     Henderson)
98    POL00129785    Interview transcript, dated 11 March       POL-0123811
                     2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)
99    POL00047227    Final branch trading statement, dated      POL-0043706
                     6 January 2010 (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
100   POL00047183    Extract of the transaction report (Ms      POL-0043662
                     Allison Henderson)
101   POL00065009_   `Person not to be employed' memo           POL-
      011            (Ms Allison Henderson)                     0061488011
102   POL00044501    Memo from Chris Knight dated 20            POL-0040980
                     April 2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)
103   POL00047159    Memo from Rob Wilson dated 21 May          POL-0043638
                     2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)
104   POL00047162    Memo from Rob Wilson dated 26 May          POL-0043641
                     2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)
105   POL00065009_   Email from Christopher Knight dated        POL-
      010            12 July 2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)        0061488010
106   POL00047193    Summons, dated 12 August 2010,             POL-0043672
                     (Ms Allison Henderson)

                                     46
                                                                              WITNO8290100
                                                                            WITNO8290100




107   POL00125643    Committal bundle, dated 27               POL-0131312
                     September 2010, (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
108   UKG100014627   Memo from Rob Wilson to Chris            UKG1025420-001
                     Knight, dated 29 September 2010,
                     (Ms Allison Henderson)
109   POL00055388    Letter from Hugh A Cauthery              POL-0051867
                     solicitors to Rob Wilson, dated 7
                     October 2010 (Ms Allison Henderson)
110   POL00055542    Advice on evidence, dated 14             POL-0052021
                     October 2010, (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
111   POL00125641    Summary of facts (Ms Allison             POL-0131310
                     Henderson)
112   POL00125644    Bundle of witness statements (Ms         POL-0131313
                     Allison Henderson)
113   POL00125646    List of exhibits (Ms Allison             POL-0131315
                     Henderson)
114   POL00125639    Antecedents form (Ms Allison             POL-0131308
                     Henderson)
115   POL00055495    Schedule of Non-Sensitive Unused         POL-0051974
                     Material, dated 24 September 2010
                     (Ms Allison Henderson)
116   POL00047195    Defence statement (Ms Allison            POL-0043674
                     Henderson)
117   POL00055787    Letter from Belmores Solicitors, dated   POL-0052266
                     16 November 2010 (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
118   POL00044503    Amended defence statement (Ms            POL-0040982
                     Allison Henderson)
119   POL00055783    Email chain, dated November 2010         POL-0052262
                     (Ms Allison Henderson)
120   POL00047169    Memo from Rob Wilson, dated 18           POL-0043648
                     November 2010 (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
121   POL00055837    Letter from Miss Andrews to Hugh A       POL-0052316
                     Cauthery Solicitors, dated 25
                     November 2010, (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
122   POL00046148    Factual basis/application for a          POL-0042627
                     Goodyear indication (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
123   POL00055853    Attendance note, dated 1 December        POL-0052332
                     2010, (Ms Allison Henderson)
124   POL00055890    Letter from Hugh A Cauthery              POL-0052369
                     Solicitors to Rob Wilson, dated 15
                     December 2010 (Ms Allison
                     Henderson)
125   POL00047170    Memo, dated 16 December 2010, (Ms        POL-0043649

                                    47
                                                                              WITN08290100
                                                                            WITNO8290100




                     Allison Henderson)
126   POL00047155    Memo from Rob G Wilson to Maureen        POL-0043634
                     Moors dated 25 March 2010
127   WITN01460100   Allison Henderson's witness              WITN01460100
                     statement to the Inquiry
128   POL00127621    Case closure report (Ms Alison Hall)     POL-0134386
129   POL00019111    Case file event log (Ms Alison Hall)     POL-0012303
130   POL00091063    Investigation report (legal) and audit   POL-0090707
                     report (Ms Alison Hall)
131   POL00016001    Legal rights form (Ms Alison Hall)       POL-0009193
132   POL00090842    Transcript of Ms Hall's interview,       POL-0090486
                     dated 28 September 2010,
                     commencing at 11:37 (Ms Alison Hall)
133   POL00091237    Transcript of Ms Hall's interview,       POL-0090881
                     dated 28 September 2010,
                     commencing at 12:25 (Ms Alison Hall)
134   POL00120439    NBSC call log (Ms Alison Hall)           POL-0120125
135   POL00091307    HSD call logs (16 May 2005 to 31         POL-0090951
                     August 2007) (Ms Alison Hall)
136   POL00021278    HSD call logs (19 September 2007 to      POL-0014470
                     23 September 2010); (Ms Alison Hall)
137   POL00091351    HSD summary (Ms Alison Hall)             POL-0090995
138   POL00091104    Case notes for conduct suspension        POL-0090748
                     cases (Ms Alison Hall)
139   POL00091257    Schedule of charges (Ms Alison Hall)     POL-0090901
140   POL00091014    Indictment (Ms Alison Hall)              POL-0090658
141   POL00091065    List of exhibits (Ms Alison Hall)        POL-0090709
142   POL00055290    Schedule of non-sensitive unused         POL-0051769
                     material (Ms Alison Hall)
143   POL00091239    Antecedents form (Ms Alison Hall)        POL-0090883
144   POL00091200    Letter from Sue Muddeman to Alison       POL-0090844
                     Hall, dated 24 September 2010 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
145   POL00091100    Email from Chris Knight to Sue           POL-0090744
                     Muddeman, dated 29 September
                     2010 (Ms Alison Hall)
146   POL00091333    Letter from Chris Knight dated 7         POL-0090977
                     October 2010 (Ms Alison Hall)
147   POL00091106    Interview notes, dated 8 October         POL-0090750
                     2010 (Ms Alison Hall)
148   POL00128077    Memo from Maureen Moors to the           POL-0134800
                     Criminal Law Team, dated 3
                     November 2010 (Ms Alison Hall)
149   UKG100001595   Email from Neil Thorneycroft, dated      UKG112409-001
                     14 October 2010 Ms Alison Hall)
150   POL00091103    Letter from Sue Muddeman to Alison       POL-0090747
                     Hall, dated 15 October 2010 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
151   POL00090992    Email chain dated 15 October 2010        POL-0090636

                                    48
                                                                           WITN08290100
                                                                         WITNO8290100




                     (Ms Alison Hall)
152   POL00090993    Email from Paul Southin dated 19      POL-0090637
                     October 2010 (Ms Alison Hall)
153   POL00091313    Letter from Alison Hall to Sue        POL-0090957
                     Muddeman, dated 25 October 2010
                     (Ms Alison Hall)
154   POL00128079    Memo from Maureen Moors to Chris      POL-0134802
                     Knight, dated 24 November 2010 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
155   UKG100001593   Email chain dated 30 November 2010    UKG1012407-001
                     (Ms Alison Hall)
156   POL00091111    Letter from Andy Bayfield to Alison   POL-0090755
                     Hall, dated 22 December 2010 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
157   POL00091260    Memo from Juliet McFarlane dated 31   POL-0090904
                     December 2010 (Ms Alison Hall)
158   POL00128080    Memo from Maureen Moors to Chris      POL-0134803
                     Knight, dated 5 January 2011 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
159   POL00091000    Email chain dated 5 January 2011      POL-0090644
                     (Ms Alison Hall)
160   POL00091244    Memo from Chris Knight, dated 25      POL-0090888
                     January 2011 (Ms Alison Hall)
161   POL00091258    Memo from Juliet McFarlane dated 3    POL-0090902
                     February 2011 (Ms Alison Hall)
162   POL00091300    Email from Dave Pardoe, dated 9       POL-0090944
                     February 2011 (Ms Alison Hall)
163   POL00091002    Information document (Ms Alison       POL-0090646
                     Hall), dated 2 March 2011
164   POL00091264    Memo from Debbie Helszajn to          POL-0090908
                     Maureen Moors (Ms Alison Hall)
165   POL00091234    Witness statement of Jess Roper       POL-0090878
                     (unsigned) (Ms Alison Hall)
166   POL00091215    Witness statement of Kimberley        POL-0090859
                     Langley (unsigned) dated 20 May
                     2011 (Ms Alison Hall)
167   POL00091045    Witness statement of Chris Knight     POL-0090689
                     (unsigned) dated 23 May 2011 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
168   POL00021311    Memo from Chris Knight to Debbie      POL-0014503
                     Helszajn, dated 26 May 2011 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
169   POL00091011    Email chain dated 23 June 2011 (Ms    POL-0090655
                     Alison Hall)
170   POL00021333    Email from Adrian Chaplin to Rob      POL-0014525
                     Wilson and Marilyn Benjamin, dated
                     28 June 2011 (Ms Alison Hall)
171   POL00021329    Email from Adrian Chaplin to Paul     POL-0014521
                     Southin and Rob Wilson, dated 30

                                   49
                                                                              WITN08290100
                                                                            WITNO8290100




                     June 2011 (Ms Alison Hall)
172   POL00091020    Note from Adrian Chaplin (undated)       POL-0090664
                     (Ms Alison Hall)
173   POL00091374    Letter from Tracey Langan to Rob         POL-0091018
                     Wilson, dated 30 June 2011 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
174   POL00091032    Memo from Phil Taylor to Post Office     POL-0090676
                     Security, dated 1 July 2011 (Ms
                     Alison Hall)
175   POL00091024    Email chain dated 24 February 2012       POL-0090668
                     (Ms Alison Hall)
176   POL00091077    Emails chain dated September 2012        POL-0090721
                     (Ms Alison Hall)
177   WITN01450100   First written statement of Alison Hall   WITN01450100
178   POL00091122    Area Intervention Manager Visit (Ms      POL-0090766
                     Alison Hall)
179   FUJ00190471    Email chain dated January 2017           POINQ0196188F
180   POL00114558    Memo from Christopher G Knight to        POL-0113664
                     training team (undated)
181   POL00141237    Email chain dated September 2010         POL-0142623
182   POL00145852    Email from Dave Posnett to Jarnail       POL-BSFF-
                     Singh dated 7 August 2013                004979
                                    m
