                                                                                          WI TNO5360100
                                                                                        WI TN05360100




                             Witness name: Rita Palmer

                             Statement Number: WITNO5360100

                             Dated: 19 December 2022


                          POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY


                    FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF RITA PALMER


I, Rita Palmer, will say as follows:

   1. This statement responds to a request for a written witness statement made to

       myself under the Inquiry Rules 2006 and concerns Phase 3 (Operation:

       training, assistance, resolution of disputes, knowledge and rectification of

       errors in the system) of the Inquiry.

   2. The Inquiry believes that I hold information relevant to the issues which will be

       investigated by the Inquiry. However, as it relates to events that occurred up

       to twenty-six years ago, there are areas that I cannot recall and in these

       cases I have said so.

   3. This statement has been drafted by myself and in my own words.

General

   4. I left school in 1976 with eight 'O' levels and went to Strode College where I

       studied for a Private Secretaries Certificate at college for two years. I then

       worked in admin roles for the local Council and Conservative MP until I joined

       Post Office Counters Ltd in 1980 to work as a counter clerk in Wells Post

       Office. I worked there for about 17 years, during which time I deputised for the

       Postmaster on occasions. When I started on the counter everything was

       manual and accounting was with books and pencils and there was no

       automation. In 1997 there was an opportunity to become a Trainer for which

                                       Page 1 of 15
                                                                                     WI TNO5360100
                                                                                  WI TN05360100




   applied and I was successful. I joined the Training team and between 1997

   and 2012 I had various roles, including Trainer, Training Manager, Audit and

   Training Manager. In 2012 I applied to be a Field Change Advisor as part of

   the Network Transformation project and I did this role until I left the Post

   Office in September 2016. I am unsure of the dates that I fulfilled each role.

5. When the Horizon system was introduced (I am unsure of dates) I completed

   my initial training on a one week course in Leeds before the system was rolled

   out to the whole Network. I had some computer knowledge as I had done

   some evening classes at Strode College to gain qualifications in Word, Excel

   and Powerpoint. I had no previous knowledge of the Horizon system until this

   training. The training I received was adequate for me to be able to

   understand the serving and report menus and I was able to increase my

   knowledge and confidence as I used it for training. I was quite comfortable

   using the Horizon system as I had a good knowledge of the manual

   processes and products so it felt quite intuitive. I also had support materials

   describing the processes step by step if there was anything I needed to

   clarify. As it was introduced, as a trainer I helped new postmasters

   understand how to use the system for serving customers and completing their

   accounting. I also delivered training on the Horizon system in a classroom

   setting to new postmasters and counter clerks.

6. My roles in relation to the Horizon system included training new postmasters

   and staff, to show and explain on Horizon how the customer serving and

   daily/weekly accounting processes were used in the day to day work. I took

   new users through the screens and buttons showing them how to serve

   different products and services and how to complete daily and weekly


                                   Page 2 of 15
                                                                                        WI TN05360100
                                                                                    WI TN05360100




      accounting. When the Training team and Audit team were joined together

      did both roles and Branch Horizon systems were used to check that the

      accounts balanced and all the stock and cash was correct at the time of audit.

      Personally I didn't feel that the roles of Trainer and Auditor were appropriate

      to combine. There are different skill sets required to train people to adapt to

      different learning styles, whilst completing an audit is more process driven and

      people skills are not so crucial. Some of the auditors were uncomfortable

      delivering training and likewise some trainers were not comfortable

      completing audits. It was a job role change that was a business decision that

      we had to implement but I did not feel it was a change for the better.


Roles in Relation to Training

   7. With 17 years of experience working on the Post Office counter I applied for

      the role as a Trainer covering the Bristol area. I completed an application

      form and had a successful interview. My training to become a trainer was

      initially shadowing a current trainer, and then being shadowed myself when

      delivering training. Training was scheduled centrally and I would be given

      notice of which branches I would be training on which dates. I can't

      remember clearly but I think when I started the training on site for new

      postmasters was two weeks and then two balances but I know that was

      reduced during the time I was a Trainer. As well as on site training I also

      delivered classroom training to both new postmasters and new Post Office

      clerks. When Horizon was introduced I received training on the system in

      Leeds before I trained on site. I was in a training role between 1997 and

      2012, initially onsite and classroom training, then I became a Training

      Manager, followed by Training and Audit Manager. The training schedule


                                     Page 3 of 15
                                                                                     WI TNO5360100
                                                                                  WI TN05360100




   centrally determined onsite and classroom training depending on the locations

   and the availability of trainers. I would not be able to estimate how many

   training courses I ran during that time. I did attend Train the Trainer courses

   and Training Skills courses during this time to update my own skills. These

   were generally internal courses but I think some were external although I

   cannot remember any qualifications received. I recall that some of the areas

   covered were Learning Styles and Objection Handling, as well as internal

   training when new products were introduced such as the Insurance products. I

   enjoyed learning about training and teaching as I felt that this added to my

   skills and benefitted my trainees. As this was so long ago I cannot recall

   specific feedback about the training or the Horizon system. I do recall that the

   feedback I received from my trainee was very positive and the support and

   help I gave during training was much appreciated. At the end of a course or

   onsite training feedback sheets were given for the trainees to complete

   feedback and give comments. As I recall these were put in an envelope and

   sent off so the feedback was anonymous. I am not sure when this was

   introduced.

8. I was a Training Manager for a few years, I can't recall the dates. During this

   time I line managed teams of trainers in the South West, in the centre of the

   South, and in South Wales. The names I can recall are Gaynor Davies, Paul

   Jones, Paul Holland, Haydi O'Brien, Alison Field, Craig Winks, Robert Hemes,

   Junaid Tanveer, Geoff Edwards, Kim Hobson, David Thomas. As best as I

   can recall the gist of the feedback received was always very positive as the

   trainees were pleased to get the support and help from the Trainer. Feedback




                                  Page 4 of 15
                                                                                     W I TNO5360100
                                                                                 WITN05360100




     was received from the anonymous feedback forms and was discussed at

     121's with the individual trainers.



The Training Programme

  9. When I started training I came under Bristol and the training we delivered was

     generally based on teaching how to complete the transactions based on our

     own knowledge. When the training was centralised, and I am not sure of the

     year that this happened, there was a Head of Training and then a group of

     Training Managers and trainers who were responsible for devising and

     updating the content and the materials for the classroom training and for use

     onsite. The training was offered to new postmasters and to new post office

     staff, and it was classroom and onsite. I delivered onsite and classroom. It

     was quite some time ago and over the period I was a Trainer/Training

     Manager the training offer changed quite a lot. It went from two weeks to one

     week, depending on what products the branch would be transacting. The

     onsite also reduced and instead of two follow up balances I think I remember

     when I left the follow up balance was a Trading Period one, although again I

     cannot recall fully. Classroom training was a maximum of 6 delegates due to

     the number of Horizon terminals in the classrooms, although these courses I

     found generally were not at maximum capacity, and sometimes only two or

     three delegates. Onsite the training was for the new postmaster, although

     towards the end of my time as a Trainer/Training Manager, some of the post

     offices had multiple new members of staff to be trained. In these cases there

     was a tick list for each member of staff to remember what they had learnt as

     they tended to work shifts so would not be in attendance for the whole training


                                     Page 5 of 15
                                                                                     WI TN05360100
                                                                                   WI TN05360100




   period. The classroom content started with understanding Horizon and the

   screens, then covered the most common transactions, such as mails, learning

   how to process through Horizon and using practical examples. There was

   extra days added for branches that issued car tax and passports as this was

   not applicable for every trainee. There was time built in for discussing

   customer service and upselling products. Also there would be end of day

   accounting and balancing practice. Every trainee had different levels of ability

   and the classroom training gave them a start and an introduction but I don't

   feel it was enough on its own, so the onsite support that followed was really

   important. This was when they had the opportunity to put into practice the

   basics that they had learnt. Facing real customers and real transactions is

   very different to learning in a classroom.

10. As an onsite trainer, if I thought my trainee was going to struggle when left on

   their own, there was an option for me to flag for some extra training,

   dependent on the availability of resources_ During the onsite training I would

   assess how well my postmaster was dealing with transactions, product

   knowledge, daily reports, etc. and if I felt that they were struggling there was a

   possibility of asking for some extra training if there was resource available on

   the training schedule_ If I had another training course scheduled straight after

   then another trainer could be assigned and I would let them know what the

   gaps were and what they needed to do to help. It was quite rare for requests

   for extending training were not fulfilled and I can't remember any particular

   occasions or branches.

11. I have been asked to consider POL00033420 and POL00033637 and have

   very poor recollection of the trial for PO Essentials and PO Local although


                                   Page 6 of 15
                                                                                   WI TNO5360100
                                                                                 WI TN05360100




   both documents say to send feedback to myself. I can remember initial

   meetings to discuss PO Essentials and what transactions and products they

   should be able to transact and sell. The concept was that they would offer a

   limited amount of products and services and would not transact ones that

   needed paperwork or end of day reports. This would mean that the

   transactions were more straightforward and easier, there would not be a

   requirement for storage for lots of paperwork and forms, end of day would

   only require a cash declaration, and the balancing procedure would be easier.

   The format was intended for convenience stores with multiple members of

   staff. I have no recollection of the role out of these models or of receiving any

   feedback.

12. The spreadsheet POL00085132 is a record of all the training briefs used by

   the training team nationally. Areas were allocated to each Training Manager

   and they were responsible for making sure that the information in those briefs

   was reviewed and updated regularly, hence the dates for reviewing at

   different time of the year. This work could be delegated to their team

   members to help.

13. Considering POL00033632 and POL00033607 as a Training Manager I was

   allocated sections of the training package to review and this was discussed by

   the rest of the Training Managers at quarterly review meetings. With regards

   to the comment about the PSA, as far as I can recall, if a trainee had

   struggled to complete a process or did not understand how to do something,

   or it had not been covered, it was marked as RED on the PSA and should be

   carried forward as an Action for whoever was supporting further so they would

   know where more help was required. Because this was not an automatic


                                  Page 7 of 15
                                                                                     W I TNO5360100
                                                                                  WITN05360100




   response on the PSA it was a concern that some actions were not being

   captured so if the command could be carried through actions would not be

   missed. Keeping the materials in the CTO's up to date was difficult as they

   weren't in constant use, but when a new course was due the prep was left

   until a day or so before the start of the course. If there were out of date leaflet

   or items missing from the prep box there would be no time to order in time for

   the start of the course, so earlier prep dates were considered an

   improvement. I wasn't completing transfer audits at this time but my team

   would have been and they would have flagged that trying to complete a

   transfer audit and actually getting the new postmaster in and opening up on

   the same day that the leaving postmaster has to balance and close was

   extremely difficult. If the published opening time on the transfer day was for

   the afternoon customers would be waiting and the transfer audit may not have

   been completed in time for opening.

14 Considering POL00033610 I believe these comments to be feedback from the

   individual trainers in my team which were put forward for consideration to

   make changes to the training offer. Some of these actions would have been

   put into place but I am not sure which ones. Sometimes the prep boxes for

   the materials being used in the classroom would contain out of date material

   which could be practical materials that had been changed but not yet updated

   in Swindon, or out of date leaflets. The reference to Day 6 stock balancing

   refers to the delegates completing a balance in the classroom on day 6 of the

   course but as they had already done a balance on a previous day and not

   completed any transactions on the system since, it would suggest and

   improvement to the course content to put some extra transactions in before


                                   Page 8 of 15
                                                                                   WI TNO5360100
                                                                                WI TN05360100




   the Day 6 balance. With reference to the PTV, there was plans for a phone

   call at one month, followed by a visit at 3 months, then and audit at 6 months.

   Feedback from the onsite trainers was that the same questions were being

   asked each time even when the first time of asking the answer was positive

   so what was the purpose? It was felt that a visit rather than a phone call after

   a month would be better as you can discover earlier by attending an office if

   there are any problems, rather than over the phone. With regards for the

   requests for more 'practicals' in the classroom, it was an ongoing process to

   continue to develop more practical examples for products and services for

   delegates to process through Horizon, giving them practice with serving

   imaginary customers, and also making sure they used the stock and cash so

   they had a good practice at balancing. We were limited with what

   transactions we could actually process through the classroom Horizon kits as

   they weren't live so we were reliant on dummy cards etc. but could make up

   parcels etc to weigh and send. The duration of the classroom course could

   feel like it was not long enough if you had a full course and a very slow

   learner, which would mean a struggle to get everything covered as you can

   only work as fast as the slowest learner.

15. Considering POL00033612 my role as a Field Team Leader was to cascade

   the changes and improvements identified in the review to my team through

   Work Time Learning sessions. I think the pilot was to assess and review

   changes and standardisation of the training courses and materials and the

   results could be reviewed and then put into place. The purpose of the

   Performance Standard Assessment was to give the trainer a process to

   assess training needs and be able to identify and put in place actions for


                                  Page 9 of 15
                                                                                         WI TN05360100
                                                                                       WI TN05360100




     areas where performance needed to be improved. This would all be

     documented.

  16. Considering POL00032755 it is a tick list to ensure all the necessary

     procedures and processes have been completed and things are in place for a

     smooth opening of an office after a period of closure or if it has moved. I do

     not recall creating this document but it could have been put together from

     parts of other processes and lists that already existed. I have no recollection

     of receiving any feedback for this process.

Advice and Assistance

  17. When I left an onsite training or a classroom course I very rarely kept in any

     contact with the postmasters or the staff I had trained. In the early days I

     would leave my phone number in case they got stuck but this caused

     problems when I was working at the following post office so I encouraged

     them to use the Helpline. I did work on the counter at Priory Road Post Office

     in Wells on a couple of occasions to allow the postmaster to attend some

     appointments, following the support I gave when she took over the Post

     Office, as this was local to me, but I didn't offer very often as I was working

     and did not want to give up my free time.

  18. 1 was not responsible for giving postmasters advice or assistance in my

     training role. My role was to teach them how to process transactions using the

     Horizon system, set up a tidy well organised system for working so that they

     didn't get in a muddle, and how to complete their daily and weekly accounts. I

     followed the training briefs and used the handouts and materials provided to

     help them remember what they were doing.




                                    Page 10 of 15
                                                                                        WI TN05360100
                                                                                      WI TN05360100




   19. If issues were raised outside of transactional and training questions I would

      direct them to what I felt was the appropriate support, whether this was the

      Helpline, HR, or the Contracts Manager.

   20. As this was so long ago I cannot recall any specific issues that were raised

      during that time. I do not recall any difficulties involving the Horizon system

      that were not an input error that could be corrected when identified.

   21. 1 don't recall raising any concerns that needed a response.

   22. 1 can only speak for myself and I felt, throughout my time as a trainer, I did the

      absolute best job I could helping and supporting my postmasters. I had a

      genuine feeling for them that I wanted them to be the best they could be, and I

      think I did a really good job.

   23. 1 have no knowledge of POL00079768 as I've never seen this information

      before, but it seems to be calls logged to the Helpline from Priory Road Post

      Office. As I stated previously, I supported Gail Ward when she took over the

      post office, although she did not require much training as she was already

      experienced. I became a friend to her and her family and on a few occasions

      I worked in the Post Office to allow her some time away. It would only be a

      day or half day and never more than one at a time. I didn't do holiday relief or

      cover when I was training for any branches. I cannot say that I wn.as the

      person taking the call listed at line 51. I have no idea what KB means in the

      last column.

Horizon Online

   24. With consideration to POL00039318 and POL00079768 when Horizon Online

      was being rolled out I think I was training so I would have been scheduled to

      support offices after they had migrated from manual to Horizon. I cannot


                                       Page 11 of 15
                                                                                      WI TNO5360100
                                                                                  WI TN05360100




      recall what support I delivered during that time but my name is on the

      document so I would have attended those branches and either was there for

      the migration to ensure everything went over to Horizon, or for the following

      morning. I do not have any clear recollection of these visits.

Bugs, errors and defects in the Horizon IT System

   25. 1 was not aware of any issues or problems with the Horizon system in my time

      with Post Office Ltd.

   26. 1 never heard of any issues from anyone so there was no impact that I had to

      deal with.

   27. As I had no knowledge of any problems with Horizon there was no impact or

      me to deal with.

Resolution of disputes

   28. When the training team and the audit team were amalgamated I received

      audit training which involved shadowing experienced auditors and being

      taught how to use the excel spreadsheets they used to record stock and cash

      during audits. I attended audits as part of a team of auditors, and when I was

      a Field Team Leader I also led audits with a team.

   29. 1 was never involved or party to disputes between Post Office and

      postmasters as once an audit was completed, if there were any

      discrepancies, the Contracts Manager would be called to make a decision on

      what happened next. As an auditor I was never notified of any outcomes of

      audits or of what happened to postmasters with discrepancies.

   30. Disputes and discrepancies would be resolved above my level. The only

      Contracts Manager I can recall from this period is Gary Adderley.

   31. 1 was never aware of any contact or input by Fujitsu in any disputes.


                                     Page 12 of 15
                                                                                           WI TNO5360100
                                                                                       WI TN05360100




   32. As far as I was aware at the time I felt that the process for resolving

         discrepancies worked. It didn't cross my mind to look for improvements to a

         procedure that had been in place for some time and I understood to be

         working.

   33. At the time I was working for Post Office and training postmasters how to use

         Horizon I had every faith that the system was working as it should and when

         errors occurred it was down to human error. As an auditor it was difficult to

         identify errors that had occurred in the past as the documentation was not

         always available and the systems reports did not go back far enough. I still

         did not question the integrity of the Horizon system, but since the information

         about the cases and the inquiry has been put in the public domain I do feel

         very sad for the postmasters and staff affected, and I feel Post Office should

         have been open when they discovered faults as it made everyone involved

         feel absolutely stupid and rotten through no fault of their own.

   34. 1 have completed this statement without a solicitor and in my own words. I

         have done my best to recollect events but have found there to be areas where

       I cannot remember what I was doing and have not tried to imagine what I

         might have done.




Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:
                    GRO
Dated:        19 December 2022
                                        Page 13 of 15
                                                                              W ITNO5360100
                                                                           W ITN05360100




Index to First Witness Statement of Rita Palmer

 No.         URN               Document Description          Control Number
 1           POL00033420       Introduction to Post Office   POL-0030355

                               Essentials Guidance v2.5

2            POL00033637       Draft training manual re:     POL-0030572

                               1.3 Introduction to Post

                               Office Local, v. 5.0

3            POL00085132       Training Review Guidance POL-0082190

                               Notes

4            POL00033632       Post Office Presentation      POL-0030567

                               V1.3 (January 2012) re_

                               Training Review Cascade,

                               by Sue Richardson on 12

                               January 2012.

5            POL00033607       POL Training 03 Review        POL-0030542

                               v1.2

6            POL00033610       Audit Review Internal         POL-0030545

                               Stakeholder Feedback,

                               Appendix A December

                               2011

7            POL00033612       Review of Post Office Ltd     POL-0030547

                               New Entrant Training Pilot

                               December 2011




                                  Page 14 of 15
                                                                WI TN05360100
                                                              WI TN05360100




8    POL00032755   Relocation and Re-          POL-0029690

                   Opening of Agency

                   Offices - FSA Guide, V7

9    POL00079768   Call log from Priory Road   POL-0076331

                   PO

10   POL00039318   PO Spreadsheet of           POL-003580 0

                   Horizon Online Rollout

                   data




                     Page 15 of 15
