                                                                                       WI TN04650100
                                                                                     WI TN04650100




                                           Witness Name: Gary Blackburn
                                           Statement No.: WITN04650100
                                           Exhibits: None


                                                   Dated: 19th December 2022


                      POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




          FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF GARY DAVID BLACKBURN




 I, Gary David Blackburn, will say as follows:


    1. I have prepared this witness statement in response to the request made by

    the Horizon IT Inquiry pursuant to Rule 9 of the Inquiry Rules, dated 21st

    November 2022. In this witness statement I address each of the questions set

    out in the Annex to the 21st of November Rule 9 request


Professional Background



    2. My full name is Gary David Blackburn I worked for Post Office Ltd

    between October 1985 and March 2014 at which point in time I TUPE

    transferred out to a company named Atos where I continued to provide

    support to the Post Office albeit then in a supplier capacity. I left Atos and

    therefore my involvement with Post Office Ltd in 2017.




                                    Page 1 of 16
                                                                                       WI TNO4650100
                                                                                     WI TN04650100




3. I spent the first nine years of my Post Office career working in Crown

Office counters in and around Huddersfield, in 1994 I moved into what was

called the Northeast Regional Office, which was based in Leeds. During my

time in Leeds, I worked on a relatively new helpdesk that was created to

support both the NE region Post Office field support services, led by Retail

Network Managers (RNM), and the branches themselves. There were 6 other

geographic regions at that time, each had their version of this regional

helpline'. The purpose of this desk was to provide advice and guidance on all

Post Office transactional services. This initial desk, predated automation of

the Post Office branch network. During a later business transformation which

reduced the 7 regions to 3 the Helpline service was consolidated into 1 with

the Northeast taking on responsibility for the provision of this helpdesk

service. This is how I transferred onto what became the Network Business

Support Centre (NBSC).



4. During the specific period in question, I fulfilled many operational roles.

These roles included a Team Leader on the NBSC, Problem Manager within

the Business Service Management (BSM) function and I managed a team of

people in the Live service desk function and finally was also Post Office

Business Continuity Manager.



5. I don't remember much about my time working as a Problem Manager

within the Post Office it was my first role within the business service

management function and was 20 years ago. It was, I also think, a short stay

in that particular team. But what I do remember is that the role was largely

reactive in nature not particularly predictive or preventative and therefore a lot

                                Page 2 of 16
                                                                                      WI TN04650100
                                                                                    WI TN04650100




of the work that I would have undertaken alongside my colleagues came from

analysis of the calls that had been received by the NBSC or thematic

Incidents. The objective being to identify trends that led to improvement

opportunity. This naturally included, on occasions such as following the Major

Incident in March 2005, engaging with IT service providers to the Post Office,

at that time the primary one being Fujitsu services. As a Problem Manager

you would be allocated to work alongside a Fujitsu counterpart to oversee

completion of agreed remediation actions. Post incident findings such as

March 2005 were not shared with the branch network to my knowledge, I

think that my line management hierarchy during this time was Bethany

Newton, and her boss was Richard Ashcroft. Engagement of Fujitsu was via

their Problem Management team representatives and the Post Office Supplier

Manager, Scott Somerside. As the Supplier Manager it was Scott's role to

oversee Fujitsu's delivery against their contracted service delivery obligations.



6. I left the problem management role to run a new team which was named

the Live Service Desk_ The Live Service team was set up to provide a direct

and single point of contact for Post Office IT suppliers, the purpose of the

desk was to coordinate and facilitate service restoration of any thematic IT

related incidents such as a loss of service. The role involved internal

communication to groups of stakeholders as appropriate and provision of a

major incident management function (I or my team would set up bridge calls

with appropriate stakeholders as we worked towards restoration of the

service). On service restoration the root cause and improvement opportunities

would be passed back into the Problem Management team_ As the Live

Service Desk matured, we took on responsibility for coordinating IT related
                                Page 3 of 16
                                                                                     WI TNO4650100
                                                                                   WI TN04650100




responses to High Profile Flag cases, I had approval authority for the

documented process for this element only, standard complaints were those

logged into the NBSC and not my responsibility. I'm unsure how the NBSC

defined complaints and thus differentiated from a general call for assistance.

High Profile complaints were received from branches or MPs by the Post

Office senior management or Retail Network Managers (RNM). These

complaints would most often be about availability of service be that to

consumers or a specific sub—Post Office but occasionally did include

complaints about branch specific accounting discrepancies. These HPC

complaints always required investigation by the appropriate IT supplier on

occasion involving onsite or field investigations. A combination of the Post

Office RNM and Fujitsu's Branch Issues Managers (BIM, Nick Crow, or

Denise Miller) would be engaged to conduct these investigations and report

back with findings. The Live service desk would facilitate flow of information

and communication. Once the investigation was complete, I would create a

draft response and send to the Post Office Flag case team to obtain senior

management sign off and incorporating into the final business response. The

same process of engaging Fujitsu's BIM applied to internal enquires (non-

complaint) commonly raised by the RNM or on occasion the Post Office

Product & Branch accounting team based in Chesterfield, the P&BA. The BIM

was also responsible for proactively investigating trends and therefore would

occasionally contact myself or my team to request facilitation of branch visits.

We would do this via the RNM. This is how I remember the process for

resolution of disputes that came through the Live Service Desk function. The

process felt effective at the time but in hindsight perhaps lacked consistent

`second opinion' review or challenge. When an IT supplier provided their
                               Page 4 of 16
                                                                                     WI TNO4650100
                                                                                   WI TN04650100




findings to myself or my team, we had limited options for further review. The

Post Office IT function did have a team of Business Relationship Managers

run by Chris Taylor that were technical. In addition, there were experts in both

Ian Trundle and Bob Booth. Whilst always supportive these individuals/teams

were primarily strategically focused and not designed to be regularly engaged

in the operational day to day running. However, my team and I would seek

support from them alongside P&BA expertise when the investigation outcome

was inconclusive or not aligned with our understanding of how the system

should work.



7. Around Autumn 2007 the then Business Continuity Manager (Tim Vause)

left the business, and a decision was taken to combine that role into my

management of the Live Service Desk.



8. During my time as Business Continuity Manager, I recollect the primary

objective being linked to continuity of service for the Post Office Card Account

(Consumer replacement option for Benefit Books). I had responsibility for

overseeing the planning associated with continuity of service. This included

an annual, cyclical set of IT and Operational process exercises that were both

`desktop' and `live' in nature. The live exercises including my chaperoning of

government officials, who had to witness. I also conducted other planning

activities linked to Post Office operations to ensure that the Post Office could

maintain primary services under any number of differing circumstances such

as denial of staff which included pandemic planning, swine flu specifically

during that period and industrial action. There were also plans for inclement



                                Page 5 of 16
                                                                                           WI TNO4650100
                                                                                         WI TN04650100




     weather which posed a risk to delivery of both cash and stock provisions to

     the Post Office network.



Advice and Assistance



     9. As I have mentioned the NBSC was formed out of an amalgamation of

     what were previously 7 regional help lines. What exactly drove the Post Office

     to do that strategically I don't know, I was a low-level managerial grade and

     not a decision maker. But it did coincide with Business wide organisational

     restructure and the automation of the branch network under the Horizon

     programme.



     1O.The purpose of the NBSC was to support the branch network through

     answering 'how do I' related transactional questions alongside the Fujitsu

     Horizon Service Desk (HSH) which was there to support the branch network

     with technical questions and queries in relation to the technology (Hardware,

     Software and Network) that had been provided. That ranged from pin pads,

     printers, routers etc. and provision of advice and guidance on how to operate

     each service from a technical point of view, that included balancing and

     rollover. But accounting was often a query that could and would come into

     either the NBSC or the HSH. Leading to calls being triaged between the 2

     desks on a regular basis.



     11.Regarding the NBSC management structure, in my days working in that

     team it was led by Jill Camplejohn (later married name `Kennedy') and for a

     short period Howard Steet. I was a team leader, one of four or five. I'm afraid I


                                     Page 6 of 16
                                                                                    WI TNO4650100
                                                                                  WI TN04650100




don't remember how many helpdesk agents, but each Team leader had a

small group of helpdesk agents that we looked after from a people

management perspective and provided them with guidance in the answering

of queries received from the Post Office network. There was also an admin

function that was largely performance focused but included people who

created and maintained the knowledge articles that were used by the agents

to answer the branch queries. NBSC Helpdesk agents were not, in theory at

least, allowed to `guess' or use their knowledge or experience alone. The

answer they provided had to be associated with a knowledge article. The call

logging tool that the agents used to log incidents and create the unique

reference numbers at the time was `Remedy'.



12.Fujitsu provided the HSH/HSD service to support the Horizon system

technology and that for me was primarily for `Tech that was not working,

broken, offline or not working as expected'. I don't recollect how many NBSC

or HSH staff there was but when the service first moved into the new office at

Dearne house in South Yorkshire the NBSC was quite substantial, my guess

is that it was 6 or 7 agents per Team leader so there was potentially upwards

of 30 to 40 plus staff working in the NBSC wider team at the time.



13.The type of people that were recruited to the NBSC during my time were

experienced, counter trained staff that understood the accounting process.

They would also need good communication skills, knowledge of the wider

business operating mode► including the branch network and the roles and

responsibilities of field support services. Training was provided, there was an

onboarding programme for all agents this included the option of Post Office

                               Page 7 of 16
                                                                                    WI TNO4650100
                                                                                  WI TN04650100




standard training that anyone joining the business would have access to but

specifically all personnel that were going to work in branches received, except

for SPMR staff. The SPMR was trained automatically but not the people they

chose to employ. The NBSC training included use of the Horizon system and

tools for the job, remedy call logging system and the telephony system. The

NBSC agents were supported by knowledge articles. Remedy had a series of

Categorisations selected via dropdown menus that would pinpoint the area of

the question within the remedy system that then linked to a knowledge article.

The knowledge article then used to provide the answer to the caller. In

addition to that there was the horizon manuals, weekly news updates

(Counter News) and bulletins. Finally, I remember there being access to 2

horizon terminals to help with visualisation of queries. In the early days this

equipment was offline, later they were switched to be online (live counters).



14.Notification of problems or changes to service came into the NBSC from

many different parts of the business, bulletin boards were updated with

messages or temporary work arounds, new Knowledge articles would be

created, or existing ones updated.



15.The most common advice requests that I remember coming into the

NBSC was generally transactional in nature to help postmasters with the sale.

The second most common would-be accounting procedures which at the

beginning of the period in question would be a weekly accounting activity and

rolling over into the following trading period.




                                 Page 8 of 16
                                                                                      WI TNO4650100
                                                                                    WI TN04650100




16.Almost all the queries would be answered by the NBSC agent using the

knowledge articles apart from `system faults' `failures' or the `system not

performing as expected' which would be redirected to the HSH. The NBSC

agent would try and assist in identification of root cause of branch

discrepancies, but this may often have required a combination of Field

support via the Retail Network Manager, P&BA, or system interrogation via

Fujitsu. The request for further investigation most commonly coming from the

RNM. Staff training requests would also come from the RNM.



17.Whilst both the NBSC and the HSH both had continuity plans to cater for

unplanned events it was entirely possible that on occasion the desk would not

be accessible by the branches. This could be down to telephony technical

fault, unexpected staff shortages or sometimes large spikes or peaks in call

arrival patterns meant that some branches may not have been able to get

through in a timely manner or at all. It is also worth noting that the service

desks were not 24/7. Having said this in my opinion the NBSC, certainly in the

early days was sufficiently resourced. Post my time in the NBSC there were

operating model changes. The strategy was to migrate to a single point of

contact for all support inquiries with an IVR hanging off the back of that single

number, providing access to various other departments including the HSH_ I

also think that the service moved out of internal Post Office limited ownership.

It was outsourced albeit to another member of the Royal Mail group (RMG) in

Royal Mail themselves, who were the owners of Dearne House the location of

the NBSC and already providing a host of service desk related services

across the RMG.



                                Page 9 of 16
                                                                                         WI TN04650100
                                                                                       WI TN04650100




     18.During my personal time at the NBSC I feel that it met its purpose in terms

     of providing a good level of support, freeing the RNM's to focus on Branch

     development and sales specifically. But that's not to say that there wasn't the

     opportunity for miscommunication between the caller and the agent that could

     have led to incorrect advice or guidance being given or human error in branch

     with guidance not followed as advised. I'm not a technical person but I did get

     to visit the HSH on a couple of occasions when they were based in

     Stevenage. In my opinion they seemed perfectly proficient in the resolution of

     technical issues with Branch network connectivity being possibly one of the

     biggest and most regular challenges.



     19.During my time working in the live service desk, I was also engaged and

     involved in several Post Office programmes. The purpose being to ensure

     that those programmes didn't materially change the support operating model

     and ultimately that we updated knowledge and processes accordingly and

     were ready to continue providing support. The example that's been provided

     for me to look at is an example from the Network Transformation (NT)

     Programme. It is evidence of identifying a gap in NBSC readiness/capability

     through receipt of negative feedback linked to the new `Local' branch

     operating model_ The action I took was to facilitate linking up the responsible

     and accountable people. In this instance that was Sarah Lambert (NT training

     lead) and Kendra Dickinson (Royal Mail NBSC lead) to close the knowledge

     gap.



Resolution of Disputes



                                    Page 10 of 16
                                                                                   WI TNO4650100
                                                                                 WI TN04650100




20.In response to the specific examples of dispute investigations at South

Warnborough, Hogsthorpe and Barkham I've laid out above that my role was

primarily facilitation between the field support services such as the RNM

community and the IT suppliers with the aim of restoring service and resolving

issues. At South Warnborough I can see that I'd been approached

inappropriately but I linked into the person responsible for providing the

answers to the specific questions which in this instance was a member of the

Royal Mail NBSC management named Ian Speck.



21.At Hogsworth I can see from the email evidence provided the Sub

postmaster believed that a specific mails related transaction was creating

accounting discrepancies. When Karen Arnold first contacted me, my initial

response comes from my pre-empting the most likely root cause of the

problem being within branch which was purely based upon the fact that at the

time I had no understanding or even belief, that the Horizon application could

or did generate erroneous discrepancies linked to this transaction type. This

was purely expression of my opinion and was not an attempt to foreshorten

the process by not pursuing the investigation further. My belief was driven by

my perception of the relatively low frequency of this type of problem when

compared with successful transactions of the same type conducted without

discrepancy. I went on to offer advice, which was to obtain evidence prior to

requesting that Fujitsu attend site. Fujitsu had, at the time, a basic

maintenance policy which was to replace hardware if they couldn't find an

obvious onsite fix or explanation (This Policy was also likely driven by the

need to fix and close calls as quickly as possible, driven by Service Level

Targets) in this instance that would have led to a loss of the information
                                Page 11 of 16
                                                                                        WI TNO4650100
                                                                                      WI TN04650100




    contained on that processor that potentially supported the postmaster at

    Hogsworth. Hence my reference to 'this policy could work against us' that this

    course of action could lead to an end of investigative options and establishing

    root cause. I'm afraid I don't have any recollection of how ultimately this

    matter was or if it was resolved, the email from John Breeden on 3rd July 2009

    suggests that my initial advice of obtaining evidence was taken.



    22.1 have no recollection of the issues reported by the SPMR at Barkham

    Post Office or how this investigation concluded but from the evidence

    provided what I can say is that it was common practice to request Horizon

    transaction logs to aid accounting related investigations, I or my team could

    facilitate obtaining them and forwarding to the subject matter expert allocated

    to complete the investigation_ This could include any or all: P&BA (Andy

    Winn), Fujitsu BIM, Fujitsu Incident Management Team (IMT), other Post

    Office technical or operational resources whose names I have mentioned

    earlier in my statement.



Remote Access



    23.At the time my understanding of how Fujitsu interrogated the Horizon

    systems was limited to the procedures they documented, and we jointly

    followed. These processes were an agreed part of the end-to-end service that

    Fujitsu were asked to provide, for example OCP. I knew that Fujitsu could

    correct system errors through this procedure. I also knew that they could see

    what had happened in branch down to the detailed sequence of individual

    keystrokes. So, my relationship with Fujitsu, and based upon my lack of

                                   Page 12 of 16
                                                                                           WI TN04650100
                                                                                         WI TN04650100




      technical knowledge was one of having to trust the supplier and following

      Post Office Ltd contractually agreed procedure, I did not challenge as I didn't

      feel that it was my place to do so but nor did it occur to me that it was

      necessary, it was BAU. I have no recollection of this capability being

      communicated to Branch staff or how this capability was controlled or audited

      beyond documentation of the corrections being made. OCP 17510 is an

      example of how such corrections were recorded for audit purposes, but I don't

      recall having seen this specific document before. I can't recall me or my

      team's role specifically but communication of the correction details to the

      Branch was not part of our responsibilities. Communication with branch would

      fall to P&BA on occasions but normally the appropriate RNM. I have

      considered Peak Incident Management log [POL00001313] this is another

      example of the BAU process in operation but I'm afraid that I have no

      recollection of the detail or whether the branch was informed.



Bugs, error and defects



      24.Whilst Fujitsu services were both accountable and responsible for both

      proactive and reactive identification and correction of bugs, errors and defects

      my awareness of them would have been via the Incident, Problem or Major

      Incident Management procedures. Whilst I can't remember specifics Post

      Office Ltd had technical resources working alongside Fujitsu in the

      remediation activities which included coordination of the release containing

      fixes.




                                     Page 13 of 16
                                                                                        WI TNO4650100
                                                                                      WI TN04650100




   25. Callendar Square Post Office had suffered from one such `bug'. My

   involvement in this process was to assist my colleague, Shaun Turner, obtain

   answers from Fujitsu I don't know how the issue originally came about, what

   advice the branch was given beyond ensuring occurrences were logged with

   the HSH, why there was a communication breakdown between P&BA and

   Fujitsu regarding the `RIMS' process, I don't recall a `presentation' by Fujitsu

   or what follow up was undertaken, with other impacted branches or post the

   S90 fix. I don't even recall whether the fix was successful but reading through

   the email chain today it does not look like root cause of the original error was

   established or if it was, I was not made aware of it.



Horizon Online



   26.As someone that worked in operational roles my involvement in

   requirement gathering, contract negotiation, design, build or implementation

   of Horizon or Horizon Online was limited to a need to understand and support

   the service once live.



   27.1 believed that the support processes were sufficiently robust be that within

   the NBSC, Problem or MIM. My responsibility was to focus on service

   restoration and protection. But I also recognised that service came with risk

   because the service was consumed and supported by people, Training,

   knowledge, understanding, and effective communication were all key. With

   the benefit of hindsight and particularly following the subsequent public

   revelations of Post Office Ltd response and treatment of some SPMR's I have

   no doubt that open communication linked to the risk of failures could have

                                  Page 14 of 16
                                                                                       WI TNO4650100
                                                                                     WI TN04650100




   been handled differently. I have chosen to remain within the IT service

   industry and if I have learned one thing during that time it is that IT can and

   does fail that people are fallible and make mistakes. It is how you respond to

   those circumstances that matter. Openness and Honesty is and always will

   be the best policy. Clearly there were occasions when the benefit of doubt

   could and should have been given. I'm sickened by what I have read post my

   time at the Post Office and have experienced a wave of emotions from

   sadness, shame, and anger. I had no direct involvement or visibility of the

   human response and action taken against SPMR's. If I, had I hope that I

   would have found the courage to challenge, sound a note of caution and

   promote the communication of outcomes more vigorously and robustly than I

   perhaps did.



   28. This has been a difficult exercise to complete. With the passing of time

   recollection of process, people, context, and chronology is hazy at best. The

   artifacts provided some help and reminded me of my purpose and how I recall

   acting with what I believed I was required to do. I hope that in some small way

   this statement is of value.




Statement of Truth
I believe the content of this statement to be true.
          -




              ---------------




                                ------




                                         -




                                             -




Signed:   ' GRO
Dated: 19th December 2022


                                                 Page 15 of 16
                                                                       W I TN04650100
                                                                     WI TN 04650100




Index to First/Witness Statement of Gary David Blackburn


 No.    Document                          Control          URN
        Description                       Number
  1    Peak Incident Management        VIS00002327     POL00001313
       PC0154358
  3
  4
  5




                                  Page 16 of 16
