WITNO05970107
WITN05970107

RESTRICTED - COMMERCIAL

PWY/JFO/002
POCL Infrastructure Demo - Meeting Report
Supplier: Pathway Date: 8 November 1995
Attendees:
BA/POCL Supplier
Jeremy Folkes Martin Johnston
Bob Booth Martin McAdam (An Post)
Dave Cooke
Liam Church (An Post)
Fionnuala Higgins (An Post)
Joe Cosgrave (An Post)
Mike Murphy (Escher - from 16.05)
Purpose:

Second “POCL Infrastructure” demonstrator meeting - specialising on technical aspects
of Riposte.

Items of Note:

1. Informally reviewed outstanding requirements queries:

« Mobile offices - steer given not to let consideration of these distort their solution.
Mobiles would be likely to be on a per situation basis. Pathway stated GSM would
be their preferred solution.

* Scales - steer is to assume outwith this procurement, just connectivity to be
demonstrated. May be potential for synergy when installing kit, but outwith this
tender. Discussed again when type approval may be required - timetable being
sought.

e Support for smart cards / keys - steer given that keys are unlikely to become
nationally justified and more likely to be regional along lines of the Work load
document provided. Pathway requested number of offices, transactions per office
type figures. Confirmed that current view is that SP are unlikely to get access to
technology partners until after selection.

e 2D bar-code - steer given that there is no current requirement to either read, or
produce 2D bar-codes. However, a cost implication would assist the requirements
team in decision process.

e OCR of data on bills - steer that this is with sponsors, but not currently seen as likely
major area; clients use mag cards and move is towards bar codes; noted An Post
demonstrably use OCR and again a costed option would assist consideration.
Steer given that issue was commercial as much bill business done for Girobank
rather than directly for end client.

e Thermal printer - question still with programme, may depend on ability to do parts as
impact. Pathway need to supply data on fade, storage requirements etc. This ties
in with apportioning of risk, as SP may want access to evidence. It was recognised
that the cost of printers was significant, and the cost to maintain and for
consumables also factored.

« Compatibility with TCDs - no requirement at present. ECCO kit should be available
at Terminal House this week, and scales may be attached. TCDs are not currently
attached to ECCO. Bob to determine number TCDs deployed. Bob to brief JM prior to

Page 1 of 6
WITNO05970107
WITN05970107

RESTRICTED - COMMERCIAL
PWY/JFO/002

next week on requirement implications such as cash holding, replenishment and ownership
within the office.

Sample APPU was requested and should be available by the end of the month. will
Russell is organising, has in stock and about to send out.

Electronic purse. Steer given that we would just want evidence that it can be added
(e.g. a serial port).

Consumables - steer given that as they would be for use in the SP’s kit, these were
currently considered as their responsibility - though distribution via POCL channels
could be investigated with commercial strand. SP needs to propose what as
POCL’s responsibilities.

General nudge - up to service provider to propose solutions and to clearly state
assumptions made about BA/POCL responsibilities to make the proposals viable.
Prefer before ITT so no surprises and avenues can be smoothed.

Colour printing - steer not required

C(TMS)1 schedule reference for message switching between PO’s. No current
requirement apart from any need predicated by the SP’s solution. Would not expect
it to be excluded but any use would be the subject of change control. Example use
might be use for transmitting remittance information between offices.

Requirement for other on-line products. Outline of possible stock ordering given,
e.g. messages upwards of 500 bytes, up to 20,000 messages per day across the
system in semi-real time (a few minutes to deliver).

Workload Brief may hint at others, but depends on re-engineering and look to the
service provider to innovate and provide capacity.

. Discussion on user administration:

Pathway saying that terminals may be initialised by a magnetic card, and then used
to allow a till to follow the clerk if they move (without forcing a close-down - just
swipe and the terminal “follows” the swipe) - this being a facility introduced in Rip23
and under considation for An Post. Storage of these cards was unclear, as was
ownership / production / distribution.

Pathway saying terminals may have their personality stored on a Smart Card that
the engineer uses on swap out etc.. Storage of these cards was unclear, engineer
or Office.

. Riposte - Mike Murphy (Escher) joined late on and altered understanding of some
areas. The “distilled” version is below:

Riposte is fundamental to the counter, back through TMS and for the provision of
PAS

Single file JOURNAL.TXT contains variable length records, it is only appended to (see
Archive), and there is one file per machine. Other machines journals have their
entries replicated across the system so all entries should exist at all machines -
though the order will differ depending on when the entries arrived, and there are
potentially “additional” (but redundant) entries after a failure scenario - all the
transaction data is retained. If not all nodes present - unsure how this is determined at
broadcast time - then the transaction is marked as such to assist in collision
reconciliation.

The journal file is moving away from being text based in Riposte 2 to binary (though
still with human readable content in most cases) under Riposte 32.

Page 2 of 6
WITNO05970107
WITN05970107

RESTRICTED - COMMERCIAL
PWY/JFO/002

All records have 64-bit CRC, some have digital signatures RSA / DES unclear which
and where and how chosen - guess in the grammar describing the entry.

Replication is achieved (in Riposte 32 by a single IP multi-cast, on Riposte 2 by
individual NetBEUI calls) by telling all other nodes that appear on a local list and a
global list held locally on the distributing machine.

All machines can and will replicate to other machines. The position 1 machine is the
only one that can talk to the correspondence server - which is effectively another
office node (from the office viewpoint) that happens to be remote - and this is
controlled by its GLOBAL file.

An attribute in the journal server shows whether a transaction should force a
connection to be made over ISDN. Whilst the connection is open (for duration of
whole units) other data is replicated, but the connection will be closed (even if the
other data is flowing) when the unit expires and there is no data of high enough
priority to open the link. How is this configured, given changes in telecomms tariffs?

When a machine comes up, it broadcasts to all its known nodes, both its own latest
state (i.e. the CRC of its last journal entry) and the latest state of all its nodes as
known to it. If there is a discrepancy, then nodes report back, for both themselves
and other nodes whose data has been replicated back to them, to bring the new
machine up to date, or conversely to get data they have missed off of the new node.
If there are collisions over the sequence numbers (e.g. Pos 3 seq 32 appears twice
with different CRC’s) the owning journal server is prevented from serving until the
situation is sorted out.

When a new entry is made, it is broadcast. If another node receives it, the entry is
rejected if the sequence number is not the next one expected (still true ?) and the
receiver then re-synchs.

Concept of entries having mortality - where they can be deleted (see Archive later)
and this will vary dependant on the attribute (type) of entry. Some entries are
Persistent Journal Objects - typically describing bill payments or reports and are self
contained. A PJO is added via an API (also termed Retail Broker) that knows about
CRC’s, security etc. A PJO can only be added if it is new (‘plu’) or points back to the
PJO it replaces.

Correspondence servers replicate in the same manner - according to a local list -
amongst themselves. Correspondence servers will be beefed up (4 processor ...). It
is envisaged that there will be two physical sites (using n x 2M between sites), each
split into two campuses (on site 100Mbps, with separate machine room, power etc.),
and replication will be to partner on other campus and then onto other site - possibly
to both campuses. One node may be a write only node (i.e. not replicating out) for
audit purposes.

Management of new offices to be taken up in system management next week.

Rough sizing was for each correspondence server to handle 43 tps, based on 20M
over 8 hours (695 tps over the system).

Riposte has indices on the journal. Either permanent, updated each time an entry is
made (though this can be disabled!), and temporary, where the index is built on
demand and then discarded.

Indexing was rather confused. There appears to be different type of index
depending of the potential size, and they plan to uses a hierarchical one on the
correspondence server where the volumes are largest, and a quicker to write, flatter
index at the counter where volumes are smaller. The permanent index will be
updated when an entry is written, adding to a B-tree, hash table. The hash table is
CRC’d, and in the hierarchical case this is done in lumps, each lump indexed and

Page 3 of 6
WITNO05970107
WITN05970107

RESTRICTED - COMMERCIAL
PWY/JFO/002

CRC’'d so corruption may only need partial rebuild. Is all this effort is it because they
keep getting corrupt indices so need to rebuild often?

Inference was that they can create parts of index table on different machines and
then merge them, proposed for taken on from CAPS when “10 million entries may
hit the system”. How does this tie into journals having same stuff but in different orders ?

New indexing is done when corruption is detected at the counter.

Archive will be an on the fly operation. Riposte was original Windows for
Workgroups - not true multi-tasking - so archives were done with the journal server
off-line. Now intend to apply weighting to entries (base on mortality and type),
combine with disk space and then determine what, if anything to delete. When
delete updates the hash index, and can return blocks from the middle of files back to
NT, and uses NT transaction system to ensure integrity “standard NT stuff’.
Contacted PO/iT/TAS to see if they can clarify/educate on this.

Envisage the workstations archive would discard, the centre would archive to CD-
ROM. Unclear on performance impact whilst archiving.

For EFTPOS (true on-line) an agent would be used, from Riposte to another piece
of software within / at the boundary of its trusted network within the correspondence
layer. Whilst doing this the counter can continue and get the response later.
Software designed for 16 events extant but throttled back to 3 as a usability issue.

Riposte API to be supplied by Pathway. Documentation !! Also requested last week.

Binary data can be included in the journal (but UUENCODE or Base 64 to preserve
binary sentinels) so Schlumberger key images etc. can be stored. But data will be
expanded in the process!

Software is intended to be the same between journal and correspondence layers,
but with different features enabled.

Riposte written in C++; front ends in Visual Basic 4.

Audit log longevity was questioned. 18 months is best steer, but probably not in the
office.

Escher scorned Pathway concern at one position office and threw a PCMCIA hard
disk to Pathway member saying “this will be in the back of the one position office
machines and will be swapped on machine failure”. Apparently news to Pathway.
Actually a good idea (if costs in). The MiniScribe disk being thrown around was 260M
giving “3.5M journal entries’. Riposte 2 would update by having 2 copies of journal
server, one acting as normal and the other replicating to the spare disk. Riposte 32
can either do that, or write to two disks at once. No thought to what other than the
journal may be stored. Take up along with software distribution at System Management
meeting next week.

The network was unclear, with mentions of ISDN CUG, and PRI's (though not all
were sure what a PRI was) feeding into the correspondence servers, or into FEPs or

Still modelling (about to ?) ISDN links required, we will need surety that the servers can
handle the traffic levels and the replication, and archiving, and recovering offices, and CAPS.
feed, and system management ...

Confusion in Pathway between Escher and rest with regards to terminal having
“strong identity” - did Pathway/An Post understand ? - and what dongle that was
thought to have been discounted re-surfaced, though may now - decided in meeting -
use a smart card to allocate blocks of sequence numbers for each terminal to
underpin Riposte’s design basis of CRC and sequence number.

Page 4 of 6
WITNO05970107
WITN05970107

RESTRICTED - COMMERCIAL
PWY/JFO/002

e Shock from Mike Murphy at thought of a 9” screen on the counter - view was “big
screen small keyboard” at odds with Pathway direction. Obvious cost and size
implications here, need to wait for EPOS to pan out. Who is defining the hardware?

@ When queried about sizing model Pathway had agreed to produce paper, when this was
mentioned later in day with Escher present, the Mike Murphy response to Pathway co-
members was “how can you do that, Pathway haven’t got a clue how it works”.
Lack of demonstrable thought processes.

Watch this space as the Pathway paper should contain information on network sizing (in
the office, office to correspondence layer, within the correspondence layer), disk sizing,
move to NT, move to IP (so IP multi-cast can be used to reduce network traffic instead of
individually addressing NetBEUI), and Topology Supervisor as a starter.

Lack of cohesion between the people at the meeting, must be doubt over ability to manage
project if this interface to their customer is so weak.

© General problem that there is no documentation about the system, and late arrival of Mike
Murphy and his contradiction / clarification re earlier explanations call into severe doubt
the knowledge of the consortia about what they are proposing and then how they may
develop it / support it in any time scale.

e Large difference between Riposte 2 and Riposte 32 - OS, indexing, ISDN, move from DDE,
data stores to name but a few that came out. We may get incremental change notes.

© Large difference between An Post system and what is being proposed.

¢ Mention of Bill Gates presenting to Andrew Stott on 2 December. Suggestion that JF might
benefit from visit to Cambridge Mass. to meet Escher designers etc.

4. Reviewed Risk Register:
e PWY7 - previously transferred to John Meagher
« PWY8 - Card reader mechanism to be taken up with peripherals - 15/11.

e PWY11 - keyboard size relating to transaction speed and suitability of touch screen
for EPOS to be covered with peripherals - 15/11. Note Pathway subsequently have
queried this with the SLM - their risk team seem out of touch with this meeting.

« PWY19 - to be taken up with peripherals - 15/11.
e PWY29 - CLEAR

e PWY48 - software distribution, response paper in progress.

Papers Received:

None.

Page 5 of 6
RESTRICTED - COMMERCIAL

Requirements Queries:

PWY/JFO/002

Would we be interested in using the Assume baseline is we wouldn't, Infra / 24/11
installation logistics for the rollout of further but worth considering (and with Implem

scales..... do we have any guidance for the other kit). SP should raise with

number of scales....... Implementation Streand.

Smart key figures in Workload Brief do not Can Workload Brief be extended | Infra 24/11
give indication of spread of offices or likely in this area?

duty cycles - design of receptacles will

depend. Further info needed.

BA receipt - processing, storage etc. -is this | Suggested SP talk to BPS BPS 24/11
in the requirements? Will SP be allowed

access to receipts for investigative purposes,

if they are expected to take the risk.

Requirements for Teller Cash Dispenser Connectivity at infrastructure level | Infra / 24/14
connectivity? How many are actually in use, | probably shown by serial port Applics

likely to be in use? What would we actually

want connectivity to mean? RB to brief JM on applic issues

Possibility of using the current PO distribution | PO would be open to suggestions. | Infra 24/11
channels for consumables etc.

Archive period length, along with who would Suggested 18 months as first stab | Infra 24/11
enquire, using whose facilities and how at retention.

quickly is response given?

Jeremy Folkes & Bob Booth 10/11/95

Page 6 of 6

WITNO05970107
WITN05970107
