                                                                                      WI TN04380100
                                                                                    WI TN04380100




                                                          Witness Name: Allan Leighton

                                                         Statement No.: WITN04380100

                                                              Dated: 28 February 2024




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




               FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF ALLAN LEIGHTON




I, Allan Leighton, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION

1. I make this witness statement in response to a Request for evidence under Rule 9

   of the Inquiry Rules issued by the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the Inquiry),

   which I received by email dated 11 December 2023 (the Request).



2_ The facts and matters addressed in this witness statement are based on my own

   knowledge except where indicated otherwise, and where facts and matters are

   based on information and belief I have identified the source of such information or

   belief.



3. This statement addresses the questions contained in the Request. As requested

   in that letter, I have not directly referenced each of the questions raised. Instead,

   I have sought to cover those questions in the following structure within this



                                          Page 1 of 30
                                                                                            WITNO4380100
                                                                                          WI TN04380100




   statement: (A) an overview of my background; (B) overview of the corporate

   structure of the Royal Mail during my tenure, and my role within it; (C) functions of

   the Board — meetings, sub-committees and ways of working; (D) IT matters I have

   been asked to address, including Horizon; (E) legal matters I have been asked to

   comment on, including in relation to the prosecution of sub-postmasters (SPMs);

   and (F) final general matters.



4. I understand that I am entitled to submit documents alongside this statement.

   However, as far as I am aware, I have no contemporaneous documents in my

   possession (other than those provided by the Inquiry to me accompanying the Rule

   9 request — some of which are not documents I would have seen at the relevant

   time'). This is because when I left Royal Mail (which I define further below) I would

   not have retained or taken with me any hard copy documents, and I do not believe

   any electronic documents would still be in my possession given that I left around

   15 years ago and have used multiple different electronic devices since then (and

   no longer have access to my Royal Mail email account). I should also note that

   some of the matters I have been asked to recollect took place over 20 years ago,

   and the most recent date back around 15 years. I have therefore done my best to

   recall relevant events, but do not have a clear recollection of the detail of many

   points I have been asked to describe.




1 For example, I do not believe I would have seen document FUJ00118186 (the POCL and ICL

Pathway 'Third Supplemental Agreement'), POL00090428 (the 'Annex to Second Supplemental
Agreement'), POL00118229 (the 'Advice on Evidence and Quantum' by S A Brochwicz-Lewinski),
POL00120833 ('IT Spend — P12 Reconciliation with Next Steps) and, as described further below,
cannot recall seeing the letters at POL00107538, POL0004030345 and emails at POL00161769 and
POL00142503.


                                       Page 2 of 30
                                                                                         WI TN04380100
                                                                                     WI TN04380100




5. I have asked the Inquiry for copies of a limited number of documents which are

   referred to in the materials that have been provided to me, and which may have

   some bearing on my evidence. Certain of these documents have been provided

   to me, which I have reviewed. Other documents I understand are not available,

   but if further documents become available or are provided to me, I would be

   happy to consider them and update my statement as necessary. I should also

   make clear that if the Inquiry wishes me to comment on any specific topics not

   already raised in the Rule 9 request, which are relevant to my roles within the

   Royal Mail companies, I would, of course, be happy to do so.



6. I was incredibly proud to serve as Chairman of Royal Mail for seven years,

   however, I would like to say at the outset that I have been shocked and

   completely horrified by the things that I have discovered about this scandal as it

   has unfolded. The impact on so many innocent SPMs has been nothing short of

   tragic and diabolically unfair. I would like to extend my deepest sympathies to all

   those so terribly affected by these events. I simply cannot comprehend the scale

   of their devastation. To the best of my recollection and understanding (including

   following my review of the materials supplied to me by the Inquiry) I was not

   made aware of these serious matters, which are now within the scope of this

   Inquiry, before I left my last role within the Royal Mail group of companies in

   March 2009.

   (A)       BACKGROUND

7. I have been asked to set out a summary of my qualifications and my professional

   roles prior to joining the Royal Mail group in 2001, during my time at Royal Mail

   between 2001 to 2009 and since leaving Royal Mail.


                                     Page 3 of 30
                                                                                     WI TN04380100
                                                                                   WI TN04380100




8. Before joining the Royal Mail group, I held various executive and non-executive

   positions. Key positions I held prior to joining the Royal Mail group are:



      a. At Asda Group PLC, I held the positions of Marketing Director, Retail

         Operations Director and Group CEO from 1992 to 1999. Upon Wal-Mart

         Inc's takeover of Asda Group PLC in 1999, I acted as President and CEO

         of Wal-Mart Europe until November 2000.



      b. Prior to this, I worked for Mars Corporation during the period 1974 to 1991.

         During this time, I held the roles of Sales Director of the Pedigree Pet Foods

         Division, General Sales Manager for the UK Grocery Division and Managing

         Director in Ireland and Portugal.



9_ After leaving Asda, I was appointed to a number of executive and non-executive

   positions within various corporations, with key roles including acting as non-

   executive director (NED) of B Sky B Plc, Deputy Chairman of Leeds United FC,

   Chairman of Lastminute.com, Chairman of BHS, Chairman of Cannons Ltd, and a

   NED of Dyson. In 2001 I also committed to positions as Chairman of Wilson

   Connolly and a NED of Scottish Power and George Weston Ltd.



10.1 continued with certain non-executive roles when I was engaged at Royal Mail and

   ceased others, in particular when I was appointed Chairman of Consignia PLC

   (which had not initially been anticipated when I first started discussions about a

   role with the Royal Mail group). At that stage I had quite recently committed to



                                     Page 4 of 30
                                                                                      WI TN04380100
                                                                                    WI TN04380100




   additional roles (as listed above). Accordingly, over the following couple of years I

   sought to reduce the commitments I had made to other organisations. For example,

   my role at Scottish Power Ltd finished in 2002, my roles at Leeds United FC and

   Wilson Connolly stopped in 2003, and my roles at Cannons Ltd, Lastminute.com

   and Dyson stopped in 2004. In 2004 I also took on the role of Chairman of

   Selfridges & Co. In April 2008 I became President of Loblaw Ltd (a George Weston

   company) as I understood my tenure with the Royal Mail group was due to end at

   that stage; in the event I was asked to continue until a replacement Chairman was

   identified in 2009.



11 _Since leaving Royal Mail in 2009, I have been appointed to various other non-

   executive roles for corporates, which has included acting as Chairman of Pandora

   (I was also later appointed as CEO in July 2013 and remained in this position until

   2015). I also held the position of Chairman for Entertainment One Ltd between

   2014 and 2019, and Chairman of Wagamama between 2015 and 2018. Until

   January 2024 I was the non-executive Chairman of the Co-operative Group, a

   position which I was appointed to in February 2015. I am also the Chairman of

   Northern Bloc Ice Cream, C&A AG, Simba Sleep Limited, Em TopCo Limited, The

   AllBright Group Limited, PizzaExpress, Element Ltd and BrewDog PLC (and am a

   NED for BrewDog Employee Benefit Trust Limited) and a director of my own

   company, Going Plural Limited.



12. 1 have also held various positions for charitable organisations, including acting as

   Chair of the Canal and River Trust from 2014 to 2022, acting as a Patron of Breast

   Cancer Care, and Chair of Race for Opportunity.



                                     Page 5 of 30
                                                                                       WI TN04380100
                                                                                     WI TN04380100




13. My qualifications include an Honorary Degree from Cranfield University (awarded

   in 2004), an Honorary Fellowship from the University of Central Lancashire in

   recognition of outstanding achievements in Business (awarded in 2010), and a

   Doctor of Letters from York St John University (awarded in 2018).




   (B)         CORPORATE STRUCTURE AND ROLE

14.1 have been asked to describe my roles within the Royal Mail group. Although the

   legal structures changed over time (and I do not recall all of the details), during my

   time with the organisation there were three main parts of the Royal Mail group —

   the Post Office, Royal Mail and Parcels (including General Logistics Services). My

   role within the Royal Mail group essentially fell into three phases:

         a. Appointment as a NED to Consignia: The first conversations I recall

           having about joining the Royal Mail group focussed around me taking on the

            position of Chairman of the Post Office. I do not recall who first approached

           me about this, but it was agreed that I would actually join the Board of

           Consignia PLC as a NED, with a view to being considered for the position

           of Chairman of the Post Office in fairly short order. Accordingly, having

            passed the public office application selection process, I joined Consignia

           PLC in April 2001 as a NED, as well as its holding company Consignia

            Holdings PLC. 'Consignia' was a relatively new name, and the group had

            previously been called the Post Office. Around this time, Consignia, in

            discussion with the Government, was considering selling the Royal Mail part

           of the business to TPG (now TNT), the Dutch national postal provider.

            However, upon starting in my role it quickly became apparent to me that the


                                      Page 6 of 30
                                                                                WI TN04380100
                                                                              WI TN04380100




   group was in significant financial difficulties and, in my view, it was not the

   time to embark upon a sales process. I, together with other Consignia Board

   members, attended a number of meetings relating to this potential sale and,

   ultimately, this sales process was abandoned and the group remained (for

   the time of my tenure) as including both the Post Office and Royal Mail

   divisions.

b. Appointment as Chairman to POL: Around that time, the group was also

   embarking on a refresh of its organisations and executive functions. In

   October 2001 the Post Office business (a subsidiary of Consignia PLC) was

  renamed 'Post Office Limited' (POL). Since having arrived as a NED of

   Consignia in 2001, discussions had started about potentially appointing me

   to the position of Chairman of the whole group, rather than just the Post

   Office business. It was therefore agreed, after going through the relevant

   selection processes, that I would be appointed: (i) Interim Chairman of

   Consignia Holdings PLC (and a NED of Consignia PLC); and (ii) Chairman

  of POL — whilst POL embarked on a search for a new Chairman. These

   appointments took place in January 2002 (and, in March 2002, I was

   appointed to the role of Chairman of Consignia Holdings PLC permanently).

  I acted as Chairman of POL from January 2002 until the end of April 2003,

   when Mike Hodgkinson was recruited and appointed as Chairman of POL.

c. Continued role as Chairman to Consignia / RMH: After I stepped down

   as Chairman of POL at the end of April 2003, I continued in my role as

   Chairman of Consignia Holdings PLC. I should note that, after I had been

   appointed to that role, one of the immediate tasks I spearheaded was the

   change of name from 'Consignia' back to Royal Mail. It seemed clear to me



                              Page 7 of 30
                                                                                                   WI TN04380100
                                                                                                 WI TN04380100




            upon taking up the role that there remained huge pride within the group in

            the term Royal Mail', and regret for the recent change of name. Accordingly,

            the name `Consignia PLC' was changed to `Royal Mail Group' PLC (RMG)

           and the name 'Consignia Holdings PLC' was changed to Royal Mail

            Holdings Plc (RMH). I refer in the remainder of this statement to the names

            RMG and RMH throughout, rather than the former'Consignia' names. I held

            the role of Chairman of RMH until March 2009.2 This position was due to

            finish in 2008 (two terms of three years), but after that period a suitable

            replacement had not yet been identified, and the Government therefore

            asked me to stay for a further year. During this period, I retained a role as

            a NED of POL.



15. Whilst in post as Chairman at RMH and POL, I undertook the usual activities I

    associate with the position of Chairman. These included reviewing board papers,

    creating board agendas, attending and chairing full board meetings, attending

    board committee meetings (as appropriate) and maintaining a regular dialogue with

    executives whilst monitoring the progress of key projects. I also spent a lot of time

    visiting delivery offices, mail centres and Post Offices. In circumstances where I

    was unable to attend a Board meeting, I would always read the relevant material

    and would discuss the content with the relevant senior individuals including the

    executives and other NEDs. I was constantly discussing issues relevant to the

    strategic direction of the group with those in senior leadership roles and had regular


2 I do not now recall the precise distinction of responsibilities between RMH and RMG. RMG is a
wholly owned subsidiary of RMH, and I can see from the minutes provided to me by the Inquiry that
RMH was the legal entity which undertook the substantive work of the group that I recall from my time
with the group. However, I cannot recall precisely what different or other work the RMG board
undertook. I would be happy to review copies of minutes of the RMG board if it would assist the
Inquiry for me to reflect on this further.


                                           Page 8 of 30
                                                                                        WITNO4380100
                                                                                      WI TN04380100




   catch-ups and meetings with those in leadership positions. I would also always

   read the minutes of any meeting I had been unable to attend.



16.At all times during my work with the Royal Mail, RMH has been wholly owned by

   the UK Government. I have been asked to set out my views on the responsibilities

   of a board of directors in the operation of a company that is owned in this way. As

   a general matter, directors of a company are required to act in the best interests of

   the company, and are subject to the general duties of directors prescribed by law.

   The responsibilities of the board include building and agreeing the company's

   overall strategy, creating and protecting value for shareholders. At a high level, I

   see the board and NEDs' role as including setting and testing the strategy of the

   organisation, and the executive directors' role is to execute that strategy. As

   Chairman of RMH, my role included providing independent oversight to the Boards,

   challenging the executive members of the board, as well as strategic guidance and

   advice based on my previous experience. I was, as Chairman, conscious of the

   unique position that RMG and RMH occupied, with the UK Government as the sole

   shareholder, and the need to work effectively with that key stakeholder to deliver

   value and service to all of our stakeholders, including our shareholder. I describe

   further below at paragraph 27 detail of RMH's interactions with the various

   government departments during my time with the group.



17.As a general matter, regarding my method of fulfilling the role of a Chairman, I

   have for many years since leaving Asda adopted an approach of holding multiple

   non-executive positions across different companies, believing strongly that my

   experience in different businesses is valuable to the companies with whom I



                                    Page 9 of 30
                                                                                        WITNO4380100
                                                                                      WI TN04380100




   work. I should add that my roles for different companies vary enormously,

   depending on the organisation and role I have been appointed to. Since leaving

   Asda I have always worked full time (I am aware many people who work in NED

   roles are partially retired when doing so). I have since that time never adopted

   an approach of working set 'days' for particular organisations, but rather work for

   each whenever that is needed in order to fulfil my duties and commitment to the

   company. I ensured I dedicated more than sufficient time to the role.



18. When I first joined RMH, and as is evident from the Board minutes that have been

   shared with me, the group had very significant financial challenges. Just by way

   of example, some of the first discussions I navigated in my role in 2002 as

   Chairman of the Post Office were around whether the organisation could even

   continue on a going concern basis, given the scale of loss-making in the business.

   Part of the reason for this was changes which resulted in many of the products

   previously provided via Post Offices instead being delivered direct to the customer

   electronically (for example certain benefits payments). The huge losses the Post

   Office was suffering meant that there was also an extensive programme to reduce

   the size of the Post Office network, which itself brought major challenges. Within

   the Royal Mail part of the business, industrial relations between the group and its

   workers were very poor, resulting in a high level of strike activity and significant

   consequential customer disruption, in turn further jeopardising the financial stability

   of the organisation. Soon after I joined, the mail business also suffered from the

   threat posed by private companies as the regulator at the time, the Postal Services

   Commission, elected to de-regulate the postal market.




                                     Page 10 of 30
                                                                                        WITNO4380100
                                                                                      WI TN04380100




19. It was also evident to me on joining, that aspects of the organisation's culture

   required my attention. In this respect, I have been asked about oversight of RMG

   and RMH's compliance with the Race Relations Act 1978. As I refer to above,

   when I joined the organisation there was regular industrial action on the Royal Mail

   side of the business, and it quickly became clear to me that this was an issue that

   needed addressing. Additionally, it was clear that cultural changes were needed

   in relation to matters such as bullying and discrimination, again in particular (but by

   no means exclusively) within the Royal Mail parts of the business. For example, I

   remember clearly that in my first few days as Chairman of RMH a postal worker

   tragically took his own life after being subject to racist abuse and in 2003 the Equal

   Opportunities Commission launched a formal investigation into sexual harassment

   of female postal workers.



20. Some workers provided me with details of their personal experiences of racial and

   sexual discrimination or harassment. For example, I remember that, during a visit

   to one particular mail centre, I was passed a note by four female employees

   detailing sexual harassment that occurred to them regularly. These were major

   (and high profile) issues for the organisation, and I led campaigns within the group

   aimed at tackling discriminatory behaviour (in relation to race, gender and

   disability). Steps we took to improve morale and culture within the group included

   a bonus scheme called `Share in Success', a scheme of phantom shares issued to

   (what I recall was) over 100,000 front line workers to ensure that they shared in the

   prosperity of the company. Without reference to contemporaneous documents I

   cannot recall all of the details of this scheme, but the aim was to give our

   employees an opportunity to share in the prosperity of the business and engender



                                     Page 11 of 30
                                                                                        WITNO4380100
                                                                                      WI TN04380100




   greater engagement with our workforce. I also sought to speak to employees at

   every level on a regular basis, and believed that speaking up was important. At

   Asda we had built the business into one which was, just after the end of my tenure,

   named by the Sunday Times as the best place to work in the UK — I knew that

   having employees who were invested in the business and felt listened to was a

   crucial element to building a successful business. As part of this attempt to change

   the culture within the business, we also established a scheme called 'Have Your

   Say' which was designed for employees within the Royal Mail business and crown

   Post Offices to escalate issues. These types of schemes were promoted so that

   our employees could raise issues (such as discrimination) which affected them or

   that they saw, but also sought to more generally help our work force feel invested

   in a business with a good culture. It is, in my experience, incredibly hard delivering

   cultural change within such a large organisation (with well over 100,000 employees

   throughout my tenure with the Royal Mail), but this issue of discrimination was one

   in which I was personally heavily involved.



   (C)        Board meetings and sub-committees



21. I am unable to recall precisely, and I have not been provided with a full set of Board

   minutes for RMG, RMH or POL, but from what I am able to recall, the Boards of

   POL and RMH met (on average) 8 - 10 times each year. I recall that the cadence

   was fairly similar to other large organisations with whom I had worked. When I was

   first appointed to the Board of RMH, the Board was chaired by Neville Bain, and

   John Roberts was the CEO. At that time, there was not a formal CEO or Chairman

   for the Post Office business. Rather, Stuart Sweetman was the Managing Director



                                     Page 12 of 30
                                                                                     WITNO4380100
                                                                                   WI TN04380100




   of POL. Shortly after I joined, there was quite significant senior personnel changes

   at both organisations: as I mentioned, I assumed the role of Chairman of RMH in

   2002, and Adam Crozier was then appointed CEO of RMH in 2003 (and was the

   CEO throughout my tenure), and in the Post Office, after my initial tenure as

   Chairman, Sir Michael Hodgkinson was appointed the Chairman (in 2003) and

   David Mills was appointed CEO (in 2002).



22. As a general matter, I have more recollection of the RMH Board meetings than the

   POL Board meetings, because from 2002 I chaired those meetings. However, in

   respect of both RMH and POL, once these new leadership teams were in place, it

   was my impression that the style of the Board meetings was open, with detailed

   discussion and contributions from everyone in attendance. I recall that proposals

   were often tested by the Board in detail, and that Board members appeared

   engaged and focussed on delivering for the group.



23. The agenda for Board meetings were determined by the Chairman and CEO, with

   Board members from time-to-time then requesting deep-dives on certain topics.

   As I mentioned above, when I first joined RMH and then POL, I recall that the key

   points within the agendas were dominated by the closure of network offices,

   industrial relations, entrance into the mail market of private participants and the

   need to replace products within the Post Offices to keep them viable from a

   financial perspective.



24. In relation to both RMH and POL, in advance of each meeting I would be sent by

   courier a hard copy of the Board papers that related to the forthcoming meeting. I



                                    Page 13 of 30
                                                                                      WITNO4380100
                                                                                    WI TN04380100




   would review these diligently, as I do for all of the companies I work with. For some

   of the POL Board meeting minutes that have been sent to me, I can see that I was

   not in attendance. Sometimes this occurred because of my schedule, but if it did

   then (as I have explained in paragraph 15 above, as was my usual practice) I would

   raise issues from the minutes I wished to enquire about with executive members

   of the Board (for example this was often in advance of the board meetings, or

   during my regular meetings with them), and then also review the minutes from that

   meeting when they arrived in the next Board pack that was delivered to me. As

   Chairman of RMH it is my recollection that I attended virtually all of the meetings,

   because I was chairing them.



25.Typically, those present at RMH Board meetings consisted of:

      a. The Chairman for both RMH and POL;

      b. NEDs;

      c. The CEO of RMH and POL; and

      d. The CFO of RMH.

   In addition, attendees included the Company Secretary and presenters of the

   agenda topics.

26. Typical attendees of POL Board meetings (after 2003 when Sir Mike Hodgkinson

   was appointed Chairman) were also the POL Chairman, CEO, Information

   Technology Director, Finance Director, COO, Sales & Marketing Director, myself

   as Chairman of RMH, and the Executive Deputy Chairman of RMH.                 Again,

   attendees included the Company Secretary and presenters of the particular topics

   relevant to the Board's agenda.




                                     Page 14 of 30
                                                                                         WITNO4380100
                                                                                       WI TN04380100




27. Alongside this, there was interaction between the businesses (at the RMH and POL

   levels) and the UK government. I am unaware of (or cannot recollect) any formal

   structures in place, when I first joined the Royal Mail group, for reporting to the sole

   shareholder, the UK Government. I do though recall that there were periodic

   meetings between the Department for Trade and Industry (DT/), including the

   Secretary of State, and the Royal Mail and, separately, meetings between the

   Treasury and the Royal Mail_ These latter meetings were particularly crucial when

   I first joined the organisation, such was the level of financial support that the Royal

   Mail group required from the UK Government — and in the latter stages those

   Treasury meetings (to my recollection) principally focussed on the issues of

   privatisation, regulation changes affecting both RMH and POL, and the funding of

   POL.



28. Then, in 2003 the UK Government established the Shareholder Executive. At this

   stage, interactions between the Royal Mail and the UK Government in general

   moved from DTI to the Shareholder Executive.            In terms of cadence, to my

   recollection, as Chairman of RMH I would have two or three update meetings per

   year with the Secretary of State. Separately, either the CEO or Chairman of POL

   would have held separate meetings in relation to POL, alongside regular dialogue

   with the Shareholder Executive at the executive level. In addition, both I and the

   Chairman of POL, and CEOs of RMH and POL would attend Government Select

   Committee meetings when requested to do so; I recall that this was in particular

   required in relation to the issue of network reduction, which was an area of

   significant focus for POL.




                                     Page 15 of 30
                                                                                    WITNO4380100
                                                                                  WI TN04380100




29. 1 have been asked to describe the sub-committees of the RMG, RMH and POL

   Boards, their membership and terms of reference. As I explained above, I cannot

   now recall precisely the difference in terms of corporate Boards / responsibility

   between RMH and RMG. However, I have seen some minutes from RMH which

   have helped to refresh my memory of the operation of that Board. In general, whilst

   I cannot recall all of the sub-committees of RMH and POL, their membership or

   terms of reference, at least RMH had a Risk and Audit Committee, a Remuneration

   Committee and a Nominations Committee. Attendees at the Audit Committee, at

   least at the RMH level would have typically included the CEO and CFO of RMH,

   internal auditors (by request), Heads of Finance (as presenters) and external

   auditors. I was not a member of any of these Committees, but would attend their

   meetings when requested. Generally, the Committee Chairmen would run the

   Committee and report back to the Board.



30.Whilst I do not have copies of the Audit or Remuneration Committees' Terms of

   Reference, I would expect these to include the standard provisions similar to other

   companies with whom I have worked. For instance, the Audit and Risk Committee

   would oversee, assess and review matters such as the financial results for the

   company, the internal reporting controls and risk management. The Remuneration

   Committee would agree or recommend remuneration structures for the company,

   including base bonus and any long-term incentives offered to the Board and senior

   executives.




                                   Page 16 of 30
                                                                                      WITNO4380100
                                                                                    WI TN04380100




31. I do not have access to the reports submitted at any sub-committee meetings, but

   from my recollection of minutes and previous experience this would include reports

   from the CEO and CFO, business unit reports and specific strategic topic reports.



   D — IT matters and Horizon



32. 1 have also reflected on the responsibilities of a board of directors in relation to

   oversight of a company's IT structure. In my view, it is typical for a board to have

   oversight of major IT projects which, from a financial and headline perspective,

   constitute a substantial outlay for the company.



33. In the context of RMH, whilst my recollection of the precise structures in place and

   personnel is limited, I recall that IT projects were managed by a large IT team

   including various sub-teams who assessed each proposed project. Projects

   considered to be potentially worthwhile would then have been sponsored by the

   CEO and the CFO would authorise the initial cost estimates and implementation

   plan. The person in charge of the project (usually the Head of IT) would then

   present the proposed project, roll out timescales and the implementation plan to

   the Board. The presentation would usually include details of the scale and cost of

   each major project so that the Board could assess its value and approve the level

   of spending. Once approved, the project would typically have been implemented

   by the IT team. The CEO, COO and Head of IT would oversee each major project's

   progress and provide updates to the Board as necessary.




                                    Page 17 of 30
                                                                                         WITNO4380100
                                                                                       WI TN04380100




34. 1 was appointed at RMH and POL after the initial Horizon project had been

   approved and implemented. My recollection is that the project was overseen in

   broadly the same manner as described above, although of course the

   implementation, running and re-negotiation of contracts relating to Horizon

   spanned a very long time. I do not have a specific recollection of receiving training

   relating to Horizon, but expect that I would have received a briefing on the purpose

   of the system and how it worked including in all likelihood a demonstration of some

   kind. I was familiar with the implementation of large-scale IT projects from other

   companies I had worked with (for example at ASDA) such as implementing SAP.



35. My main recollection of the Board's oversight of the Horizon IT project is that a key

   focus, and repeated discussion point within the Board of POL, related to the

   timeline and headline content of the project, the cost and its value for the UK

   Government and by extension the taxpayer. This is evident from the minutes

   provided to me by the Inquiry but I also recall that, from the time I began working

   with RMH and POL, POL was in a difficult financial position, and Horizon

   represented a significant cost. I knew that projects of this nature often took

   significantly more than the planned time and cost to implement properly. This was

   therefore an area that was tested by the Board — the company needed a system

   which was fit for purpose and represented value for money.



36.Although I do not specifically recall the training I had on Horizon, I do recall that at

   one stage (I cannot recall precisely when) I visited a back-office customer service

   centre in Chesterfield. I recall that this office handled various complaints about

   Horizon and other issues, perhaps (although I cannot be certain) dealing with



                                     Page 18 of 30
                                                                                         WITNO4380100
                                                                                       WI TN04380100




   questions from SPMs — the `hotline' that was available to SPMs to use to try to

   resolve queries. I cannot recall why I visited this office, but it was typical for me to

   visit various Post Office or Royal Mail sites around the country to speak to staff,

   wherever I was. I recall that, whilst there, I spoke to individuals about the Horizon

   system and its effectiveness. From my recollection, although there appeared to be

   some day-to-day issues that the staff in the office were dealing with, I do not recall

   that there were complaints which indicated major issues with the system and I

   certainly do not recall being told anything about the issues with Horizon that are

   part of the Inquiry's investigations.



37. As regards Board oversight, I recall that the POL Board would discuss the Horizon

   project when a major milestone was reached or when substantive decisions

   needed to be made in relation to the renegotiation of the contract or when new

   major updates were rolled out.          I have limited recollection of any particular

   discussions, but as above I recall that the thrust of the matters debated related to

   the high cost of the system (particularly at the stages it was being renegotiated with

   Fujitsu) and a focus on getting value for money for the business and the tax payer.

   I think that at times executive members of the Board met with SPMs to discuss the

   system, but I do not recall that clearly (and do not recall any major issues that were

   escalated via that route to me, or the Board). I have no specific recollections, but it

   is my expectation that, during the roll out of the Horizon system whilst I was a Board

   member of POL and Chairman of RMH, there would have been at least some

   performance issues relating to the Horizon system reported to the Board. It is, in

   my experience, usual that there would be at least some degree of issues within a

   system like Horizon system when it was being rolled out; what I as a Board member



                                     Page 19 of 30
                                                                                    WITNO4380100
                                                                                  WI TN04380100




   would have done is seek assurance that any issues were being rectified (or

   reported back if for some reason they could not be).



38.As a general matter, if reports of problems, issues or outages within Horizon were

   reported to the POL Board (more likely than the RMH Board), I am not sure they

   would have struck me as an immediate cause for concern; in my experience large

   IT systems will almost always experience issues that require resolution; and pretty

   much all large IT systems require regular upgrading to improve performance

   (amongst other things). Of course, if the Board had been aware of the significant

   problems, issues or outages that evidently existed and were not being remedied,

   or the tragic consequences that these led to for SPMs, the Board should have

   sought to require that the issues were resolved as a matter of urgency. I have no

   reco►lection of such problems being identified to the Board generally or me in

   particular. Indeed, I note from POL00095531 that in August 2005, in relation to

   Horizon Online, the Board was being told that at a SPM exhibition that the

   "response from delegates to the new system remains overwhelmingly positive... It

   was also reassuring that our key messages continue to be received and

   understood". Further, as noted in POL00095521 on the release of Horizon S90, it

   was stated that "The release continues to make good progress. There have been

   a number of issues in pilot but these have been quickly diagnosed and resolved'.

   I have no specific recollection of these meetings but these minutes do not appear

   to show any significant problems with SPM's use of Horizon.




                                   Page 20 of 30
                                                                                       WI TN04380100
                                                                                     WI TN04380100




39.1 have also been asked about oversight of the RMH and POL accounting systems.

   I do not have copies of any reporting line structures or terms of reference, but it is

   my expectation that, as in most large companies, responsibility for the accounting

   systems of RMH and POL fell within the remit of the CFOs of each of those

   companies. The Board would review the company's profit and loss accounts each

   month, and any additional information that management provided or that the Board

   requested. The accounts would also be externally audited twice each year. The

   auditors would, as part of that process, meet the audit committee chair on an ad-

   hoc basis and brief the audit committee and the Board as to the outcome of each

   audit. I recall that at times, the Board would be presented with more detailed

   financial reports. These were collated by the CFO and were intended to assist the

   Board in making decisions regarding the company's strategy. If there were any

   concerns regarding the company or group's accounting which had a significant

   impact on the company's financials, I would have expected the CFO or auditors to

   bring these to the attention of the Board and the audit committee.



40. It is my expectation that the Legal and Operations teams would have been

   responsible for the negotiation of the Horizon contracts.        I would have also

   expected that the terms of key contracts such as Horizon might have been

   evaluated by external advisors. In that respect, I note there is evidence of Gartner

   assisting in evaluating the contract for the Next Generation of Horizon

   (POL00021487), which matches my expectation. Summaries of these negotiations

   were also brought to the Board, which is what I would have expected for such a

   large contract. Those summaries would have covered the major points but would

   not have gone into detail regarding the contractual provisions. To my knowledge,



                                    Page 21 of 30
                                                                                       WI TN04380100
                                                                                     WI TN04380100




   the contract itself was never presented at these meetings, and I would not have

   expected as Chairman of the RMH Board (or non-executive of POL) to review the

   detailed contract; I would expect to be briefed by the executive team on the key

   points.



41.In answer to the Inquiry's question regarding POL00090428 (Annex to Second

   Supplement Agreement) and my knowledge of page 23, I cannot recall being

   aware of this provision (or indeed, the agreement). This agreement was signed

   before I joined the Royal Mail group. As described in paragraph 40, I would not

   typically have expected to review the details of a contract (and I do not recall

   reviewing this one); I would expect to be briefed by the executive team, in relation

   to major new projects / contracts that were being signed, on the key terms

   (although this particular contract was put in place before I joined the Board).



42. Further, in respect of the Inquiry's question regarding FUJ00118186 (POCL and

   ICL Pathway Third Supplemental Agreement and my knowledge of provision 5.3),

   I note that this contract was signed before I joined the Royal Mail group. In any

   event, whilst I would have expected that contracts of this nature had certain audit

   provisions (for example in relation to performance and financial metrics), I confirm

   that I cannot recall being made aware of this provision (and the same points apply

   as in paragraph 40 above).



43. 1 have been asked to set out the nature and extent of my involvement in the design

   and implementation of the IMPACT programme. Having refreshed my memory

   from the documents provided to me (in particular POL00032147), I recall that



                                    Page 22 of 30
                                                                                     WITNO4380100
                                                                                  WI TN04380100




   IMPACT was intended to update and improve the accounting system and save

   time and money. I do not recall much more detail than this. I do not recall the

   Boards discussing the fact that SPMs would no longer be able to place disputed

   discrepancies into a local suspense account and roll into a new period. As a

   general matter, this is not the type of issue I would have expected to be raised to

   the level of the Board of POL or RMH, as this was a comparatively detailed

   technical issue_ I have no recollection of any involvement in the procurement or

   negotiations of Horizon Online.



   E — legal matters and prosecutions



44. 1 have been asked to describe my role in overseeing the RMH, RMG and POL legal

   departments, problem management teams, security and / or investigation

   department. After leaving my roles at RMG and RMH in 2009, I of course heard

   through media sources of the terrible and irreparable harm that the legal cases

   brought by the Post Office caused to so many SPMs. I do not recall any discussion

   during Board meetings of the prosecutions that POL was pursuing against those

   SPMs. I have tried to remember any specific discussions, but cannot recall any

   discussions at all at the Board level of the prosecutions, less still the legal

   arguments that were being advanced in those cases.



45.As a general matter, my role as Chairman and NED of RMH was one which

   involved overseeing and advising on the strategic objectives of RMH. Where

   issues were raised to Board level, I would seek to take an active role in discussing

   and probing the best course of action. Since the litigation was taking place within



                                     Page 23 of 30
                                                                                      WITNO4380100
                                                                                    WI TN04380100




   POL, as with other companies with whom I have worked over the years, I would

   have expected the Board of POL to be kept up to date with key litigation ongoing

   in the company. Usually this would include litigation which impacted, or had the

   potential to impact, the strategic objectives of the company. I would not have

   expected to have been briefed on all litigation, but rather those deemed by the

   executive team to be high cost or have the potential to impact the strategic

   objectives of the company. Within the business, the responsibility for conducting

   and overseeing litigation is, in my experience, the responsibility of the company's

   legal function.



46_ To the best of my recollection, this is how matters worked at RMH and POL. There

   was a legal team which was responsible for oversight of criminal and civil

   proceedings. Anything affecting the Group's strategic objectives should have been

   flagged to the relevant personnel and Board as required. During my time at RMH,

   the Group's General Counsel did not sit on the Board. Given the passage of time

   and the various corporate reorganisations during my tenure, I cannot recall the

   General Counsel's reporting line, but I would have expected them to report to the

   CEO.



47. During my tenure, I do not recall that civil or criminal proceedings against SPMs

   specifically were addressed at Board meetings. Having reviewed the documents

   provided by the Inquiry to refresh my memory, including RMG00000006 and

   RMG00000008, I do recall discussion in RMH (it appears from the minutes

   provided this was in the Audit and Risk Committee of RMH) from time to time about

   the issue of theft and fraud in the Royal Mail part of the business (i.e., within the



                                    Page 24 of 30
                                                                                       WI TN04380100
                                                                                     WI TN04380100




   mail centres). I can see from both RMG00000006 and RMG00000008 that figures

   were provided to the Audit and Risk Committee in November 2003 and May 2004

   of numbers of Royal Mail personnel prosecuted; I assume these figures relate to

   the Royal Mail side of the business (as opposed to the Post Office), because it

   refers to `Royal Mail personnel' (in RMG00000006) and is under the heading

   `Protecting Royal Mail Assets' (in RMG00000008) but I cannot be certain. I do

   recall discussion within Royal Mail about the theft of Royal Mail assets. I recall in

   particular that, when I joined the group there was discussion about thefts from the

   mail and, when I visited one particular mail centre I saw walkways running above

   the mail sorting area, with managers standing on the walkways to watch for thefts.

   This struck me as an incredibly unpleasant working environment, and was one of

   the aspects of the culture I recall we sought to address. However, in relation to

   RMG00000006 and RMG00000008, without knowing to whom these figures apply

   it is difficult to comment on their significance retrospectively. The Royal Mail group

   employed in excess of 100,000 people during my tenure and as such, without a

   more detailed breakdown, it is difficult to draw any conclusions from the figures

   included in those committee minutes.



48. Although I do not have specific recollections, I must have been aware at least as a

   general matter that the Post Office also prosecuted individuals for fraud-related

   offences. I would expect (although cannot recall) that there were relevant practices,

   guidelines and policies available in relation to the investigation of any alleged

   wrongdoing and subsequent criminal proceedings. I expect the same existed in

   relation to the suspension or termination of SPMs' contracts and any potential civil

   litigation which might follow. In general, I would not have expected the Board to



                                    Page 25 of 30
                                                                                        WITNO4380100
                                                                                      WI TN04380100




   be briefed on precisely what those policies were, or on individual cases where fraud

   was prosecuted within the business. However, I would absolutely have expected

   the practices, guidelines and/or policies not to permit or require Post Office staff to

   pursue prosecutions in circumstances where there was insufficient evidence or if it

   was known that the relevant losses were in fact caused by an IT system and not

   by an individual. Although I have tried to remember more about this aspect since

   receiving the Request, I cannot recall having seen any of these policies, nor recall

   discussion about them.



49. During my time at RMH and POL, I was not involved in the conduct of audits of

   SPMs' branch accounts. As a member of the POL Board, I would have seen the

   POL company accounts and therefore any profits or losses in connection with rural

   post offices. However, I would not be provided with detailed accounts relating to

   each SPM's branch — accounts of this nature were the responsibility of the Finance

   and Operations teams, and this level of detail would not be presented to the Board.

   The management of the distribution of information on Horizon within POL would

   have been overseen by the CEO, COO and Head of IT.



50.1 have been asked to explain the nature and extent of my involvement in

   investigating and responding to complaints about Horizon and the legal

   proceedings brought by POL. I had no direct involvement in dealing with these

   matters and was unaware of the complaints made by SPMs. Whilst I expect there

   were policies in place to deal with complaints made by SPMs, given my role, do

   not recall seeing or remember the specifics of those procedures.




                                     Page 26 of 30
                                                                                        WITNO4380100
                                                                                      WI TN04380100




51. 1 have reviewed POL00107538 and P0L00040345, and have been asked to

  provide my recollections. I do not recall receiving these letters and do not know if

  I did. During my time at RMH and POL I often received a large amount of mail

   each day relating to issues right across the business. When mail was addressed

   to me in my capacity as Chairman of RMH, it would not always be passed to me.

  A proportion of the mail I received would inevitably flag issues which the sender

  would have liked to be resolved. If I was not in the office on that day,

  correspondence was often passed on to somebody else to action instead,

  sometimes the complaints department. This would very often mean that issues

   could be dealt with more efficiently than if I were to review each letter individually.

  I have reflected back but unfortunately cannot recall the letter from Alan Bates and

  subsequent correspondence with Betty Williams MP, and do not know if I dealt with

   it personally at any stage, or if it was only dealt with on my behalf, perhaps by the

  complaints department given the nature of the letter (it seems likely, given that

   there is no reply with my signature on it or any handwritten notes on the letter by

  me, that it was received or handled by someone else, but I cannot be sure given

   the long passage of time).



52. 1 have been asked to describe the nature and extent of my knowledge and

   involvement in POL v Wolstenholme and have reviewed documents P0L00142503,

  POL00118229 and POL00120833. I do not recall having any knowledge of this

  case, but I would have expected the Head of the Legal team, the CEO or Managing

  Director of POL to have been informed of a case where the integrity of Horizon had

  been successfully challenged. I may not have been notified about this case

  because the amount of money involved was low by comparison to litigation that



                                     Page 27 of 30
                                                                                         WI TN04380100
                                                                                       WI TN04380100




   might typically be raised for consideration by the Board. It goes without saying that,

   in hindsight, had any executive been aware of the evidence presented in this case

   and the potential impact on SPMs' convictions, I would like to have been informed.



53. 1 have reviewed POL00161769 and do not recall why I asked to be notified about

   the reopening of Hoylake Post Office following the suspension of its SPM. I was

   not copied to the emails that have been shared with me, and I cannot recall seeing

   them. I do recall that from time to time MPs contacted me about the closure of a

   post office in their local area. It could be that this is what happened on this occasion

   — the local MP could have written to me to request that the decision to close a

   particular post office should be revisited (in this instance from the emails I have

   been provided, I can see this might be connected to a golf tournament). However,

   I do not recall any questions being raised to me about this particular instance.



   F — General



54. In the 'General' section of the request, I have been asked by the Inquiry to reflect

   on my time at the Royal Mail group and if I would handle the Horizon system and

   the associated issues differently. As I have explained at the outset, I have been

   absolutely horrified by the information I have seen subsequently emerge about the

   improper prosecution of SPMs.



55. Reflecting back, with the benefit of the information provided to me by the Inquiry, I

   cannot see that I could have provided more information personally to the Board or

   DTI, given the information that had been presented to me. I also cannot see that



                                     Page 28 of 30
                                                                                      WITNO4380100
                                                                                    WI TN04380100




   it was brought to my attention at the time the way in which POL was handling any

   challenges to the integrity of the Horizon IT system, or what POL's approach to

   prosecutions and the disclosure of information to SPMs was.



56. 1 have found it difficult to reconstruct my memory from such a long time ago and

   on the documents I have been provided with. I therefore find it challenging to

   establish what could have been done differently to ensure that the Board was

   alerted to these issues sooner. The corporate structure was similar to those used

   in other similarly sized companies at the relevant time and I considered that this

   structure typically offered adequate oversight. I believe that the Board gave reports

   regarding Horizon adequate attention, but did not have the information available to

   them to indicate that there was a deeper issue with Horizon.



57.In hindsight, a greater level of data regarding labour turnover, accompanied by

   details on why employees were exiting, may perhaps have helped to establish what

   was happening to SPMs. However, SPMs were not employees of the Post Office

   or Royal Mail and so I expect that the data would not have been available, nor

   would the Board have expected to receive such data. Further, more detailed

   reports regarding the Royal Mail group's prosecutions, ideally divided by subsidiary

   and role, would have been helpful in perhaps flagging the patterns which emerged

   but there is no guarantee that these would have been brought to the attention of

   the relevant individuals. I have considered if a dedicated SPM whistle blower

   hotline might have assisted_ I suspect it would, though only if reports were

   adequately escalated and given the importance which, in hindsight, they clearly

   deserved.



                                    Page 29 of 30
                                                                                           WI TN04380100
                                                                                        WI TN04380100




58. 1 would like to conclude this statement by once again expressing my heartfelt

   sympathies to all those so terribly affected by these miscarriages of justice. I also

   re-iterate my willingness to assist this Inquiry with any further topics, if it is thought

   that I could be of any help.

Statement of Truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:
             GRO
          28.02.2024
Dated:




                                      Page 30 of 30
                                                                            WI TN04380100
                                                                         WI TN04380100




Index to First Witness Statement of Allan Leighton
 No.     URN        Document Description                   Control Number
    1.   POL00095531Post Office Limited Operations
                    Functional Report of October 2008      POL-0095114
    2. POL00095521 Post Office Limited Operations
                                                           POL-0095104
                    Functional Report of April 2006
    3. POL00021487 Post Office Limited Board Minutes of    POL0000020
                    23/02/2005
    4. POL00090428 Annex to Second Supplement              POL-0087397
                    Agreement
    5. FUJ00118186 POCL and ICL Pathway 'Third             POINQ0124350F
                    Supplemental Agreement
    6. POL00032147 Post Office Limited Board Minutes of    POL-0029082
                    17/08/2005
    7. RMG00000006 Royal Mail Holdings plc Audit and       VIS00007414
                    Risk Committee Minutes of
                    11/11/2003
    8. RMO00000008 Royal Mail Holdings plc Audit and       VIS00007416
                    Risk Committee Minutes of
                    24/05/2004
    9. POL00107538 Letter from Alan Bates to Mr A          POL-0105846
                    Leighton RE: Termination of
                    Sub postmaster Contract
    10. POL00040345 Letter from Richard Barker to Betty    POL-0036827
                    Williams MP, RE: Horizon
    11. POL00142503 Email from R Ismay to D Parker, M      POL-BSFF-
                    Talbot and others, RE: 'Legal case —   0001779
                    Cleveleys PO 153 405 Mrs J
                    Wolstenholme'
    12. POL00118229 Advice on Evidence and Quantum by      POL-0120149
                    S.A Brochwicz-Lewinski in POCL v
                    Julie Wolstenholme, Case No.
                    CR101947
    13. POL00120833 IT Spend - P12 Reconciliation with     POL-0126849
                    Next Steps; Risk-Opps and Forecast
                    Analysis
    14. POL00161769 Email from Patricia Hull to Mark       POL-0150146
                    Partington, RE: '42 Day Process —
                    Escalations'
