                                                                                       WI TNO8170100
                                                                                     WITNO8170100




                                                       Witness Name: David John Pardoe
                                                         Statement No.: WITNO8170100
                                                               Dated: 24th October 2023


                         POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




            FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF DAVID JOHN PARDOE




I, David John Pardoe, will say as follows...




   1. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry

       (the "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 17 August

       2023 (the "Request").



   2. I come from a family of Postmasters; my late father owned and ran a Post

       Office in the Northwest of England from the 1950s and his mother held the

       position before that.


   3. Given my family ties with the Post Office, then from a very young age I could

       successfully perform Post Office transactions and I used to run my father's

       Post Office for him whilst he went away on holiday. I initially commenced my

       career within the Civil Service, but as a young man, perhaps aged 19 or so, I




                                        Page 1 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




   applied for and was successful in securing a Post Office Crown Officer

   counter clerk role in the Warrington area.


4. I then quickly progressed from counter clerk and held several administrative

   roles within the Liverpool District. One role was to design and deliver SPMR

   onsite training. Prior to this initiative new or incoming SPMRs had been

   trained by the outgoing. This was proving to be increasingly unsatisfactory as

   any bad habits or flawed transactional processes were being immediately

   inherited by the new SPMR. The revised training saw specialist training

   delivered by one of two trainers. As such, I travelled across the Northwest of

   England providing two-week training inductions and refresher courses.


5. One day I was catching up on administrative work within the District Office in

   Liverpool. I was approached by two individuals who I knew worked for the

   Post Office Investigation Department - POID. This was the function that

   provided investigation services to all elements of Post Office including Royal

   Mail, Parceforce, Post Office Ltd and CASHCO (the cash carrying arm of Post

   Office). The individuals asked me if I would consider working in an inner-city

   branch that was under investigation for dishonesty. I agreed and I worked in

   the Post Office branch for several months and supported a covert surveillance

   operation. The operation was in connection to benefit payment book fraud.


6. The operation concluded satisfactorily, and I received recognition for my

   support. Shortly after I was offered the role of the Investigation Liaison Officer;

   this role saw me act as the interface between the Liverpool Post Office District

   and POID. The role involved taking reports of crime and suspected crime



                                   Page 2 of 62
                                                                                     WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




   events, documenting them, and reporting them for intervention by POID. This

   was very much an interface role and would not initially have led or supported

   PACE investigative interviews or similar activity. I think that this would have

   been around 1991.


7. I have asked the Post Office IT Inquiry team for detailed personnel print out of

   the roles and role moves I held from around 1991. I genuinely do not wish to

   appear evasive but do need support to aide my memory. I have held several

   roles in the function and some will be of more interest to the Inquiry than

   others.


8. There was minimal training given to discharge the POID interface role and

   certainly nothing formal. I do seem to recall spending a week or two with my

   predecessor, but the role was very much around reporting cases, providing

   employee details obtained from HR, gathering witness information and so on.

   In fairness, I didn't feel ill-equipped to perform the role as the technical

   elements were delivered outside of my pay grade.


9. Throughout this period the business was going through a sizeable number of

   changes. In fact, change seemed a constant within the business, and this led

   to the amalgamation of Post Office administrative structures for Liverpool,

   North Wales and Manchester areas into one North West and North Wales

   Region. The Regional office ended up in Salford.


10. Shortly after this, the Region started to encourage me and one other Liaison

   Investigator to get closer involved in investigations that were being submitted

   to POID. I don't know the reason why. It was just a belief from some strong

                                   Page 3 of 62
                                                                                        WI TNO8170100
                                                                                      WITN08170100




   stakeholders that we should be closer to the conduct of our own

   investigations. This started to see me conduct investigations in a supporting

   role as second officer.


11. 1 do recall this was the start of formal training. I seem to recall that at this time

   I received classroom training delivered by Royal Mail Group and access to

   other training materials. I was also very heavily mentored by an experienced

   and far more senior investigation manager, and this would see every element

   of my work supervised. Again, I could do to reference with career details

   surely held by the Post Office to provide dates with greater clarity. Given the

   time that has elapsed I suspect that none of the training materials /

   methodology will be available to the Inquiry.


12. The business continued into a state of flux. At the time, POID were being split

   into the various Post Office business units. When this happened, I moved into

   the newly formed Regional Security Department, had a substantive

   investigator, as my line manager, and a Regional Head of Security. I seem to

   recall that my job title also changed to that of Assistant Investigator.


13. This period saw me receive significantly more training both formally and

   informally. It's difficult to recall the timeline, but at various stages in an

   operational role I received classroom investigative training, internally and

   externally delivered courses around search awareness (using Metropolitan

   Police facilities), interviewing course with Lancashire Constabulary, PACE

   training, RIPA awareness and CPIA awareness. Elements such as PACE,

   RIPA, HRA and CPIA were supplemented with various materials that were



                                     Page 4 of 62
                                                                                     WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




   intended for retention. PACE and CPIA codes of practice would have been

   available within every interview kit. I still recall having the codes in my

   investigation kit. In my Post Office career, I also studied and passed my

   Proceeds of Crime Act Senior Appropriate Officer. This was a pass fail one

   week course delivered by the National Police Improvement Agency.


14. During my career in the function I also undertook other lines of role and

   academic learning; I hold a certificate and diploma in management and am a

   holder of an MSc in Security & Risk Management attained from Leicester

   University. My MSc centered on organisational crime risk and was completed

   in September 2000 by submission of an academic study on the reasons why

   SPMRs committed offences of theft and wrongdoing and therefore rendered

   themselves liable to prosecution. The work was entitled with complete irony

   "There Must Be Some Mistake"; this referenced that SPMRs were shocked, in

   the main, that their behavior led to suspension and prosecution. I'm struggling

   to find a copy of the work and presume it's lost during a number of house

   moves. I do recall that several subjects were citing unexplained losses as

   being the cause of their downfall, but these were ordinarily attributed to sneak

   thefts or a reluctance to provide full and frank explanations. This study would

   have been completed pre-Horizon.


15.As an Assistant Investigator my role was to, predominantly, support field

   investigation into allegations of dishonesty. I would not lead on interviews

   under caution but would rather support with investigation questions around

   the daily and weekly accounts.




                                   Page 5 of 62
                                                                                       WI TNO8170100
                                                                                   WITN08170100




16. Again, I would need reference to Post Office HR details, but I then became a

   substantive lead Investigator. This move was supported by additional training

   and my lead work (first officer interviews, file preparation and so on) was

   highly supervised to the extent that even grammatical errors within reports

   would be returned for correction - that was the standard of supervision. Even

   after this promotion to lead Investigator I remained in supervision for many,

   many months and certainly longer than for any professional role I have held

   subsequently. I don't think that was any reflection on my ability to progress at

   pace, it was just the way it was. There was a recognition that the role was

   unique and required a high level of interpersonal skill and confidence to

   deploy effectively.


17. There followed a further series of team restructures, building moves and

   boundary moves. The function throughout the years if not decades always

   struck me as an easy target to drive headcount reduction. Indeed, later in my

   career I was performing the role of consultation manager for a long serving

   colleague who had been subject to redundancy. I was to follow a party line

   around change being a business necessity... when the colleague abruptly

   stopped me and proceeded to produce a piece of paper and recount the 14

   restructures they had been personally impacted by since joining the Post

   Office — the majority in the security field. That was the regularity of structure

   change.


18. Nevertheless, I seemed to escape the inevitable culling and received a

   number of role moves and promotions. I was involved in a significant range of

   operational activity within the Security function_ Again, I need an aide to

                                   Page 6 of 62
                                                                                     WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




   memory in terms of precise dates and durations, but roles included

   Investigation team leader and further promotions to national roles and to

   Senior Security Manager. The later saw me, at stages, involved in working as

   a Commercial Security Manager with client managers to assure new and

   existing products and services, a separate role dealing with physical crime

   mitigation, a separate role dealing with operational investigations, a separate

   role dealing with crime intelligence (under a basket of services called

   Grapevine) and administration for the function, along with two or more

   significant periods dealing with organisational design (headcount reduction)

   and the move of Post Office Counters Ltd to Post Office Ltd in 2001. Some of

   these periods would see removal and secondment from my substantive role

   for periods of up to 12 months.


19. Throughout my career my reporting lines both up and down varied

   significantly. From recollection I reported at periods into Susan TOMS (HR

   lead NW Region), Jim McLeish, Tony UTTING, Duncan McFadyen and

   latterly in my career John SCOTT (Head of Security). My span of control also

   varied significantly, and I can recall working without any direct reports,

   through to an operational Senior Security Manager leading a team of 15 or 20

   via several team leaders and direct reports. In terms of competence and

   professionalism of colleagues and managers, then given my varied roles and

   length of service then that's a difficult one. I worked with some fantastic

   individuals who were highly capable and committed to doing their role to the

   best of their ability. I worked with others who were less so and who would be

   managed accordingly. Overall, the investigators were competent. We had, in



                                   Page 7 of 62
                                                                                     WITN08170100
                                                                                   WITNO8170100




   the team, recent po►ice officers and to be honest their application of the role

   and understanding and use of impacting legislation was no better or worse

   than incumbents who had progressed through a non-policing route, so I

   suppose that must give some credit to Post Office grown talent and

   incumbents.



20. I left the Post Office in 2014. I was tired of the London commute and living

   away from home. I was also increasingly worn out by the prevailing Security

   Team culture. I would say, from the outset, that I do have an issue with

   several prosecution decision making activities and subsequent inputs I am

   asked to comment on later in this statement; my memory is that I left the

   operational Fraud Strand / Security Operations, to become the lead for crime

   intelligence and administrative support under the generic term Grapevine.

   Certainly, POL00091037 is attributed to me and clearly shows the prosecution

   lead as lain MURPHY, but later in the life of the case I perform the

   prosecution sign off. Mr. MURPHY was the Fraud Strand leader for a period (I

   think he was my successor) and the case relates to late 2010. I think Mr.

   MURPHY held the position throughout 2010. To the best of my knowledge, I

   had limited operational involvement in investigation cases from then (albeit I

   seem to have returned to Security Operations in 2011 for a period). In my

   Grapevine role I supported Fujitsu ARQ requests made by operational

   Investigators (as one administrative part of my Grapevine role). Later in this

   statement I talk about supporting an operational investigation when Mr.

   Stephen BRADSHAW wished to obtain advice when an interviewee was

   initially undecided whether they required the presence of a solicitor. Without

                                  Page 8 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                   WITN08170100




   the benefit of memory or documentation to the contrary, I suspect that this

   was a period when I was the only immediate available Senior Security

   Manager and not the substantive Security Operations lead — I will cover off

   this specific instance later in this statement. To recap I suspect that the

   Inquiry is labelling a small number of authorised prosecution activities

   incorrectly to me.



21. 1 suppose that I could best paraphrase my various roles and responsibilities

   within my security career with Post Office as follows:


   i)     Investigation liaison was a District role acting as the interface between

   the District and the Post Office Investigation Department. I received no

   specific training save for a transfer of activity with the predecessor. I was

   trained in elements such as DPA and the various headings (In Confidence)

   and storage and transmission protocols required for personal data and

   confidential papers.

   ii)    The Assistant Investigator was a Regional role. This was accompanied

   by a mentorship with a far more experienced Investigator. I would have

   started to receive training through this role using mediums from classroom,

   through to electronic and paper handouts. I would also have met members of

   the Criminal Law Team. I recall training sessions from both in and out of

   house Lawyers and training staff from the Post Office Investigation

   Department.

   iii)   The Investigator role was Regionally based. My training detailed above

   was supplemented by significant levels of supervision and general oversight.



                                  Page 9 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITN08170100




   In this role I was performing the role of lead investigator and discharging

   activity from interviews under caution through to case paper and committal

   preparation. To the best of my knowledge all my tenure in this capacity was

   pre-Horizon.

   iv)    I don't recall me holding National Investigator role (I thought this was a

   title afforded to a former line manager Mr Tony UTTING). There was a period

   when I was responsible for leading a small team of investigators, again a

   Regional role. This role was leading on complex investigations and supporting

   a team to ensure effective casework delivery. Again, this was mainly pre-

   Horizon and was interspaced with a period supporting Tony UTTING as a

   National Investigation Manager for Post Office Ltd; I also supported Mr.

   UTTING at this time with the draft of policy documents and also was

   seconded for a 12-month period as a project lead to the creation of Post

   Office Ltd from Post Office Counters.



22. As a Senior Security Manager, I occupied several varied positions:



   i)     The Commercial Security Manager saw me support new and existing

   products and services in terms of ensuring that they were deployed with

   suitable levels of crime risk assurance. This was a national role and saw me

   work with clients and Product Managers. This was a senior role in terms of

   impact and decision making albeit with no operational investigative activities

   or involvement in Horizon.

   ii)    The Fraud Strand Manager / Security Operations saw me support

   investigation cases via Investigators and their respective Team Leaders. I

                                  Page 10 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITN08170100




can't be specific around the numbers in terms of span of control but there

were regionally based Investigators covering events across the UK, along with

Team Leaders and I seem to recall Financial Investigators. There may have

also been a Casework Manager responsible for the timely and effective

conduct of investigations. My role here was to provide leadership to the crime

landscape and to support the identification of new and emerging crime trends.

During this period, I would have discharged the prosecution authority albeit

this is an area I will discuss later in this statement.

iii)   Training through this period continued; I became the POCA Senior

Appropriate Officer and seem to recall undertaking other training courses in a

similar vein to those detailed earlier in the statement.

iv)    From the role above I seem to recall leaving operational investigation (I

have already referenced that my successor was ultimately lain MURPHY) and

leading the crime intelligence and administrative support function under the

title Grapevine. Structure would have been broadly similar to the above in

terms of leading the function via direct reports and one full-time consultant.

There was no Horizon or operational investigations in this role save for

providing administration support for the conduit of Horizon and enabling Helen

ROSE as a team member to support ad-hoc analytical requests a number of

which related to Horizon. I'm unsure the dates to which I ebbed and flowed

between Security Operational roles, but I certainly became the substantive

Grapevine Senior Security Manager in 2012; this saw me hold responsibility

for the intelligence services provided by a third-party supplier in terms of risk

and potential risk / crime pattern analysis for Post Office branches utilising the

National Intelligence Model and crime risk management risk weightings. As

                                Page 11 of 62
                                                                                       WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




   I've detailed, at this time, I also had direct reports responsible for supporting

   casework management and for liaising with Fujitsu in terms of receiving and

   processing ARQ requests. To be honest, my primary focus at this time was

   supporting the Grapevine product in terms of the external crime landscape.

   v)     Around 9 months or so before I left in late 2014, I was effectively being

   removed from my role and asked to design a structure that would again

   support a reduction in headcount as well as accommodate my departure. I

   wasn't exactly placed on gardening leave, but my operational career with Post

   Office was at an end and I was more or less omitted from all other activity.



23. 1 want to address now how I understood my role in each of the following. For

   simplicity I will model my answers around those organisational roles I held as

   Investigation Manager, Investigation Team Manager and Senior Security

   Manager Fraud and latterly in my Post Office career Grapevine.



24. For disciplinary matters I would have observed the relevant Codes of Conduct

   appertaining to Post Office Ltd. As a line manager I would have applied these.

   There were legacy Security team discipline conduct instructions, albeit my

   recollection is that these were superseded by generic business unit standards

   of behavior and particularly at separation from Royal Mail Group in 2012.

   Irrespective of policy, it was recognised that conduct awards would be

   potentially disclosable in future prosecution cases and that they would have a

   significant impact on the recipient. I am aware of the award of conduct up to

   and including termination of employment for members of the Security Team.




                                  Page 12 of 62
                                                                                      WI TNO8170100
                                                                                    WITN08170100




25. For interviewing then my role was to comply with the impacting elements of

   PACE when I was actively conducting investigations.


26. Disclosure I wish to cover in more detail later as I appreciate that it will form a

   significant part of the Inquiry's ask from me. All Investigators were expected

   to comply with CPIA.



27. In terms of my role in litigation, then I read this to be recovery under POCA;

   for non POCA litigation, then my role would have simply to have been to

   provide supporting case papers and potentially additional statements. I did not

   make non POCA litigation decisions. In terms of POCA then I discharged the

   role of Senior Appropriate Officer. This was around providing oversight to the

   Financial Investigators and acting as signatory to the various authorisations

   required to perform their role and the recovery objective. The Head of

   Security, John SCOTT, had overarching responsibilities for the strategy

   around recovery. I certainly recall conversations with him around the

   calculations concerning recoverable amounts and defendant's benefit. I recall

   that Mr. SCOTT was specifically challenged by the NFSP around the

   calculation of recoverable amount in a particular case. We discussed the

   case and whilst I don't recall the specific outcome it was clear that he had

   been challenged at a senior level.



28. In the context of liaising with other departments then communication was

   predominantly between investigation function and Criminal Law Team. There

   would be correspondence with the Criminal Law Team on a regular basis. In



                                   Page 13 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITN08170100




   addition, stakeholders such as the Retail Line Management would be

   appropriately apprised of charging decision and key elements of progression.

   In terms of lessons learned and product weaknesses, then we would drive

   liaison with product teams and financial departments within Chesterfield

   Product and Branch Accounting. We would also undertake regular liaison with

   Information Security in respect particularly about requesting Horizon logs.



The Security team's role in relation to investigations and prosecutions.



29. The organisational structure of the Security team changed frequently and I

   have detailed previously a number of the roles I myself occupied as a result of

   restructures; broadly speaking and later in my career, there was a Fraud

   Operations strand that led investigations against employees and SPMRs, a

   Grapevine strand that led on crime intelligence and administrative support,

   Physical Strand that led on supporting physical crime mitigation, Asset

   Security that looked after physical security assets and the Commercial

   Security strand that offered crime risk assurance to new and revised product

   and services.



30. Function changes could be significant. I seem to recall organisational charts

   with 80 or so colleagues, quickly depleted over the years. There were several

   significant changes that led to sizeable redundancies, strand renaming and

   functional job titles changing.




                                     Page 14 of 62
                                                                                      WITN08170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




31. 1 have read though the suite of supplied policy documents. For Group policies

   that would have been cascaded through the Security team, I would have been

   a recipient as opposed to a contributor / author. On an aside POL00104968

   has a comment that seems to have been attributed to me; this is incorrect, it is

   a comment seemingly from Dave POSNETT who I believe is an Inquiry

   witness.



32. 1 would logically have had input into POL00105229 covering Post Office

   authorised access to PNC. As I recall this was a highly regulated area and

   subject to external audit. Again, logically, I would have oversight into several

   of the POCA type investigation policies and specifically the policies that were

   drafted post Group separation such as POL00104853.



33. Very early in my Security career I worked with Tony UTTING as National

   Investigation Manager. I held for a very brief period a policy and standards

   role. I do not recognise any of my work from this period in the supplied

   documents. This would certainly have been a pre-Horizon role. Any of my

   work from that time I suspect would predate materials available to be given to

   the inquiry.



34. There were several impacting policies during the time that I occupied roles

   within the Security function. Logically, these would have come across my

   desk and whilst I don't recall them specifically, they would have been

   applicable to my team. These would include the Group policies including

   those at P0L00030578 / P0L00104812, P0L00031004, P0L00031003.

                                  Page 15 of 62
                                                                                       WITN08170100
                                                                                      WITNO8170100




   Other policies authored in 2010 and onwards I'm still unsure around my

   precise roles within the function.


35. The function a►so had I seem to recall a suite of polices / procedural standards

   covering PACE 1984 codes of practice, DPA, RIPA, HRA, CPIA and safe

   ways of working.



36. Policies would be revised dependent on legislative changes. We would

   ordinarily be advised of these changes by the Criminal Law team.



37. Post Office split from RMG in April 2012. By this stage I do not believe I was

   working within the investigation element of the Security team. Whilst I

   supported John Scott on separation (I specifically recall discussing with the

   Home Office our status in POCA legislation as well as agreeing a way of

   working with Royal Mail should a Post Office employee or subpostmaster be

   suspected of offences against Royal Mail) — actions and objectives are

   reflected in POL00104900, POL00105191 and POL00105216, I do not recall

   spending significant amounts of my time on the split but I may have attended

   a number of senior meetings.



38. In terms of understanding the way that investigations were conducted post-

   split, then I do not believe that I held a senior role in the investigation function

   at the time. If I did, I'm not confident that it was for a sizeable duration. In

   addressing how investigation conduct changed at this time, then save for the




                                   Page 16 of 62
                                                                                      WI TNO8170100
                                                                                     WITNO8170100




   fact that we no longer received Group policy documents or Group training

   support, then the mechanics of investigations remained the same.



39. In terms of complaints around conduct then I would have been expected to

   follow the company policy around conduct. I certainly don't recall a specific

   policy that we applied outside of the standards expected by Post Office. I

   know that pre 2012 split there was a Group policy, but conduct would have

   followed the business unit protocols.



40. Irrespective of the successive structural changes, then Investigators would

   report into a Team Leader and would overview their cases on a regular 121

   basis. I think at one stage this was completed by both physical case files and

   associated contents along with electronic case logs. Expectation would be

   that the Team Leader would overview their direct report's cases on hand and

   advise around quality and speed of progression. The Team Leader would also

   intervene if a direct report was failing to progress inquiries in a timely manner.

   I do recall that there was also a template around the construction of case files

   to standardise casework.



41.As previously detailed, this was a heavily mentored role, and my expectation

   was that Team Leaders were highly visible and staying close to direct reports

   in terms of casework supervision.



42. Crown Office investigations were relatively rare. The reason for this is that,

   besides the smaller population in terms of physical numbers, Crown Office

                                  Page 17 of 62
                                                                                     WITN08170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




   employees were subject to regular till checks and cash float and stock

   exchanges between their peers. It just wasn't possible or at least simple to

   commit ongoing false account of a cash on hand figure providing, obviously,

   that supervision was applied as it should be. We did however prosecute

   employees including those who worked in a Crown Office. There was no

   difference in approach or expectation of how a case would progress up to and

   including prosecution. If anything, there was a lower appetite for loss within

   the Crown environment. There was a time when Crown employees were

   expected to produce weekly balances with no more than a £2 variance and

   regular values above that could see investigation involvement.


43. There was also a period when resources would have been applied to

   suspected thefts from SPMR assistants. By this I mean cash thefts and not

   simply fraud against customers and / or clients. This ceased when I was new

   in role and ended with the transition of Districts to Regions that I mention

   earlier in the statement. On an aside, I do think that was a retrograde step as

   it left SPMRs isolated and with the unenviable task of attempting to engender

   police support to counter and evidence suspected employee theft.


Audit and investigation



44. I've read through POL00104821. I don't think I have ever seen it before. I do

   question who it is aimed at — I'd have thought it was aimed towards Auditors —

   cash and stock checkers in effect. It's not something, end to end, I'd envisage

   the Investigator completing. In summary, then an Auditor would attend an

   audit based on two broad scenarios; that is that a routine, unexpected, audit

                                  Page 18 of 62
                                                                                      WI TNO8170100
                                                                                   WITN08170100




   has produced evidence of wrongdoing either by virtue of a cash loss, other

   anomaly or admissions made to the Auditor. This would see an Investigator

   provide reactive audit attendance and would only be performed, on the same

   day, if the Investigator was available and the journey was practicable. The

   second reason for attendance would be in response to intelligence around the

   likely result. Intelligence could be Product & Branch Accounting monitoring

   cash movements in branch, or a client complaining about how customer

   transactions were being dealt with.



45. Irrespective as to the catalyst for Investigator attendance, then the purpose for

   attendance would be broadly similar, in terms of securing and examining

   evidence and seeking to obtain an account from the person(s) responsible.

   Whilst frequently, this would see voluntary interviews and searches on the

   day, exceptional circumstances would see arrangements made to interview

   later. Invariably, the Investigator would also have engaged with the retail line

   in terms if future of office immediately post audit.


46. 1 seem to recall that there was a triggers and timescale document that

   covered the monetary loss value at which investigators would get involved,

   coupled with prima facie evidence of wrongdoing. Unfortunately, I've not

   recognised within the bundle of documents supplied to me. It was certainly at

   around a £1K (one thousand pounds) before Investigators got involved and

   even then, at that value, where other conditions existed, such as the value

   disturbed a clear or obviously falsified balance. In terms of did this change

   during my career with Post Office, then in the face of reductions in



                                  Page 19 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                WITN08170100




   Investigator numbers, then lower-level cases would not have progressed.

   There was no one person that was required to instigate an investigation; there

   was an accepted case raise process and it certainly wouldn't have needed my

   involvement as a senior manager.


47. The Contract Manager was not in a position to ultimately unduly influence

   whether a case was raised or not or as to whether a particular course of

   action was followed. This had always been the case and I certainly don't recall

   this changing during my tenure.


48. As previously detailed, there was a trigger document. This would have been

   reviewed during my tenure, but I'd expect that elements in the document

   reflected an increased risk appetite, to reflect that resource had diminished.

   Certainly, I recall undertaking investigations in the late 1990s and early 2000s

   that would never have been conducted later in my career; one example was

   the petty thefts of personal property in a Welsh Crown Office that was met

   with electronic surveillance and early morning testing operations. That type of

   case would never have been undertaken even in 2007 and certainly not in

   2014 when I left.


The process followed by Security team investigators when conducting a

criminal investigation following the identification of a shortfall at audit.



49. Once a reportable audit discrepancy had been made, then the Investigator

   would be expected to attend the branch and make introductions to the

   personnel on site. Traditionally, two Investigators would have attended, with a



                                 Page 20 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




   lead Investigator making introductions and establishing from the Auditor(s) in

   attendance the details of the variance and details of any pertinent comments

   made by the SPMR. Once this was established then on the proviso that the

   audit had been completed, then I would have expected the Investigator to

   invite the SPMR / person responsible for completing the account to a formal

   interview under caution.



50. Personally, I would have started to use my pocketbook from entering the

   branch and would start to record key events and pertinent conversations. I

   would also have asked the SPMR if they had any objection to the interview

   taking place on site, dependent on suitability.



51. 1 would then expect an interview to be prepared; this saw, in my time, a two-

   tape recording machine utilised, and a set of paperwork completed and read

   aloud by the Investigator. The paperwork would see the caution administered

   and paperwork completed around whether legal representation was required.

   There was also an offer made to have a Post Office friend witness the

   interview. Obviously, if either of these conditions were required to be met,

   then arrangements would be made.



52. The events of the day would then be outlined, and confirmation requested

   around any pertinent conversations or verbal statements made prior to the

   start of the recording.




                                  Page 21 of 62
                                                                                  WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITN08170100




53. An account would then be sought from the SPMR. There would be a lead

   Investigator and second. Towards interview conclusion a second caution

   would be administered, and the interview closed. The Investigator would then

   apprise the Contract Manager as to the outcome and traditionally you would

   relay to the SPMR the requirement to speak to his Contract Manager around

   the immediate future of the branch. At a suitable point the Investigators would

   leave the branch, traditionally ensuring that cash and stock was secure.


54. From this stage, the case would enter the casework management system.


Decisions about prosecution and criminal enforcement proceedings



55. There was a period when I dealt with prosecution decisions, both as a conduit

   between the Post Office Investigation Department and line managers making

   the decision and then as a period myself as the nominated representative.

   I'm unsure why the switch was made between line manager and Security as a

   nominated representative, but it occurred.



56.A decision to prosecute would only ever be made in the face of supporting

   advice from the Criminal Law Team (CLT). CLT would have seen all the facts

   appertaining to the case including audit reports, Investigator report, supporting

   evidence and interview precis. My expectation was that the CLT as an integral

   part of Post Office security would have made all the due considerations in line

   with Code for Crown Prosecutors and applied each necessary test in reaching

   their decision. I took a stance that the decision will have been checked by




                                 Page 22 of 62
                                                                                    WITN08170100
                                                                                   WITNO8170100




   CLT for fairness and objectivity. I saw my role to confirm their decision and

   place the case into prosecution status via the Investigation Team Leader.



57. 1 understand that documentation exists stating that the decision to prosecute

   ultimately sat with the Head of Security (POL00104929). I'm genuinely not

   sure where that originated. I do seem to recall that towards the end of my

   tenure John SCOTT as Head of Security was personally signing off the

   authorities. During my tenure I was advised that I was the nominated

   representative. I guess that the Head of Security reference may have been a

   post Group separation change.


58. The Contract Manager had no input into the decision-making process.


59. In terms of test around the correctness of prosecution and charging decisions,

   then I firmly expected this to have been considered at the CLT stage. If they

   had felt that public interest factors tended against prosecution, then my

   expectation was that this would have been clearly stated. I'm genuinely not

   attempting to be evasive, but I failed to see what additional input I was

   providing around correctness when a Principal or Senior Lawyer had carefully

   made the charging decision.


60. The question around charges was solely within CLT; whilst towards the end of

   my tenure I'm aware that investigators would recommend charges when

   submitting papers into the CLT, the ultimate recommendations sat with CLT.

   Again, in terms of prosecution decision then my expectation was that all

   elements had been considered by CLT in reaching a decision.



                                  Page 23 of 62
                                                                                     WI TNO8170100
                                                                                    WITN08170100




61. Restraint and confiscation was enacted under POCA 2002 and under the

   oversight of the National Police Improvement Agency (NPIA). There was a

   prosecution financial trigger applied to engagement and I seem to recall this

   was around £5K (five thousand pounds). The initiative was under the

   oversight of the Head of Security and for a period as Senior Appropriate

   Officer, I could provide the signatory for various elements of the Act.

   Confiscation / restraint was very much the default position, and it was widely

   recognised as being a key driver to recovering loss. I don't recall a specific

   sign off process to consider proceedings, but obviously the Financial

   Investigators would keep me apprised and require my input as SAO signatory.


Training Instructions and guidance to investigators within the Security

team



62. Throughout my career in the Security team there were several approaches to

   training; I may well reference courses that I personally attended that were

   subsequently made obsolete or superseded by other training interventions.

   For example, I trained under Lancashire Constabulary in terms of

   investigative interviewing but am aware that would have only applied to a

   small number of investigators. Generically, the function saw comprehensive

   training. This would traditionally have been a residential course held at a

   management training facility. Whilst I do not recall the exact curriculum, it

   certainly contained elements around interviewing of witnesses and suspects (I

   seem to recall role playing was a mainstay) and would also have covered

   search awareness. Again, my own search course was led by Group trainers at



                                  Page 24 of 62
                                                                                       WI TNO8170100
                                                                                     WITN08170100




   Metropolitan Police training college using their own search houses. I seem to

   recall that the residential Post Office training course had a pass I fail

   weighting with additional support given to weaker attendees.



63. All elements of case file construction would have been covered including

   evidence gathering and committal preparation. I would have envisaged that

   this included obtaining evidence from third parties, albeit I do not recall any

   specific reference to Horizon data. All Investigators would have received

   instruction in the use of Horizon and so logically I would have expected that

   available evidence would have been covered then.



64. Formal training would have been supplemented with significant levels of

   supervision in terms of operational activity and case paper construction and

   submission. This was a role that traditionally had a longer lead in time given

   the uniqueness of activity undertaken.



65. During formal training then attendees would have been provided with a range

   of training materials including impacting policies and a copy of PACE and

   CPIA codes of practice.



66. 1 also seem to recall that representatives from the Criminal Law Team would

   attend the residential training courses for guest slots. I'd be guessing at their

   agenda slot, but the residential training was afforded, quite rightly, a certain

   gravitas.




                                  Page 25 of 62
                                                                                      WITN08170100
                                                                                   WITNO8170100




67. 1 don't recall specifically receiving the 2000 or 2002 Casework Management

   document at POL00104747 I POL00104777 although logic says I would have

   received the documents.


68. I've heard the Inquiry question previously the meaning of source documents

   and policy that specifically highlight the removal from various reports of

   content that indicate failures in security or operational procedures. Throughout

   the various roles I held within the function I never, ever read this as being

   applicable to Horizon bugs, errors or defects. I'd like to provide a clear

   example of how I interpreted this; the Post Office conducted all their product

   offers and services on behalf of third parties. A third party could be a private

   entity, through to government departments such as DWP and DVLA. Each

   product and service had a transactional process that the Post Office agent

   was expected to follow and then some form of back-end reconciliation to

   assure elements that were important to the particular client. Up to 2005, Post

   Offices would pay many millions of pounds to benefit claimants using paper-

   based pension & allowance payment books. This was a wholly flawed

   proposition in terms of the design of the book and a weak reconciliation

   process that saw <10% of work submitted subject to check. In essence, this

   meant that a Crown employee or SPMR or his or her assistant could pay

   benefit claimants £100K (one hundred thousand pounds) in a particular

   accounting week and claim that actually £120K (one hundred and twenty

   thousand pounds) was paid. The resultant cash surplus could be applied then

   to personal use. The fraud in this respect was audacious and drew the

   attention of organised crime groups (OCGs), who would target willing or



                                  Page 26 of 62
                                                                                    WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




   unwilling SPMRs and Crown colleagues. In terms of the inherent weaknesses

   in the design of the product, then Investigators were advised that under no

   circumstances should the product weaknesses be supplied in any form of

   disclosed discipline report but should sit within the offender reporting process.



69. There were similar weaknesses within a range of products. I seem to recall a

   sizeable fraud through the poor treatment of Lottery payment cheques. Again,

   there would have been a concerted effort to keep these failures out of a wider

   public domain. I actually supported the approach.



70. As no time in my career was I aware of an implicit or explicit request, demand

   or expectation that this approach was to be applied to Horizon failures.



71. My expectation is that ultimately every single document and Investigator

   comment on organisational weakness should have been subject to review by

   CLT and the disclosure test applied accordingly. I remember being

   specifically advised, by CLT, that this would be the case.



72. 1 do recall something of the compliance checks. I may be wrong, but I think

   that every case due to be sent to CLT for their comment around a suspect

   offender enquiry went through a series of compliance checks. I actually think

   that this had originally been a minimum of two cases per annum, per

   Investigator but had changed over the years. Their purpose was to

   standardise the quality of casework, I don't recall who specifically performed

   the checks. This changed dependent on team structure and whichever role

                                  Page 27 of 62
                                                                                       W I TN08170100
                                                                                     WI TN 08170100




   held that responsibility. I do recall that earlier structures had a substantive

   Casework Manager that would have had overarching responsibility for

   casework quality. The Casework Manager would have seen every case. I

   seem to recall that this responsibility switched to team leaders for a period

   post restructure and then back to a single point. I seem to recall that Dave

   POSNETT conducted a number of the checks, but I may be wrong.



73.In terms of development, then again, I don't recall specifically being involved

   in their design and deployment but logically I must have been.



74. Again, I never, ever read the requirement to, in any way, sanitise a report

   required to be disclosed for conduct purposes to have been applicable to

   Horizon. My take on this as I have previously detailed was that we were

   absolutely required to treat issues around product and service reconciliation

   and crime risk exposure with care and this certainly extended to placing within

   the public domain. We had significant crime risks within a number of product

   offerings predominantly around DWP type products. The situation was so bad,

   that when the DWP benefit book contract was reaching obsolescence, we had

   to recruit and train a team of submission checkers based in Chesterfield. This

   was to shore up the collapse of weekly submission checking by the DWP.



75.At POL00118104 & P0001181281 find the issue around "Identification

   Codes" as utterly abhorrent. I certainly did not draft the document and have

   no knowledge who did. I do not recall reviewing the document.




                                  Page 28 of 62
                                                                                        WI TNO8170100
                                                                                    WITN08170100




76. We did instruct Investigators to record identification codes. My recollection

   was that these were required to complete any submission into Police to have

   details of subsequent convictions entered onto the PNC. These were referred

   to as NIB type details. I certainly don't recall the horrendous language on the

   form or the obsolete country names.


Analysing Horizon data, requesting ARQ data from Fujitsu and

relationship with Fujitsu.


77. 1 personally was not an operational Investigator from the inception of Horizon.

   I don't recall supporting or certainly leading a Horizon type investigation. I did

   obviously lead the Fraud Strand and Security Operations function during

   pertinent periods so will respond with that in mind.



78. 1 appreciate that this is a view that will have been expressed previously, but

   throughout my tenure the opinion firmly expressed at every turn, internally,

   was that Horizon was fit for purpose. I recall with an element of clarity updates

   from John SCOTT assuring the Security function that the system was reliable,

   and we were to continue with BAU activity. I appreciate that there became a

   more measured approach towards the end of my tenure, but I certainly don't

   recall being involved in those conversations. I also seem to recall an internal

   Paula VENNELLS communication in response to the increasing noise around

   Horizon; obviously I can't recall word for word, but the thrust was that Post

   Office were defending the system and refuted the claims. My point is that with

   honesty the use of tools such as Credence data and ARQ logs were to my

   mind used as much to evidence guilt than innocence and particularly utilised

                                  Page 29 of 62
                                                                                       WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITN08170100




   when false accounting was admitted but not theft. My understanding is the

   Investigator would analyse logs to attempt to evidence theft and wrongdoing

   particularly in terms of cash balance declarations and redeclarations; I'm not

   even sure how the log would denote a bug, error, or defect. It's certainly not

   an area we had any training in, i.e., to spot a bug, error, or defect these are

   the data patterns you should search for. The language at POL00055590 in

   terms of Horizon bashing expressed by a Senior Lawyer was not uncommon.



79. My understanding is that Fujitsu was contracted to provide Audit Record

   Query data, on demand, using an agreed secure process. I seem to recall that

   the data provided a full log at key stroke levels for the period specified by the

   Investigator and providing transactional and branch reporting detail. I'm

   aware that this data could be used to identify singleton transactions (like the

   use of a certain credit card) or a full and complete series of transactions using

   a date range specified by the requester.


80. 1 do recall limits in respect of ARQ requests. FUJ00080107 has refreshed my

   memory and I recall that as a function we were capped, within contract, at 720

   requests P.A. I seem to recall that this changed during mediation, but I wasn't

   involved in discussions around this and am not aware what the uplift was. I

   seem to recall that additional requests were around £500. I don't specifically

   remember being involved in uplift conversations that authorised these; it

   certainly wasn't a budget that I held, and I presume that John SCOTT would

   have addressed this with the wider business.




                                  Page 30 of 62
                                                                                      WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




81. 1 don't recall specifically any changes between legacy Horizon and Horizon

   online. I do not recall Investigator noise that this was proving to be

   problematic.


82. There was a period towards the end of my career when I managed the crime

   intelligence function under the heading Grapevine. This function acted as the

   conduit between the operational Investigators and Fujitsu in terms of ARQ

   requests. This was a stringent process and covered by a policy that

   unfortunately hasn't been presented to me within supplied documents. I didn't

   act as the gatekeeper to requests. I do recall that Dave POSNETT would get

   involved in out of course requests in terms of size. As a Fraud Strand /

   Investigation lead, then I can say that Investigators were empowered to

   request ARQ data using a prescribed process. I don't recall ever authorising a

   request nor by the same token do I recall refusing one.



83. I don't know who specifically received the ARQ requests within Fujitsu — I do

   recall a Penny THOMAS being potentially involved. I do recall that these

   requests were complied with by the return of password protected CD-ROMs_



84. In terms of additional prosecution support then I obviously recall that Fujitsu

   would provide expert witness testimony presented by Gareth JENKINS. I'm

   unsure what the contractual basis for this was.




                                  Page 31 of 62
                                                                                     WITN08170100
                                                                                   WITNO8170100




85. 1 don't recall any discussion I was privy to in 2003 / 2004 around limits on

   Fujitsu requests. I'm not sure what role I undertook in 2003. It wasn't Fujitsu

   facing.



86. 1 was not aware that 2003 had seen a decrease in contractually covered

   requests (a question raised at 28.ii under Horizon data). I suspect this should

   read increase as we were then preparing to shore DWP benefit book

   reconciliation and investigation using internal resource.



87. I'm not aware of any impact on investigations in 2003 that the reduction in

   requests within contract had.



88.2004 saw an increase in pre-paid requests through to the DWP inhouse

   activity previously detailed.



89. 1 do seem to recall some conversation around direct access to data. I'm not

   aware that this was achieved in my tenure and certainly not for historic data. I

   think that Credence access provided 90 days.



90. In my employment post the Post Office I have yet to work for an employer

   who cannot access, on demand, their own EPoS data and usually via their

   own propriety data warehouse. There would be a question around the

   granularity of data held, but my experience is that these can be overcome with

   system changes. I am aware that several retail organisations will exercise

   independent data harvesting and storage solely for the investigation of

                                   Page 32 of 62
                                                                                  WITN08170100
                                                                                WITNO8170100




   anomalies, leaving an independent warehouse to capture transactional sales

   and performance details.



91. In line with my response at 78, my belief is that there was a cynicism in terms

   of the steps that were taken to support any assertion that Horizon was the

   root cause of discrepancies. Horizon data from my perspective was primarily

   a tool to either evidence how false accounting took place or to support a

   charge of theft and particularly when theft was denied at interview. I'm

   struggling to understand how the ARQs would identify a bug, error, or defect

   and particularly if their presence was subtle and sat beneath obvious key

   stroke data.


92. I'm not aware of circumstances where an ARQ was provided to a SPMR, save

   for prosecution cases when I would have expected the data to be disclosed.



93. I've considered POL00114566. At the time I suspect that I was supporting our

   internal response to the withdrawal of the DWP benefit book as a method of

   payment for claimants. I know that this is one of the reasons cited why we

   were seeing an uplift in requests, along with the fact that paper-based records

   were disappearing from branch and that cases needed to be supported by

   Fujitsu.



94. In terms of POL00114566 whilst I can't recall my response at the time, I would

   have been disappointed by the omission and particularly of end of day activity.




                                  Page 33 of 62
                                                                                   WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




95. 1 don't recall my thoughts around the prevalence highlighted in POL00114566

   at the time. I would now read it as a system weakness in terms of capacity,

   exasperated with human error.



96. 1 don't recall that the information in POL00114566 impacted on investigations

   and prosecutions. I see that Tony UTTING was detailed as Head of Security

   in the period. Mr. UTTING may well be closer to response and steps taken.



97. Whether the fact that requests had been returned incomplete was identified

   and communicated in other case then that I'm not aware of. Again, I would

   have, expected that CLT and the Head of Security would have assured this.



98. 1 have no knowledge of what happened to that particular case impacted by

   POL00114566.



99. Other than acting in a role that had team members who acted as the conduit

   between Post Office Investigators and Fujitsu then I can't recall any regular

   contact with them. Contact historically was via the Information Security Team.



100.      I understood Gareth JENKINS to be the expert witness for Horizon. His

   role, remit and purported status was presumably decided between Post Office

   Ltd and CLT. I had no dealings direct or otherwise in this. In matters of

   independence, then my expectation would be that this test around the validity

   of his status would have been applied by CLT.




                                 Page 34 of 62
                                                                                           WI TNO8170100
                                                                                      WITNO8170100




   Relationship with others



   101.      I had very little contact with Cartwright King So►icitors. I seem to recall

      having one meeting with them at one of their offices, but don't recall the

      context or content. I understand that they commenced offering the initial

      charging advice in cases, but I don't recall how that came about. I'm assuming

      that this was post Group separation.



   102.      In the early stages of my career and particularly when I had District

      facing roles as opposed to National, then I had ad-hoc relationships with

      NFSP Representatives. We would often see a Representative performing the

      official friend at interview role and would get to know one another via that

      contact. We also attended NFSP events and roadshows to provide personal

      security advice and to show a presence. As my role progressed Regionally

      and latterly Nationally, then contact became less frequent. I do seem to recall

      that John SCOTT as Head of Security would meet them on a formal and

      presumably structured basis.



Involvement in Criminal Prosecution Studies



Prosecution of Josephine Hamilton


   103.      I have no recollection of this case and note from POL00047955 that

      Tony UTTING was detailed as prosecution authority. I have read and noted y,

      POL00118877 and POL00118990 with POL0018990 unfortunately being



                                     Page 35 of 62
                                                                                     WITN08170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




   unreadable. Again, I cannot be sure what role I played in this investigation. I

   was not the lead Investigator, nor second officer. Potentially, I would have

   discussed case progression at 121s with team leaders as I recognise the

   inclusion of Paul DAWKINS as holding this position, but I really am

   speculating. I clearly became involved later in the prosecution as evidenced

   by POL00049083.



104.      I was aware of the allegations around Horizon IT issues. At the time

   and as previously detailed, these would have been treated in line with the

   business advice. I see that at POL00044388 this sentiment is reiterated by

   Juliet MCFARLANE as Principal Lawyer.



105.      I do not recall specific communications in terms of plea, other than

   those supplied to me as part of the Inquiry. I would expect that the managing

   agent / counsel would be involved along with CLT and the Investigator in the

   case. I see that this case came to me for authority to proceed with the

   proposal, I'm not sure how often this would take place. Very often a basis for

   plea would be agreed on the day and without my availability and therefore

   input. I would be guided on the appropriateness of acceptance by CLT.


106.     I'm not aware of any conditions required to accept the plea. I don't

   recall ever being privy to discussions that a plea came with caveats around

   Horizon.




                                  Page 36 of 62
                                                                                     W I TN08170100
                                                                                 WI TN 08170100




107.       I'm not aware of the circumstances of why the theft count was left on

   file. I'd presume that this was to enable reinstatement should it be required at

   a later date. I'd really have expected CLT to have led on this.


108.       I would likely have read POL00047955. There must surely be a

   connection between agreeing to treat the theft charge and the lack of theft

   evidence. I read the observation by Mr. BRANDER around evidence of cash

   inflation (lack of) to mean that he did not find a series of inflated cash

   declarations succeeding lower declared values. I wouldn't have thought this

   was unique as there were ways to overstate cash values without leaving an

   audit trail.


109.       I have considered POL00049071 and POL00049535. I would have

   been supervising Ged HARBINSON. I had qualified under the National Police

   Improvement Agency as the POCA Senior Appropriate Officer. I would have

   had oversight of the financial investigation using 121 discussions with Mr.

   HARBINSON as Financial Investigator and his case notes. This was a period

   when we were heavily supervised by the NPIA.


110.       I do not have the benefit of successive POCA file notes that illustrate

   how the loss was recovered. I presume form POL00049083 that the amount

   was repaid prior to sentencing.


111.       I have read the relevant paragraphs of POL00113278. Clearly, the

   prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post Office refutes that

   the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there was knowledge of

   bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and significantly affect the cash

                                   Page 37 of 62
                                                                                  WITN08170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




   values required to perform an acceptable balance and I was expected to

   remain mute around these and continue any form of role within the Security

   function, then I would have considered my position untenable.


Prosecution of Susan Rudkin



112.     I have read and noted the available documents in relation to the above

   named. I would have had no role in the initial investigation but would have

   been privy to the upward report at POL00050123. As previously stated, this

   was a period when I discharged the role of nominated representative in terms

   of prosecution decision. I have previously outlined my role and would have

   taken the proposed CLT charges and at POL00050347 and advise that

   prosecution should ensue as per the CLT advice. I was not involved in the

   decision to charge or the offence construction.



113.     I first became aware of the case when I would have received the report

   cascade at P0L00050026. My role at the time would have been Strand

   Leader and would have been to work through the Investigation Team Leader

   to ensure appropriate case progression. I discharged the nominated

   representative role and would have performed my SAO role in terms of any

   POCA engagement. Because of the relationship with the NFSP, I would have

   likely kept John SCOTT apprised as Head of Security.


114.     I had no role in the initial investigation.




                                  Page 38 of 62
                                                                                  WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




115.     My role in relation to charge and prosecution remains that at 112/

   above.


116.     I have considered POL00050244, P0L00050040, P0L00061322,

   P0L00046450, POL00056762 and P0L00094295. I would have been

   supervising Ged HARBINSON. I had qualified under the National Police

   Improvement Agency as the POCA Senior Appropriate Officer. I would have

   had oversight of the financial investigation using 121 discussions with Mr.

   HARBINSON as Financial Investigator and his case notes. This again would

   have likely been a case conducted with the knowledge of the NPIA.


117.     Recovery decisions were made in line with POCA and after

   consultation with John SCOTT as Head of Security given the gravitas of the

   investigation in terms of NFSP relationship.


118.     I understand from POL00056762 that the amount outstanding was paid

   by way of Compensation Order.


119.     I have examined POL00051044, P0L00059762, POL00044916 and

   POL00060421. I'm not certain if I was aware of the correspondence at the

   time. Saying that I would have been surprised if I hadn't been. However, I

   certainly wouldn't have thought the content would have influenced the

   decisions made.


120.     I have read POL00046524 and P0L00050993. I don't recall whether I

   was aware of these issues at the time. However, I have dealt with similar




                                 Page 39 of 62
                                                                                  WI TNO8170100
                                                                                 WITN08170100




   issues and would have expected that the correspondence was sent to CLT for

   their notice.


121.      I do not recall reviewing the prosecution or indictment decisions.


122.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Julian Wilson



123.      I note that at POL00044692 that I am the nominated representative in

   terms of prosecution. This likely would have been the first time I was aware of

   the case. The case would have, traditionally, been sent to me and the been

   forwarded to CLT.



124.      I had absolutely no role in the initial investigation.



125.      I had no role in the charging decision and my prosecution role is as

   previously detailed.




                                   Page 40 of 62
                                                                                   WITNO8170100
                                                                                 WI TN 08170100




126.      Unfortunately, POL00052183 is omitted from my papers. I am therefore

   unaware of the context and the role I played in it



127.      I would have read at the time the report at POL00044692 was

   submitted and been aware of the assertion that Horizon was cited as being

   one of the causes for deficiencies as well as the supporting precis at

   POL00050140 and POL00050128 and the comments made by Mr. Rob

   WILSON. At the time these would have been dismissed given the repeated

   assurances being presented by the business around the system reliability.


128.      I have considered POL00051920, UKG100012555, P0L00044751,

   P011-00044809, P0L00051720, P0L00051459, P0L00044800 and

   P0L00051936. I don't recall seeing these documents previously. I do not

   recall any review of the prosecution decision albeit any proposed change in

   the indictment would, time permitting, ordinarily come back into the Security

   function.


129.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Peter Holmes



                                 Page 41 of 62
                                                                                      WITN08170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




130.      I have been asked to comment on the above using the initial report

   POL00050832 and interview precis P0L00066743.



131.      In terms of prosecution, I can see I was detailed as the nominated

   representative. I would have acted in respect of the CLT decision as

   previously stated. I would have played no active operational role in the initial

   investigation.


132.      I have read the interview precis at POL00050561. I can indeed see that

   Horizon difficulties have been cited. Again, these assertions would have been

   transacted with the fact that a steady stream of denials were being issued by

   Post Office.


133.      I do not recall any review of the prosecution decision albeit any

   proposed change in the indictment would, time permitting, ordinarily come

   back into the Security function. By time permitting, I mean that occasionally a

   change of plea in Court may have been discussed directly with CLT, by the

   agent, and agreed.



134.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of




                                  Page 42 of 62
                                                                                      WITN08170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Seema Misra



135.      I have read and noted the available documents in relation to the above

   named. I would have had no role in the initial investigation but would have

   been privy to the upward report at POL00044541. As previously stated, this

   was a period when I discharged the role of nominated representative in terms

   of prosecution decision. I have previously outlined my role in this matter and

   would have taken the proposed CLT charges and ensured that prosecution

   commenced. Could I immediately add please that during late 2009 / early

   2010 I had no Fraud Strand ownership. This sat instead with lain Murphy.

   Whilst I would have been in role for the inception of the investigation, matters

   during 2010 I would assume were handled or occurred with the knowledge of

   lain MURPHY Senior Security Manager.



136.      I have outlined on a number of occasions my thought process around

   discharging the role around prosecution. I saw myself enacting a charging

   decision from CLT. At POL00049716 I would presumably have been agreeing

   with the CLT proposed schedule of charge(s).



137.      At POL00049716 I was enquiring from the CLT Lawyer Mr. Jarnail

   SINGH as to whether there should not be consideration of charges under the




                                 Page 43 of 62
                                                                                     WITN08170100
                                                                                 WITNO8170100




   Fraud Act. At that stage I was aware that the relatively new Act was

   increasingly being used in charging decisions for cases such as this.


138.      I have examined POL00051441 and P0L00051539. On

   P0L00051441, then in the absence of the committal bundle or page stated,

   then I am unsure why the Investigator would question prosecution

   continuance. I don't recall the specifics of this case. I can say that dropping

   the theft charge in relation to acceptance of falsification of accounts was

   certainly not unheard of. Again, these matters would have been deferred back

   to CLT and discussed between CLT and nominated agents.


139.      I have read through P0L00051773. When transacted with

   POL00044541 I can see that the challenge to Horizon integrity occurred in

   around June 2009.


140.      I have noted the contents of P0L00052202. I can see that there is

   some push back on the volume of ARQs requested. The challenge would

   have been around exhausting contractual limits and incurring additional costs.

  I don't read the document as an absolute denial to supply, rather and quite

   rightly a request for further discussion, led by the Investigator to CLT.


141.      I have read through a significant volume of documents in respect to the

   cut and thrust of disclosure requests. I have no knowledge of these requests

   or the CLT counters. At POL00053849 then I have no idea what this relates

   to. I can see no evidence that this was escalated to me, although obviously it

   may have been at Team Leader 121 or similar.




                                  Page 44 of 62
                                                                                   WITN08170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




142.     I can offer no comment as to position offered to the Defence by Post

   Office around disclosure demands. I can clearly see from the various counters

   that Post Office felt this was unacceptable, but perhaps a fuller answer would

   be available from the decision makers in this respect. But simply, as an

  Investigator, Investigation Team Leader or Senior Security Manager then we

   would have attempted to meet every disclosure request. It was not for us to

   apply a reasonableness test, but rather would expect that to be performed

   through CLT.


143.     I do not recall how Penny THOMAS and Gareth JENKINS became

   involved. I seem to recall that Gareth JENKINS was involved in individual

   cases via CLT. I can't see a logical involvement point within the various

   documents save for the statements form Gareth JENKINS at P0L00110275,

   POL00001643 and FUJ00122906_ I would have considered Mr. JENKINS to

   have been acting as an expert witness.


144.     At the time of this investigation, I recall no explanation given to me

   internally around a bug, error, or defect within the Horizon system.


145.     I have no view on the material sought by the Defence. Clearly, at

   instances such as P0L00053723, P0L00044557, P0L00053746,

   POL00054010 and P0L00044553, requests were being challenged.


146.     In respect of POL00055418 I presume that this was under the watch of

   lain MURPHY as previously detailed. Likewise, I would have expected any

   changes in prosecution or charge amendment to be within his knowledge if

   applicable.

                                 Page 45 of 62
                                                                                       WITN08170100
                                                                                      WITNO8170100




147.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Alison Hall



148.      I note that the nominated representative for the prosecution for this

   case was lain MURPHY as at POL00091037 but that at POL00091300 I act

   as the nominated representative in providing this. I have covered my thought

   process around this previously.



149.      I had no role in the initial investigation. I had no role in any charging

   decision.


150.      I would have read the case papers commencing with the report at

   POL00091037 and precis at POL00021252. The case seems centered

   around lottery scratch cards which I seem to recall was a stand-alone entity to

   the Horizon system in terms of selling cards, but I also see transaction

   corrections mentioned that are obviously connected with Horizon. I would

   therefore have been aware of the connection and again relied on the business

   assertions.



                                  Page 46 of 62
                                                                                       WITN08170100
                                                                                      WITNO8170100




151.      I don't recall any involvement or request to review the prosecution

   decision or involvement in changing the indictment. I don't recall any

   involvement in agreeing the eventual plea basis.



152.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Lynette Hutchings



153.      I note that it is alleged I was the nominated representative for the

   prosecution as per POL00056478. I have covered my thought process around

   this discharge of responsibility previously.



154.      I had no role in the initial investigation. I had no role in any charging

   decision.



155.      I would have read the case papers commencing with the report at

   POL00056478 and precis at POL00056532, POL00044505, POL00046625. I




                                  Page 47 of 62
                                                                                      WITN08170100
                                                                                     WITNO8170100




   note that Horizon was immediately cited. I would therefore have been aware

   of the connection and again relied on the business assertions.


156.      I don't recall any involvement or request to review the prosecution

   decision or involvement in changing the indictment. I don't recall any

   involvement in agreeing the eventual plea basis. Indeed, I suspect that a

   number of these discussions and decisions took place and were made when I

   had no responsibility for investigations.


157.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors or defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Grant Allen



158.      I note from POL00089436 that I was the nominated representative for

   the prosecution. I do not believe I was at that stage working in the fraud

   function and that this is an error on the template. I would like this clarified

   please before I can make further comment.



159.      I have examined POL00089560, POL00089110 and POL00089111. I

   don't recall the discussions I had with Mr. BRADSHAW_ Contextually, I do



                                   Page 48 of 62
                                                                                      WI TNO8170100
                                                                                     WITNO8170100




   recall that Investigators were to really explore when an individual showed

   uncertainty around the need for a legal representative and particularly when

   uncertainty was around cost or convenience. Mr. BRADSHAW did exactly

   what was expected of him. If I'm reading the events correctly, the Mr. ALLEN

   showed initial uncertainty around whether legal representation was required,

   but this shifted to one of him taking advice post interview and being content to

   continue.


160.     Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Mr Khayyam Ishag



161.     I note that the nominated representative for the prosecution for this

   case as detailed at POL00046224 and at POL00057078. I have covered my

   thought process around this previously.



162.     I had no role in the initial investigation. I had no role in any charging

   decision.




                                 Page 49 of 62
                                                                                   WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




163.      I do not recall how Penny THOMAS and Gareth JENKINS became

   involved. I seem to recall that Gareth JENKINS was involved in individual

   cases via CLT. I would have considered Mr. JENKINS to have been acting as

   an expert witness.



164.     At the time of this investigation, I recall no explanation given to me

   internally around a bug, error, or defect within the Horizon system.



165.     In respect of POL00046243 then my expectation would be that the

   disclosure test would have been attended to via CLT.



166.     POL00059686 has been examined. I have no reason to believe that

   Mr. BRADSHAW was doing anything other than tow the party line. Mr.

   BRADSHAW will need to comment himself on whether he would have made

   such a bold assertion had he been in possession of all the facts.



167.     I don't recall any involvement or request to review the prosecution

   decision or involvement in changing the indictment. I don't recall any

   involvement in agreeing the eventual plea basis.



168.      Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of

                                 Page 50 of 62
                                                                                      WITN08170100
                                                                                     WITNO8170100




   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


Prosecution of Angela Sefton and Anna Nield



169.     I note from POL00044017 that I appeared as the nominated

   representative for the prosecution for this case. I have covered my thought

   process around this previously.



170.     Logically, my belief is that this case was a matter of a short few weeks

   before I left Fraud Strand / Security Operations to take up the Grapevine

   Intelligence role. Decisions made or not made after this time should be

   addressed to my successor.



171.     I had no role in the initial investigation. I had no role in any charging

   decision.



172.     At the time of this investigation, I recall no explanation given to me by

   the business around a bug, error or defect within the Horizon system.



173.     Clearly, the prosecution was wholly wrong as was the continual Post

   Office refutes that the system was not at fault. Had I been aware that there

   was knowledge of bugs, errors and defects that could ultimately and

   significantly affect the cash values required to perform an acceptable balance

   and I was expected to remain mute around these and continue any form of


                                 Page 51 of 62
                                                                                    WITN08170100
                                                                                  WITNO8170100




   role within the Security function, then I would have considered my position

   untenable.


          Review of challenges to Horizon Integrity I Post Office

          Investigations


174.      I am struggling with any clarity to recall the involvement I may have had

   regarding investigations into the integrity of Horizon. I have been asked to

   refer to several emails including POL00120471 and POL00120479. Cleary at

   POL00120471, I as being asked to input into case number details concerning

   pre and post Horizon online migration. It seems that cash checks on migration

   were producing shortages; I really can't be more specific or recall why the

   input was required. Likewise, at POL00120471, I can see I am cc into a Rod

  ISMAY email around Horizon integrity. Obviously, I'm aware that Mr. ISMAY

   was a key contributor to the defence of Horizon integrity, but I can't remember

   the specifics, other than the continued stance that Horizon was fit for purpose.

  I do recall Helen ROSE playing a supporting role in terms of analysis. Whilst

   ostensibly Helen worked in my strand, I am aware that Helen was supporting

   other Strand leads with Horizon type issues. At that point my remit was firmly

   around external crime management and maturing the Grapevine service.



175.      I genuinely don't recall any sizeable levels of engagement with the

   other bodies or individuals named.


General




                                 Page 52 of 62
                                                                                   WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




176.      It's clear that operationally there was cynical group think around in

   integrity challenges and this has been highlighted previously in this statement

   when you consider some of the language used and assertions made around

   disclosure demands.



177.      I did not seek further information when giving consideration to

   discharging my nominated representative role in terms of prosecution. I was

   confident that cases submitted to CLT contained prima facie evidence of

   criminality, contained all the facts and circumstances and accordingly the

   charging advice returned never shook me enough to question the

   recommendation.



178.      Yes, I did support the refusal of a prosecution. I worked in the Liverpool

   District and along with the Head of Services declined a prosecution in relation

   to a SPMR who had suffered several physical assaults by the local community

   and whose partner and small child had narrowly escaped serious injury when

   the rear yard entrance to the Post Office was effectively boobytrapped with

   concrete blocks designed to fall from a height on anyone accessing the yard.

   As I recall the SPMR was effectively forced to rehouse his family and

   committed offences in terms of applying official cash to personal use given

   increased expenditure, when faced with additional costs this rehousing had

   incurred. The District argued that prosecution was not the correct route to

   take. I do recall having a ticking off from a Senior Lawyer for failing to ensure

   that the District effectively engaged back with CLT when making the decision.




                                  Page 53 of 62
                                                                                      WI TNO8170100
                                                                                    WITN08170100




179.      I have also been highly critical and challenging when as an Investigator

  I was forced to deal with branches that clearly lacked financial viability. I recall

   a Shropshire branch had, I seem to remember, three quickly successive

   SPMRs that failed to make a viable business with the third incumbent

   prosecuted. I went past the former branch the other month — it was now

   permanently closed. I recall vocally criticising a Retail Line decision at the

   time to continue services. I did similar at other branches and particularly

   when suspensions were met with family transfers that effectively exasperated

   financial troubles.


180.      The more I see and hear from the Inquiry, then the further I despair. It

   strikes me that no one, at a suitable level of seniority, had the conviction and

   gumption to say enough is enough and to drive a timely, truly independent

   review whilst ceasing all prosecution activity and having the courage to be

   prepared to support the application and lessons of a truly independent

   Horizon review, to both historic prosecutions and non-prosecuted repayment

   of accounting shortfalls. As someone that held several investigatory roles in

   the Post Office, I feel utterly deceived.



181.      With hindsight there should have been a team of skilled analysts

   working on behalf of branch errors, conducting full error analysis using

   complete and unabridged Fujitsu data including all reversals. This level of

   transparency would have supported SPMRs to come forward at low level loss

   stage, rather than being pushed into systematic false accounting series.




                                   Page 54 of 62
                                                                                   WI TNO8170100
                                                                                  WITN08170100




182.        I genuinely don't feel well informed enough to comment on Fujitsu's

   role in escalating bugs, errors, and defects.




Statement of Truth



I believe the content of this statement to be true.




Signed: I             GRO

Dated: ........24th October 2023




                                   Page 55 of 62
                                                                                WITN08170100
                                                                               WITNO8170100




Index to First Witness Statement of David John Pardoe

No   URN              Document Description                       Control
                                                                 Number
1    POL00091037      Post Office Ltd Investigation - Alison     POL-0090681
                      Loraine Hall
2    POL00104968      POL - Enforcement and Prosecution          POL-0080600
                      Policy (with comments)
3    POL00105229      Post Office Ltd PNC Security               POL-0080854
                      Operating Procedures
4    POL00104853      Post Office's Financial Investigation      POL-0080485
                      Policy
5    POL00030578      S02 Royal Mail Group Criminal              POL-0027060
                      Investigation and Prosecution Policy
                      December 2007
6    POL00104812      "Royal Mail Group Ltd Criminal             POL-0080444
                      Investigation and Prosecution Policy"
7    POL00031004      RMG Policy - Crime and Investigation       POL-0027486
                      (S2) - version 3.0
8    POL00031003      Royal Mail Group Crime and                 POL-0027485
                      Investigation Policy v1.1 October
                      2009
9    POL00104900      Undated 'Separation Project -              POL-0080532
                      Criminal Investigations             Post
                                                Poliofor




                      Office Ltd'
10   POL00105191      Activity Plan for POL separation           POL-0080816
                      project - Criminal Investigations Policy
11   POL00105216      Post Office Ltd Security Operations        POL-0080841
                      Team -- Compliance — Guide to the
                      Preparation and Layout of
                      Investigation Red Label Case Files:
                      Offender reports and Discipline
                      Reports - undated
12   POL00104821      Condensed Guide for Audit                  POL-0080453
                      Attendance v2
13   POL00104929      "Post Office Limited: Internal Protocol    POL-0080561
                      for Criminal Investigation and
                      Enforcement (with flowchart)"
14   POL00104747      Investigation Policy: Casework             POL-0080387
                      Management (England & Wales) v1.0
15   POL00104777      Investigation Policy: Casework             POL-0080417
                      Management (England & Wales) v4.0
16   POL00118104      Appendix 6 - Identification codes          VIS00012693
                      (undated - date taken from parent
                      email
17   POL00118128      Race Identification Codes, numbers 1-      VIS00012717
                      7.

                                Page 56 of 62
                                                                          WI TNO8170100
                                                                         WITNO8170100




18   POL00055590   Email from Marilyn Benjamin on          POL-0052069
                   behalf of Jarnail A Singh to Mandy
                   Talbot, Hugh Flemington, Jacqueline
                   Whitham, Re: Regina v Seema Misra-
                   Guildford Crown Court-Trial-Attack on
                   Horizon
19   FUJ00080107   Fujitsu's Guidance on Security          POINQ0086278
                   management service: Service             F
                   Description (v.2)
20   POL00114566   Audit Record Requests (Increase In      POL-0113672
                   Limits
21   POL00047955   Josephine Hamilton Offences Report      POL-0044434
22   POL00118877   Antecedents of Josephine Hamilton -     POL-0118796
                   Officer in Case Graham Brander,
                   Supervising Officer Dave Posnett
23   POL00118990   Josephine Hamilton criminal case        POL-0118909
                   study - Suspect offender reporting
                   form to be emailed to Casework team,
                   case file no. POLTD 0506/068,
                   Josephine Hamilton
24   POL00049083   Email from Graham Brander to            POL-0045562
                   Jennifer Andrews, Juliet McFarlane,
                   Dave Pardoe and others re: Fw:
                   Hamilton
25   POL00044388   Josephine Hamilton case study:          POL-0040867
                   Memorandum from Miss J A
                   McFarlane to Investigation Team Post
                   Office Limited, cc Graham Brander,
                   Ged Harbinson and Dave Pardoe RE:
                   R v Josephine Hamilton mentions
                   hearing 19/11/2007 - update after
                   hearing
26   POL00049071   Josephine Hamilton Case Study:          POL-0045550
                   Financial Investigation Policy Log -
                   Josephine Hamilton.
                   POLTD/0506/0685.
27   POL00049535   Josephine Hamilton case study:          POL-0046014
                   [Internal Memo from Ged Harbinson
                   to Dave Pardoe re: Investigation Ref: -
                   POLTD/506/0685 - OFFICE South
                   Warnborough / SUSPECT NAME
                   Josephine Hamiltonl
28   POL00113278   Approved Judgment between               POL-0110657
                   Josephine Hamilton & Others and
                   Post Office Limited




                            Page 57 of 62
                                                                             WI TNO8170100
                                                                            WITNO8170100




29   POL00050123   Email from Mike Wilcox to Williamson       POL-0046602
                   and finance investigation in re to
                   Susan Rudkin
30   POL00050347   Email from David Pardoe to Fraud           POL-0046826
                   Team Post Office, RE: DAM Authority-
                   Susan Jane Rudkin Ibstock
31   POL00050026   Record of tape recorded interview of       POL-0046505
                   Susan Jane Rudkin dated 20/8/08.
32   POL00050244   Financial investigation policy log in re   POL-0046723
                   to Susan Rudkin dated 21/08/2008
33   POL00050040   Susan Rudkin case study: [Witness          POL-0046519
                   statement of Gerald Harbinson in
                   support of an application for a
                   restraint orderl
34   POL00061322   Email chain from Ged Harbinson to          POL-0057801
                   Mike Wilcox cc Graham Brander re:
                   Fw: Ibstock Sub Post Office (re
                   Restraint
35   POL00046450   Witness statement of Gerald                POL-0042929
                   Harbinson
36   POL00056762   Financial Investigation Events Log.        POL-0053241
                   Susan Rudkin csae no:
                   POLTD/0809/0101
37   POL00094295   Susan Rudkin Case Study - Email            POL-0093241
                   from Tahira Rasool to Ged Harbinson
                   re: Michael and Susan Rudkin
                   (Ibstock PO, 2232170) - Email chain
                   provides background to the
                   prosecution and discusses repayment
                   of debt
38   POL00051044   Email from Jarnail A Singh to Tahira       POL-0047523
                   Rasool in re to Michael and Susan
                   Rudkin (Ibstock) Leicester post office.
39   POL00059762   Email from Glenn Chester to Sarah          POL-0056241
                   Howards. Re: Urgent Advice needed-
                   Flag Case FCT728
40   POL00044916   Letter from Mr Michael Rudkin to POL       POL-0041395
                   re: Requesting withdrawal of
                   suspension & prosecution
41   POL00060421   Letter from E M Rudkin to Mr Goerge        POL-0056900
                   Thomson re: Private, In the Strictest
                   Confidence and without Prejudice.
42   POL00046524   Letter from Marie Dancer to Mike           POL-0043003
                   Wilcox in re to Susan Rudkin
43   POL00050993   Letter from Dr A T Peden Richard           POL-0047472
                   Nelson Solicitors in re to Susan
                   Rudkin's mental health.

                             Page 58 of 62
                                                                              WITN08170100
                                                                             WITNO8170100




44   POL00044692    Post Office Ltd investigation report for   POL-0041171
                    Julian Wilson (Astwood Bank office)
45   POL00047029    Memo from Miss J S Andrews to Post         POL-0043508
                    Office Security re: Regina v Julian
                    Wilson Worcester Crown Court
                    Confiscation Hearing - W/L W/C 16th
                    November 2009 Case No:
                    POLTD/0809/0126
46   POL00050140    Transcript: Record of tape interview in    POL-0046619
                    re to Julian Wilson dated 15/09/2008
47   POL00050128    Transcript: Record of tape recorded        POL-0046607
                    interview in re to Julian Wilson.
48   POL00051920    Julian Wilson case study: Letter from      POL-0048399
                    J. Canlin to Mr J Singh RE: Julian
                    Wilson - Worcester Crown Court. 15th
                    June 2009 - PCIVIH
49   UKGI00012555   Letter pertaining to Plea and Case         UKG1023351-
                    Management hearing R v Julian              001
                    Wilson from Jarnail Singh to Jolyon
                    Canlin
50   POL00044751    In The Crown Court at Worcester,           POL-0041230
                    Advice statement re: R v Julian
                    Wilson
51   POL00044809    Indictment, Draft Case Summary from        POL-0041288
                    Anthony Vines, Civitas Law - R v
                    Julian Wilson
52   POL00051720    Letter from Jarnail Singh to Fraud         POL-0048199
                    Team Post Office Limited c.c. Gary
                    Thomas and others re: REGINA v
                    JULIAN WILSON
53   POL00051459    Instructions to Counsel (Mr Anthony        POL-0047938
                    Vines of Civitas Law) drafted by Rob
                    G Wilson to settle indictment and
                    advise on evidence and brief for the
                    prosecution in the matter of The
                    Queen v Julian Wilson (Backsheet
                    endorsed by Counsel (Richard Cole
                    with various dates)
54   POL00044800    Indictment, Statements of Offences -       POL-0041279
                    R v Julian Wilson
55   POL00051936    Letter from John H. Dove. to Mr. J.        POL-0048415
                    Singh re: Regina - v -Julian Wilson -
                    Worcester Crown Court




                              Page 59 of 62
                                                                            WI TNO8170100
                                                                           WITNO8170100




56   POL00050832   Peter Holmes Case Study: POST             POL-0047311
                   OFFICE LTD CONFIDENTIAL:
                   INVESTIGATION LEGAL
                   POLTD/0809/0128, OFFENCE,
                   Theft/False Accounting re: Peter
                   Anthony HOLMES
57   POL00066743   Note on Peter Holmes Interview            POL-0063222
58   POL00050561   Record of tape interview in re to Peter   POL-0047040
                   Anthony Holmes dated 19/09/08.
59   POL00044541   POL Investigation Report for Seema        POL-0041020
                   Misra (POLTD/0708/ 0249)
60   POL00049716   Email from Jason G Collins to Jarnall     POL-0046195
                   A Singh re: DAM Authority Seema
                   Misra West Byfleet
61   POL00051441   Letter from Phil Taylor to Mr Wawick      POL-0047920
                   Tatford. Re: Counsel's advice on
                   criminal prosecution of Seema Misra
                   for theft
62   POL00051539   Seema Misra Case Study - Email from POL-0048018
                   Warwick Tatford to Phil Taylor re
                   Seema misrta Guildford Crown Court
                   Trail - W/L 1st -12th June 2009.
63   POL00051773   Seema Misra Case Study: Attendance POL-0048252
                   Note by Jarnail Singh re: Seema
                   Misra at Guildford Crown
                   Court(CRM/258932/JSX)
64   POL00052202   Email from John Longman to Phil           POL-0048681
                   Taylor Fw: Trial of Seema Misra -
                   West Byfleet SPSO - Branch Code
                   126023 - Guildford Crown Court 30th
                   November 2009 (Four day trial)
65   POL00053849   Attendance note from Jarnail Singh        POL-0050328
                   for Seema Misra dated 27/01/10.
66   POL00110275   Witness Statement of Gareth ldris         POL-0108082
                   Jenkins Version 3.0 11/02
67   POL00001643   Witness statement of Gareth Jenkins       VIS00002657
68   FUJO0122906   Witness statement of Gareth Idris         POINQ0129120
                   Jenkins; Re: Seema Misra                  F
69   POL00053723   Email from Jarnail Singh to Warwick       POL-0050202
                   Tatford incl em chain from Mark
                   Dinsdale to Rob Wilson re: advice
                   requested on disclosure request in
                   MISRA case
70   POL00044557   Advice on requests for disclosure in      POL-0041036
                   Seema Misra case


                             Page 60 of 62
                                                                             WI TNO8170100
                                                                            WITNO8170100




71   POL00053746   Seema Misra case study - Letter from       POL-0050225
                   Jarnail Singh to Coomber Rich
                   Solicitors, RE: R v Seema Misra,
                   Guildford Crown Court, Trial 15 March
                   2010
72   POL00054010   Email from Issy Hogg to Jarnail Singh      POL-0050489
                   RE: FW: R v Seema Misra Guildford
                   Crown Court Trial 15th March 2010 -
                   disclosure
73   POL00044553   Letter Jarnail to Singh to Seema           POL-0041032
                   Misra's lawyers regarding Regina v
                   Seema Misra Guilford crown court
74   POL00055418   Email exchange between Mandy               POL-0051897
                   Talbot, Jarnail Singh, Rod Ismay and
                   Mike Granville
75   POL00091300   Email from David Pardoe to Post            POL-0090944
                   Office Security, RE: DAM Authority,
                   Hi htown
76   POL00021252   Alison Hall, POLTD-1011-0095               POL-0014444
                   Record of interview with Post Office
                   investigation department
77   POL00056478   Post Office Confidential: Investigation,   POL-0052957
                   Legal - report of Lynette Hutchings
                   investigation
78   POL00056532   Lynette Hutchings Case Study:              POL-0053011
                   Record of Taped Interview of Lynette
                   Hutchings dated 20/04/2011
79   POL00044505   Record of Taped Interview with             POL-0040984
                   Lynette Hutchings
80   POL00046625   Transcript: Record of taped interview      POL-0043104
                   re Lynette Hutchings dated
                   20/04/2011.
81   POL00089436   Email from Jarnail Singh to Hugh           POL-0086411
                   Flemington re: Horizon cases
82   POL00089560   Post Office Limited - Witness              POL-0086535
                   Statement of Stephen Bradshaw
83   POL00089110   Post Office Ltd Security Operations        POL-0086085
                   Typed Copy of Notebook Entry
84   POL00089111   Agreement to Continue without Legal        POL-0086086
                   Advice: Interviewer (Grant Ian Allen)
                   and Investigator (Stephen Bradshaw)
85   POL00046224   Investigation (Legal) Offender Report      POL-0042703
                   by Stephen Bradshaw -- Khayyam
                   Isha




                             Page 61 of 62
                                                                           WI TNO8170100
                                                                          WITNO8170100




86   P0L00057078   Khayyam Ishag case study:                POL-0053557
                   Investigation (Legal) report by
                   Stephen Bradshaw re Khayyam Ishaq
87   POL00046243   Email from Cartwright King to Stephen    POL-0042722
                   Bradshaw re Ishag case
88   POL00059686   Witness Statement of Stephen             POL-0056165
                   Bradshaw re Second Sight
                   appointment
89   POL00044017   Hand written note about                  POL-0040496
                   subpostmaster's contractual obligation
                   to make good discrepancies / Angela
                   Sefton, Ann Nield case
90   POL00120471   Emails chain from Lynn Hobbs t To        POL-0126165
                   Sue Huggins, Nick Beal, Philippa
                   Wright and others. Re: Horizon -
                   Urgent Please
91   POL00120479   Email chain from Rod Ismay to Rod        POL-0126171
                   Mark Burley, Ian Trundell, Dave
                   Pardoe and others Re: Horizon
                   Challenges Draft report with
                   attachments




                             Page 62 of 62
