                                                                                        WITNO9830100
                                                                                      WI TN09830100




                                                          Witness Name: Patrick Bourke

                                                          Statement No: WITNO9830100

                                                                      Dated: 11 April 2024



                           POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




               FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF PATRICK BOURKE




I, Patrick Bourke, will say as follows:


INTRODUCTION


1      I am currently employed by Post Office Limited ("POL") as its Government

       Affairs and Policy Director. I have occupied this role since January 2017.


2      This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (the

       "Inquiry") with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated 16 January 2024

       (the "Request")


3      I have prepared this witness statement independently of POL and with the

       assistance of separate legal representation. To assist my recollection and the

       preparation    of    this   statement   I   have    reviewed     some    additional

       contemporaneous documents, requested and supplied to me by POL, and

                                      Page 1 of 168
                                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




    beyond those which were disclosed to me by the Inquiry with the Request. A

    full list of the documents exhibited with this statement is included in the

    accompanying index, all of which have been previously disclosed to the Inquiry

    by POL. Where I have quoted from any of the documents exhibited with this

    statement, these are in italics.


4   I have addressed the 93 questions posed to me in the Request in a narrative

    form that reads chronologically, insofar as possible. I have broadly structured

    the statement to follow the section structure of the Request, but have also

    included specific sections to address key issues it raises. My reflections, in

    answer to question 92 of the Request, are set out in paragraph 294.


BACKGROUND


5   I have been asked to set out my professional background and qualifications

    prior to joining POL. I graduated from the London School of Economics and

    Political Science and the University of Strasbourg with a degree in Law and

    French Law. I trained as a lawyer at the European Commission, the Post Office,

    and DJ Freeman and qualified as a solicitor in 1997. I practised as a solicitor

    for 2 years at Berwin Leighton in Brussels, before becoming Head of European

    Affairs for Post Office in 1999, again based in Brussels, when I stopped

    practising as a lawyer. I joined the then Department of Constitutional Affairs

    (now Ministry of Justice ("MOJ")) in 2002 where, as a junior and subsequently

    a senior civil servant, I worked in a variety of roles in international trade policy,

    aspects of regulatory reform in the legal services sector, the Freedom of

    Information Act 2000, and as the Department's lead on European and
                              Page 2 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




    International policy. I worked at the MOJ for 8 years prior to taking up a post as

    Head of European Affairs and EU Representative for the Isle of Man

    Government, opening its Brussels office in 2011. I joined POL in 2014.


6   In September 2014, I joined POL as a programme manager for the Initial

    Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme ("The Scheme"). I held this role until

    around June 2016. I set out details of this role below at paragraph 23.


7   I was recruited to POL by a former colleague, Belinda Crowe, with whom I used

    to work at the MOJ. In or around spring 2014, she contacted me on Linkedln

    while I was abroad and explained that she was now working at POL. She asked

    me to contact her for further information about a role there which she thought

    might be of interest to me.


8   On return, I contacted her and she explained that she was engaged in work for

    POL to investigate complaints about a computer system with a view to

    establishing what might have gone wrong and to seek a resolution to those

    complaints through mediation where appropriate. Belinda Crowe and I had

    worked in the same directorate at the MOJ and she was broadly familiar with

    my skills and experience. In particular, she was aware that I had led a piece of

    work at MOJ to prepare for the commencement (on 1 January 2005) of the

    Freedom of Information Act 2000 ("FOIA"). This involved the close and timely

    management of a sensitive case load, significant interest from Ministers and

    senior officials across Whitehall, and heightened external scrutiny. Our

    discussions continued, we both confirmed our respective interests, and I then


                                  Page 3 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




     went through the normal HR vetting and joining process, starting with POL on

     a fixed term contract, extendable by mutual agreement.


9    In around June 2016 my team became part of the Corporate Services Group

     and I became the Deputy Corporate Services Director until January 2017. I took

     this role as a result of an internal restructuring process following the closure of

     the Scheme, and the follow-up work which was by now being conducted as part

     of POL's preparations for litigation. The then General Counsel, Jane MacLeod,

     was asked to expand her responsibilities and take on responsibility for

     Information Security (including Cyber-Security) & Rights (including compliance

     with the Data Protection Act 2018 and FOIA), Audit & Risk, and the Security

     team, in addition to the in-house legal function. The new directorate would later

     become the Legal, Risk, and Governance team.


10   As Deputy Corporate Services Director, I helped Jane MacLeod with the

     restructure and acted as her deputy for the purposes of management and

     helping to integrate the various teams into their new structure. In addition, I was

     responsible for managing POL's information security and information rights

     teams which included coordinating data subject access and freedom of

     information requests ("FOIRs"). I had line management responsibility for

     between eight and twelve individuals and I shared a personal assistant with

     Jane MacLeod, to whom I reported throughout. Within approximately 6-12

     months of the new structure taking shape, steps were taken to break up the

     Security team into three smaller teams, with only the Financial Crime team

     (looking at money laundering issues) remaining within Jane MacLeod's wider

                                    Page 4 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




     Directorate. While I was not directly involved in this decision, I was aware of

     concerns at senior level about the prevailing work culture which characterised

     the team.


11   I have been a member of different committees and focus groups during my time

     at POL, including being a member of the Postmaster Litigation Steering Group

     ("PLSG"), which I refer to in more detail later in my statement. I was engaged

     in Project Sparrow, this being a broad descriptor of POL's efforts to address the

     complaints of postmasters in the Scheme, but the formal governance took place

     at the level of the Board of Directors ("the Board"), and as far as I remember, I

     only ever attended one meeting at that level.


MY CURRENT ROLE


12   In January 2018, I became the Corporate Affairs Director, joining POL's

     corporate affairs and communications team. The role has been through a

     number of changes in scope and job title, reflecting restructuring within the

     team, as well as a more widespread and centrally led-exercise to reduce

     headcount. I have been in this role, now known as Government Affairs & Policy

     Director, for six years and I am responsible for a mix of corporate affairs,

     external relations, and general communications work.


13   This involves managing a team responsible for liaising with a number of POL's

     stakeholders including various government departments and agencies,

     Members of Parliament ("MPs"), trade associations, charitable organisations,

     POL's senior leadership team (of which I am also a member), members of the

                                   Page 5 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




     Group Executive and POL's Chief Executive Officer ("CEO"). Occasionally, I

     also work directly with members of the Board. I manage approximately ten

     direct reports and I share a personal assistant with 2 others. When I started in

     the communications team, my line manager was Mark Davies, the Group

     Director of Corporate Affairs and Communications. Following his departure, I

     reported directly to the CEO for a period of 5 months, until the appointment of

     a new Group Corporate Affairs and Communications Director, Richard Taylor,

     in 2020. My current line manager is Karen McEwan, POL's Chief People Officer,

     who in turn reports to the CEO, Nick Read.


14   My role is varied and my job title has not always reflected its content particularly

     accurately. POL engages with government (POL's sole shareholder) at different

     levels and through different teams; that has always been the case in my

     experience. Between my arrival in late 2014 and early 2019, the scope of the

     relationship was relatively narrow reflecting the position that, while owned by

     government, POL was commercially and operationally independent of it. At that

     time, it was principally conducted through the Corporate Affairs and

     Communications team day-to-day, with input from Finance and the Legal teams

     as appropriate. At the most senior level, the then CEO and Chief Financial

     Officer ("CFO") (Paula Vennells and Alasdair Cameron respectively) would

     liaise with government as necessary through their fellow Board member,

     Richard Callard, who was the Shareholder's representative on the Board.


15   Since early 2019, however, government `oversight' of the business has become

     very much more energetic and substantially broader in scope to the extent that,

                                    Page 6 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




     in my personal view, it has become harder to assert that the business is

     commercially and operationally independent in any meaningful sense. This is,

     at least in part, attributable to government's response in anticipation of the

     financial, political, and reputational risks the litigation brought by Alan Bates &

     Others under the Group Litigation Order (the "Group Litigation") would

     potentially expose it to (and, of course, did following Fraser J's judgment in

     March 2019). It also reflects the creation of a Post Office Policy Unit in what

     was then the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy ("BEIS"),

     the idea behind which was that POL needed a champion within a mainstream

     Whitehall government department to support it from a policy perspective, with

     UK Government Investments ("UKGI") focused on its financial performance as

     a government asset.


16   In reality, despite some limited policy interventions, the new Post Office Policy

     Unit has added a further measure of control and constraint on POL's ability to

     manage its business day-to-day. The central, overwhelming, concern of

     government in relation to POL since 2019 has been the Group litigation and its

     consequences, most notably around the funding and delivery of compensation,

     and the Inquiry. More recently, it has also become concerned with aspects of

     POL's senior governance in which it, of course, plays a direct part through its

     Board representative. As a result, there has been little substantive

     advancement of broader policy questions between POL and its sponsoring

     Department, whether through UKGI or the Department proper.




                                    Page 7 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




17   It has been my experience in the last four and a half years that the CEO, Nick

     Read, unlike his predecessor, has preferred to engage directly with BEIS and

     UKGI at working, as well as at Ministerial, level in our sponsoring Department

     (now the Department for Business and Trade, and UKGI) day-to-day. While he

     is supported by me and my team in his formal engagements with Ministers, his

     engagement with officials is more frequent and informal in nature and he

     typically does not require briefing or the participation of others. As a result, my

     role, and my team's focus, more frequently entails liaising with other parts of

     government. For instance, we were recently engaged in coordinating POL's

     input into work being undertaken by HMRC on the practical effects of the

     Windsor Framework Agreement with the European Union on postal services

     between Northern Ireland and Great Britain.


18   The policy element of the work relates to the development and advocacy of

     ideas which benefit (any or all of) the business, postmasters, and its customers.

     Examples include our successful efforts to ensure that, as a matter of law, and

     despite the closure of thousands of bank branches nationwide, people and

     small businesses continue to have convenient, local, access to free to use cash

     services. Similarly, we made the case for Her Majesty's Treasury to continue

     providing postmasters with financial support to offset against eye-watering

     energy bills after the initial six-month period of the scheme.


19   1 am also one of the people who meets with the CEO to discuss a range of wider

     issues concerning POL. Here, I act as a sounding board, or, on occasion, I may

     provide advice or a solution.

                                     Page 8 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




KNOWLEDGE OF THE HORIZON IT SYSTEM


20   By the time I arrived at POL in September 2014, it was clear that concerns

     about the Horizon IT system ("Horizon") had been expressed to POL for some

     time and a fair bit of work had already been done to try to get to the bottom of

     the issues and resolve them. At the time, Second Sight had already prepared

     its first report and found no systemic problems with the Horizon software;

     however, Second Sight reported several themes arising from the postmasters'

     complaints relating to Horizon, such as power outages that could potentially

     delay a transaction being processed and operational errors arising from the

     icons on the branch terminal screen being too close, potentially resulting in

     postmasters pressing the wrong keys. Relatively soon after I joined POL, I

     began to understand that at the heart of the complaints was the suggestion that

     Horizon was producing anomalies; it was not always the case that it was

     attributed to a bug; it could also be hardware or external factors such as power

     outages.


21   I was not provided with any specific training relating to Horizon. I was employed

     to help facilitate a scheme where sub-postmasters' complaints could be

     ventilated, any points of difference with POL could be understood, and a

     mediated resolution might be achieved.


22   However, I did take steps to improve my knowledge of Horizon as referred to in

     more detail below.




                                   Page 9 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




THE INITIAL COMPLAINTS REVIEW AND MEDIATION SCHEME ("THE SCHEME")


23   As one of the programme managers brought it to support it, I was responsible

     for the day-to-day management and supervision of the Scheme, reporting to

     Belinda Crowe. The Scheme was set up in agreement between POL and the

     Justice for Sub-postmasters Alliance ("JFSA"), following the publication of

     Second Sight's Interim Report in July 2013. By the time I joined POL in

     September 2014, the Scheme was already established and Second Sight were

     engaged in this phase of their work. I was not, therefore, involved in designing

     the Scheme or in discussions around the scope of Second Sight's engagement.


24   Upon joining POL, I believe I would have been verbally briefed by Belinda

     Crowe about the architecture and processes of the Scheme and on Second

     Sight's role. Tom Wechsler and I were recruited to work on the Scheme by POL

     at around the same time and we divided the responsibility for managing it

     between us. From memory, the broad division involved Tom Wechsler

     managing the Working Group while I was responsible for administering the pre-

     Working Group stages of the Scheme, and ensuring the progress of cases

     though the system.


25   The Scheme involved a completely fresh and comprehensive reinvestigation of

     all the cases admitted to it, resulting in an investigation report for each of the

     applicant sub-postmasters. Angela van den Bogerd led a team of people

     brought together for the purpose of reinvestigating the facts and circumstances

     of each case admitted to the Scheme and for the preparation of investigation

     reports. These reports were then submitted to Second Sight to enable them to
                                 Page 10 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




     conduct an independent assessment of the facts and circumstances of each

     case recorded, at the end of their work, in a Case Review Report ("CRR"). This

     CRR would contain a recommendation from Second Sight as to whether, having

     reviewed all the evidence, facts, and circumstances, they would recommend

     the case as being suitable for mediation. Their CRR, including this

     recommendation, was then communicated to the Working Group.


26   POL also engaged external legal support from Bond Dickinson LLP, as it was

     then called, to assist it with the administration of the Scheme and provide advice

     in relation to individual cases. Bond Dickinson LLP prepared responses to

     Second Sight's CRRs which included their recommendations as to whether

     POL should agree to mediate and, if so, on what basis and issues.


27   The Working Group's role was to facilitate agreement as to which cases were

     suitable for mediation. Their determination of each case was made following

     receipt and consideration of the investigation report, prepared by POL, and

     Second Sight's CRR. It was chaired by Sir Anthony Hooper, and also comprised

     representatives from Second Sight, members of the JFSA, Alan Bates, Kay

     Linnell and POL. Tom Wechsler, Chris Aujard and Belinda Crowe represented

     POL. As General Counsel, Chris Aujard was POL's most senior representative

     on the Working Group. In the event of a disagreement amongst the members

     of the Working Group over whether or not a case should proceed to mediation,

     Sir Anthony Hooper held the casting vote. Sir Anthony Hooper was appointed

     to Chair the Working Group on the recommendation of the JFSA.



                                   Page 11 of 168
                                                                                  WITNO9830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




28   I did not have any specific roles or responsibilities in respect of the Working

     Group beyond overseeing the preparation of the document packs ahead of

     meetings. Tom Wechsler was responsible for engaging with the Working Group

     and Sir Anthony Hooper.


29   Mediations were organised and facilitated by the Centre for Effective Dispute

     Resolution ("CEDR"), who were selected for their independence and reputation

     for alternative dispute resolution, and attended by subject specialists from

     within POL's business who had experience of the issues which were the focus

     of the mediation in a given case. This would usually be someone with

     operational experience of running Post Office branches who understood the

     various pitfalls and issues that could arise. Someone from Bond Dickinson LLP

     would also usually attend alongside POL. We would receive feedback as to how

     the mediation had proceeded. Under the Scheme, POL made provision for

     applicant sub-postmasters to have legal representation at the mediation, and

     to cover their expenses on the day.


30   In certain cases, I was involved in determining the levels of payment that we

     might make to sub-postmasters during a mediation as part of a resolution to

     their complaint. POL's approach to all mediations, including in relation to the

     level of any payments, was at all times guided by legal principles on advice

     from Bond Dickinson LLP. Typically, there was a pre-agreed ceiling on any

     possible financial payment which might be made in the room. Going beyond

     that ceiling would usually need escalation by phone call to me, Tom Wechsler,

     or Belinda Crowe. I imagine that had payments exceeded a certain level, a

                                 Page 12 of 168
                                                                                 WITNO9830100
                                                                               WI TN09830100




     further escalation might have been necessary, although I do not now recall

     whether this was, in fact, ever triggered.


31   Neither Tom Wechsler nor I attended mediations, with one exception. I was

     interested to see this end of the process better to understand how it worked

     and what issues might typically arise in practice. I therefore attended one

     involving a postmaster named Mr Bajaj in around February or March 2015.


32   Throughout my role working on the Scheme, I had relatively little contact with

     Second Sight. Most of the contact between POL and Second Sight was

     conducted by Tom Wechsler, Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard, and then Jane

     MacLeod once she took over from Chris Aujard as POL General Counsel.

     Other than my team being responsible for uploading investigation reports and

     Second Sight's CRRs to a document sharing platform called Huddle. I would

     occasionally provide updates and documents to Second Sight when I was

     asked.


33   A number of contentious issues emerged in connection with the Scheme,

     including whether the cases of sub-postmasters with criminal convictions could

     or should be mediated. POL's position, based on legal advice from Bond

     Dickinson LLP and also, I think, from Cartwright King and Brian Altman KC (see

     paragraph 71 below), was that conviction cases could not be mediated which

     led to arguments about whether POL was fulfilling the terms on which the

     Scheme was established.




                                   Page 13 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




34   I am also aware that there was disagreement between Second Sight and POL

     around the extent to which Second Sight had full access to POL's prosecution

     files. I was not involved in making the decision or determination over any such

     access. My understanding is that some information within the prosecution files

     was never intended to be shared with Second Sight because the material was

     legally privileged. I think that Sir Anthony Hooper may have supported that

     stance in the context of a specific case in the Scheme. However, prior to me

     joining POL, I understand that some of POL's prosecution files on specific

     cases, and which contained privileged information, were in fact disclosed in full

     to Second Sight but in error. As I understand it when POL then refused to

     provide the full prosecution files relating to the other cases in the Scheme,

     Second Sight formed a view that POL was reneging on the terms of their

     engagement, presumably because the access they had been erroneously given

     created an expectation. My understanding of this comes from discussions at

     the time with Rodric Williams, Belinda Crowe, Mark Underwood and others who

     were part of the POL team who were involved with the engagement of Second

     Sight and the Scheme.


35   As stated at paragraph 23 above, I was not involved in discussions or decisions

     about the design and framework of the Scheme as it was initially envisaged, as

     this pre-dated my employment at POL. However, I assume (but do not know for

     certain) that advice as to the non-disclosure of legally privileged material from

     POL's prosecution files to Second Sight in the context of the Scheme would




                                  Page 14 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




     have come from Rodric Williams, as in-house counsel for POL, through his

     interface with external counsel from Cartwright King and/or Brian Altman KC.


Closure of the Working Group


36   The Scheme came under a significant amount of scrutiny and pressure from

     Parliament and the media. Criticism of POL felt like the daily backdrop to our

     work. There was a great deal of concern being expressed about perceived

     delays in cases progressing through the Scheme. In addition, in many cases

     where Second Sight had recommended mediation, POL took the view that the

     facts did not support that recommendation and, accordingly, did not agree to

     mediate. A collection of MPs, led by Lord James Arbuthnot ("Lord Arbuthnot"),

     had been instrumental in supporting JFSA and in the establishment of the

     Scheme. They requested a meeting with the CEO, Paula Vennells, in order to

     remonstrate about the various complaints of the JFSA about the process. That

     meeting duly took place on 17 November 2014 with Paula Vennells, Angela van

     den Bogerd, Lord Arbuthnot, Oliver Letwin, and perhaps others, at the House

     of Commons. I had been asked, I think by Belinda Crowe, to prepare a briefing

     for Paula Vennells for that meeting and I set out details of my role at paragraph

     66, where I describe my role in connection with briefing documents.


37   A key request advanced at this meeting by the MPs was for POL to agree to a

     general presumption to mediate all cases in the Scheme where this was

     recommended by Second Sight. Once the Scheme was in operation, Second

     Sight began to recommend that almost all of the cases proceed to mediation.

     On the basis of the investigation reports prepared by POL, and our review of
                                  Page 15 of 168
                                                                            WI TN09830100
                                                                          WI TN09830100




the CRRs which Second Sight submitted, my team and I had some concerns

about the approach Second Sight were adopting in consistently recommending

cases to be mediated, even in circumstances where their own CRRs appeared

to contradict such a recommendation. For example:


 Scheme case            Details from Second Sight's CRR


 Case M020 concerned The draft CRR, dated 5 February 2015, expanded

 branch    losses   of on three specific discrepancies which the Applicant

 £19,335.92.            believed provided evidence of faults with the

                        Horizon system. In respect of a purported branch

                        surplus of £3,500, paragraph 4.4 stated "It is clear

                        that this discrepancy was caused by a keying error

                        made by the Applicant, rather than by a `fault' in

                        Horizon." In respect of a shortfall of £200 caused by

                        an error of phone card stock, the CRR stated at

                        paragraph 4.8 that "we find that the cause of the

                        discrepancy in this instance was an operational error

                        made by the Applicant." In respect of a purported

                        discrepancy related to a "Green GIRO" payment of

                        £1,257.99, paragraph 4.12 provided that "We can

                        only conclude, on the evidence presented, that there

                        was no discrepancy related to this amount". Despite

                        these findings, the CRR recommended this case for



                           Page 16 of 168
                                                                               WI TN09830100
                                                                             WI TN09830100




                        mediation to consider "whether Post Office or the

                        Applicant is responsible in part or in whole for the

                        losses of£19,335.92." [POL00035285]


Case M120 concerned The draft CRR, dated 22 November 2014, stated at

branch     losses   of paragraph     4.4    that   "Having   reviewed     these

£34,330,41.             transactions, errors and TCs, we have concluded

                        that Post Office was not at fault in any of its actions.

                        The Applicant, on the other hand, made mistakes

                        and then compounded them with further mistakes,

                        which had the effect of masking the branch's true

                        shortfall that was, by that point, very substantial."

                        The CRR went on to recommend this case for

                        mediation to consider "whether Post Office or the

                        Applicant is responsible in part or in whole for the

                        loss of £34,330,41 that remains unrecovered by

                        Post Office." [POL00040448]


Case M087 concerned Paragraph 4.18 of the draft CRR, dated 18

responsibility      for November 2014, stated that the branch's shortfalls

branch     losses   of "were probably caused by human error, and

£43,269.10.             exacerbated by her apparent lack of understanding

                        of Horizon accounting (and end of Trading Period)

                        procedures." Paragraph 4.23 stated "It is clear...that



                           Page 17 of 168
                                                                             WI TN09830100
                                                                           WI TN09830100




                        the Applicant was making errors, and that they were

                        very difficult to trace, the more so because of the

                        Applicant's false accounting"        This case   was

                        recommended for mediation to consider "whether

                        Post Office or the Applicant is responsible in part or

                        in    whole    for    the   losses   of   £47,097.22."

                        [POL00040446]


Case M041 concerned Paragraph 4.20 of the draft CRR, dated 13

responsibility     for November 2014, provided "We concur with Post

losses of £26,256.63.   Office's assessment that the evidence shows that

                        the Applicant frequently made mistakes whilst

                        operating the branch... it is reasonable to assume

                        that many errors would have gone undetected and

                        caused branch losses". The CRR went on, at

                        paragraph 6.1, to recommend this as "a weak case

                        for mediation", despite finding that "the most likely

                        causes of the shortfalls experienced by the branch

                        were operational errors made by the Applicant and

                        her staff". The issue to be considered at prospective

                        mediation would be "whether Post Office or the

                        Applicant is responsible in part or in whole for the




                             Page 18 of 168
                                                                                  WITNO9830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




                               losses made good by the Applicant of approximately

                               £77,000." [P0L00035026]




38   From my reading of the CRRs, such as the examples provided, I came to hold

     the view that Second Sight had lost their objectivity. This view was shared by

     others at POL and also at Bond Dickinson LLP when they read Second Sight's

     CRRs. At some stage, the JFSA began to refuse to engage in any discussion

     as to the merits of cases Second Sight had recommended for mediation

     unilaterally declaring that Second Sight's recommendation alone was or, at

     least, should be determinative. In other words, where Second Sight

     recommended a mediation, this effectively should be interpreted as an

     instruction to POL. On the basis that it considered a significant proportion of

     the cases recommended by Second Sight for mediation as being, instead,

     unsuitable, POL could not agree to this approach. JFSA refused to engage in

     discussions of cases in the Working Group which led to a fatal break down of

     the architecture of the Scheme in that it ceased to function as had been

     envisaged and, indeed, called its viability into question.


39   Given the challenges it was facing, a group of those engaged in administering

     and participating in the Scheme (consisting of, among others, Tom Wechsler,

     Mark Underwood, Mark Davies, Rodric Williams, Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard,

     and then Jane MacLeod — who was General Counsel on a permanent basis)

     would have held various discussions about how these might be overcome while

     continuing to honour, as closely as possible, the commitments POL made to
                                 Page 19 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




     applicants to the Scheme. While I cannot recall specific instances of these

     meetings or who participated in any given one, it is my clear recollection that all

     of those engaged on the POL side shared that objective. My contribution

     towards these discussions about the Scheme came from my direct involvement

     with it and the issues encountered. Against the backdrop of daily criticism and

     disruption to its operation, I was in favour of finding a way through. I cannot

     remember where the idea originated, but I later supported the view that POL

     could agree to mediating all of the remaining cases in the Scheme, save for

     those in which the applicant had a relevant conviction, because it would

     accelerate the process and represent an important concession to the demands

     of the JFSA and MPs. Doing so would also have the effect of making the

     Working Group redundant and, in circumstances where its work was in any

     event hampered, this was an acceptable outcome.


40   Prior to POL's eventual decision to move forward on that basis, I was involved

     in some work to establish whether any such decision was susceptible to legal

     challenge. This arose, I believe, in the context of being told by Chris Aujard that

     Paula Vennells was concerned about the possibility of such a decision being

     judicially reviewed. In order to understand the parameters of possible courses

     of action available to POL, a decision was taken to seek advice from leading

     counsel, in this case Tom Weisselberg KC. There were questions over the

     extent to which POL was acting in a private or public law capacity with respect

     to the Scheme, and therefore whether there were any constraints on POL's

     ability to make changes to the Scheme generally and to close the Working


                                   Page 20 of 168
                                                                                  WITNO9830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




     Group in particular. The decision to seek this advice and consider the options

     for the future of the Scheme appears to have been informed by the meeting

     between Paula Vennells and MPs on 17 November 2014, since this is referred

     to under the sub-heading "Watershed moment" in the instructions.


41   I believe that I drafted the instructions to Tom Weisselberg KC [POL00149601].

     In so doing I would have received input from others, including Rodric Williams,

     Belinda Crowe, Mark Underwood, Tom Wechsler and POL General Counsel,

     Chris Aujard, who would also have approved the final instructions.


42   I attended the conference with Tom Weisselberg KC at Blackstone Chambers

     on 24 November 2014 and circulated an email summary note of his advice to

     POL colleagues shortly afterwards [POL00116814]. This email seems to

     suggest that it had previously been thought that POL was not able to take the

     steps now envisaged. I am aware that in June 2014 POL had obtained legal

     advice, known as the "Beachcroft advice", to which I believe I was referring in

     my email of 24 November 2014. This advice was obtained prior to my arrival at

     POL, so I was not party to discussions around that advice being obtained. On

     27 November 2014, I emailed Rodric Williams attaching a document I had

     located and asked him to confirm that the attachment was "the JR advice we

     had over the Summer", which suggests that I was unfamiliar with the document

     [POL00149688]. I have recently reviewed documents which show that the

     Beachcroft advice was shared with me by Belinda Crowe on 23 October 2014.

     Her cover email states that she understood "that Chris [Aujard] spoke to

     Stephen Hocking about whether[POL] could simply bring the Scheme in house

                                 Page 21 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




     and the answer was that carried too great a risk" [POL00307631]. Belinda

     Crowe shared further background documents with me on 23 October 2014

     [POL00307633], which included a paper for the Board sub-committee, dated 3

     June 2014, which outlined three options for the Scheme going forward, one of

     which was "moving the governance and management of the Scheme in-house

     (ending Second Sight's engagement and dissolving the Working Group)"

     [POL00027369], and another paper, dated 6 June 2014, recommending this

     option to the Board, subject to the risk of judicial review [POL00027153].

     Insofar as I read the Beachcroft advice and the Board papers shared by Belinda

     at the time, I do not recall the details of their contents. I do not recall being

     involved in any discussions relating to the varying or closure of the Scheme

     until October 2014, although I now clearly see that this matter had been

     considered by the Board in June 2014, prior to me joining POL.


43   I have been asked to describe the background to an email exchange I had with

     Tom Wechsler on 26 November 2014 [POL00149685]. In this exchange we

     discussed the possibility of the Scheme being changed in some way, and/or the

     Working Group being disbanded. This discussion followed the advice we had

     received from Tom Weisselberg KC. In his email of 17:07, Tom Wechsler

     appears to be referring to there being, at the time the Scheme was established,

     less certainty about whether there were any problems with the Horizon system.

     This email seems to reflect a growing sense of confidence within POL, on the

     basis of the cases which were progressing through the Scheme and Second




                                  Page 22 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




     Sight's work, that there were, in fact, no problems with Horizon. I cannot recall,

     and do not know, what the first two emails in this chain refer to.


44   On 12 January 2015, I attended a meeting of the Project Sparrow sub-

     committee in a supporting capacity. I did not typically attend these meetings, or

     any Board-level sub-committee meetings, since I was insufficiently senior. The

     minutes for this meeting indicate that I was welcomed as a guest

     [POL00006575]. I assume I was required to attend this meeting because of my

     involvement in instructing Tom Weisselberg KC in November 2014 and

     preparing the briefing materials for the Westminster Hall debate on 17

     December 2014. I cannot recall whether I contributed to the discussion.


45   POL had been invited (in the meeting hosted by Lord Arbuthnot on 17

     November 2014) to relax its approach to the Working Group by agreeing to a

     general presumption to mediate all cases in which Second Sight's

     recommendation was to do so. However, paragraph (i) of the minutes of this

     meeting states that POL should "continue to take a robust approach at the

     Working Group, focusing on the agreed Terms of Reference". I understand this

     to mean that POL should continue to determine cases on the basis of the

     evidence before it and in accordance with legal principles for compensation,

     and in so doing, adhere to the original agreement for operating the Working

     Group as intended, which had been agreed at the outset of the Scheme.


46   The second bullet point under paragraph (i) provides that POL should "consider

     the most effective options to draw a line under the Scheme for consideration at


                                   Page 23 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




     a future Sparrow Sub-Committee". This task appears to have been assigned to

     Mark Davies.


47   On 26 January 2015 at 15:35 1 shared an options paper with Paula Vennells

     [POL00117056] describing ways in which POL might respond to the myriad

     challenges facing the Scheme [POL00102065]. This paper set out an

     assessment of the risk associated with each option. Paula Vennells responded

     at 19:36 later that day with some comments on the paper, which included the

     suggestion that the wording "[Second Sight's] impartiality is a fiction" was too

     strong. This reflected my view at the time that Second Sight had by that stage

     lost objectivity, particularly in light of its recommendation that almost all cases

     be mediated, even where it's assessment of the facts of sub-postmaster's case

     appeared to reflect a different conclusion as discussed in paragraph 37 above.

     My email of 27 January 2015 at 08:37 to Tom Wechsler and Mark Davies in the

     same email chain also reflects my view at the time that, while we needed to

     keep an open mind to all options, this included the possibility that closing the

     Scheme was the least worst option.


48   I assisted in preparing and/or editing some slides for a meeting between Mark

     Davies, Paula Vennells and Alice Perkins on 4 February 2015 [POL00130853].

     The slides were designed to inform a decision to be taken by Paula Vennells

     and Alice Perkins as to the course of action for the future of the Scheme. These

     slides are a representation of where the reflections of the POL team had

     reached and reflected their input. In my email to Mark Davies of 08:57

     [POL00102109] I asked him for guidance on the extent to which POL was

                                   Page 24 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




     required to ask the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills ("BIS") for

     approval on our proposed next steps. To the extent that I expressed concern, it

     was about ensuring that we were dealing with government stakeholders

     appropriately, and the extent to which we should ask them for input on our

     forward-looking work. As discussed in paragraph 62 below, the Project Sparrow

     sub-committee of the Board decided that POL would agree to the request of the

     JFSA and MPs, and POL would mediate all the cases in the Scheme, save

     those involving a conviction. One of the natural consequences of that decision

     was there was no longer any need for the Working Group in circumstances

     where a decision to mediate all cases had been taken.


49   On 5 February 2015, I emailed Andrew Parsons, of Bond Dickinson LLP, to

     request advice on the effect, in both legal and practical terms, of a decision to

     terminate Second Sight's engagement [POL00022352]. This request for advice

     would have arisen in the context of wider discussions around the future of the

     Working Group. On 6 February 2015 Andrew Parsons provided POL with the

     requested advice [POL00021728] [POL00006364]. The decision to terminate

     Second Sight's engagement had not been taken at the time of this request.

     Rather, this advice was sought to enable POL to better understand what would

     happen should such a decision be taken. Following a Board sub-committee

     meeting on 18 February 2015, where the options for taking the Scheme forward

     were discussed, a paper was shared with the Board on 2 March 2015 which

     sought endorsement for the closure of the Working Group and the current




                                  Page 25 of 168
                                                                                  WITNO9830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




     engagement     with   Second    Sight   to    be   terminated   [POL00223073]

     [POL00102254].


50   When POL took the decision to mediate all cases, POL retained Second Sight

     in order to deliver on its commitment that every applicant in the Scheme would

     have their case comprehensively reinvestigated by POL and an independent

     CRR prepared by Second Sight. This would enable them to pursue further

     avenues for redress in future should they be dissatisfied by the outcome of the

     Scheme.


POL Response to Second Sight's Part Two Report


51   Second Sight's Part Two Report was intended to set out a number of thematic

     issues which Second Sight identified as arising in two or more cases which they

     examined as part of their ongoing work on cases in the Scheme. It was

     expressed as intended to be a 'living document' which would be updated in the

     light of further work. The objective of the Part Two Report was to identify and

     explain what thematic issues were revealed by their work to enable applicants

     to the Scheme and their advisers to better prepare for any mediation they might

     undertake with POL. I recall that there was frustration at POL (and among

     applicants to the Scheme, I believe) about the time taken for Second Sight to

     finalise this report. POL then also considered that the Part Two Report was

     deficient in a number of material respects.


52   On 11 March 2015 Second Sight shared their Part Two Report with Jane

     MacLeod, Belinda Crowe and Tom Wechsler. It was then forwarded by Jane

                                  Page 26 of 168
                                                                                  WI TN09830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




     MacLeod internally to a wider distribution list, which included me. Following

     receipt of Second Sight's Part Two Report, on 12 March 2015, I met with the

     communications team, Bond Dickinson LLP, and those working on the Scheme

     to discuss how POL might respond. This meeting was arranged by Belinda

     Crowe, who at the time appears to have taken the lead in coordinating POL's

     response [POL00040938]. I would have contributed towards this discussion,

     although I cannot precisely recall what was discussed


53   Later that day, I emailed Jane MacLeod to set out the key points arising from

     the discussion and agreed next steps [POL00040952]. I copied this email to

     Melanie Corfield, Rodric Williams, Belinda Crowe, Tom Wechsler, Mark

     Underwood and Andrew Parsons, and believe that the copy list reflects those

     who attended the meeting.


54   Having now reviewed my email to Jane MacLeod of 12 March 2015, it appears

     that it was agreed at the meeting that POL would write to Second Sight to

     highlight POL's concerns about their Part Two Report. My email indicates that

     POL's concern was that, "The collective view (Sparrow, Comms and BD) is that

     we ought to register with SS the fact that we think the Report goes over ground

     we have already addressed with them, strays into areas beyond the Scheme

     and SS's professional expertise, and lack evidence for many of the claims it

     makes" [POL00040952]. The genuinely held concerns were that the Part Two

     Report often covered case-specific rather than thematic issues, made claims

     which were not supported by evidence (or without quoting the source of the

     material), commented on matters outside their remit and expertise such as

                                 Page 27 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




     criminal law and the interpretation of the postmaster contract, and did not

     provide evidence that particular issues had caused losses. The details of these

     concerns are set out in POL's public response to the Part Two Report.


55   My email to Jane MacLeod attached a first draft of POL's letter to Second Sight

     which I had prepared, and which had "already had the benefit of others'

     comments". I emailed Jane MacLeod again on 16 March at 17:08 and attached

     an updated version of the letter to address "the points you raised with me", and

     invited both her input and "substantive comments from others".


56   On 17 March at 10:51, 1 shared an updated draft of the letter to Second Sight

     with Jane MacLeod. On 17 March at 12:16 Jane MacLeod responded with a

     slightly amended version with some questions embedded in the text

     [POL00040953]. The letter reflects POL's concerns about the content of the

     Part Two Report and its utility to applicants in the Scheme. The letter also seeks

     to ensure that POL and Second Sight "work on Applicants' individual cases

     collaboratively in an appropriately prioritised manner", given that the

     engagement of Second Sight had by then been rescoped and it was felt that

     our priority should be to focus on the remaining cases in the Scheme for the

     remainder of their engagement.


57   I also assisted with preparing POL's detailed response to the Second Sight Part

     Two Report ("POL's Part Two Response"), which set out POL's response to

     each section of Second Sight's Part Two Report. I recall that Mark Underwood

     and Andrew Parsons initially led on gathering information to inform POL's

     response. On 26 March 2015, I shared a draft of POL's Part Two Response
                              Page 28 of 168
                                                                                WI TN09830100
                                                                              WI TN09830100




     with Andrew Parsons [POL00041013] [POL00041014]. On 27 March 2015 POL

     sent a draft version of POL's Part Two Response to Second Sight, as stated in

     Andrew Parsons' email of 11 April 2015 [POL00041057]. POL's Part Two

     Response was informed by external professional advisers, Bond Dickinson LLP

     and Fujitsu as described below


58   On 9 April 2015, Second Sight issued a finalised version of their Part Two

     Report and later that month POL issued its finalised detailed response to the

     Part Two Report. Both documents were shared with Applicants to the Scheme

     to ensure they had a rounded view of the issues raised in Second Sight's Part

     Two Report.


59   The process by which expert input was sought for inclusion in POL's Part Two

     Response is illustrated by the email exchange between Mark Underwood and

     Fujitsu between 9 and 13 April 2015, where Fujitsu were asked to provide

     wording to rebut some assertions included in Second Sight's Part Two Report,

     to inform POL's response [FUJ00087144]. Fujitsu's input and assistance was

     sought again on 8 April 2015 with respect to the response to Second Sight to

     address section 14 of their Part Two Report, concerning branch transactions

     not entered by a sub-postmaster. Pete Newsome appears to have set out, in

     an email to Mark Underwood, the process for injecting a balancing transaction

     into branch accounts. The email was sent following a call between Mark

     Underwood and Pete Newsome where this matter was discussed. Mark

     Underwood then forwarded this email to Andrew Parsons and me. At 16:26,

     following his reflection on the email from Pete Newsome, Andrew Parsons

                                 Page 29 of 168
                                                                                   WITNO9830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      shared an updated version of the letter to Second Sight. His covering email

      (when sharing his updated version) suggested the text about balancing

      transactions from an earlier draft was largely retained. Andrew Parsons again

      shared a draft marked-up version of the letter with his comments, and a clean

      version, at 17:07 [POL00226090].


60    On 11 April 2015, Andrew Parsons emailed Mark Underwood, Melanie Corfield

      and I with an updated version of POL's Part Two Response [POL00041059]. It

      appears that POL had asked Bond Dickinson LLP to undertake a complete

      review of POL's draft response to check for accuracy and consistency, and to

      highlight any changes that had been made between the initial draft, dated 11

      March 2015, and the finalised version, dated 9 April 2015, of Second Sight's

      Part Two Report. Andrew Parsons' cover email notes that Rodric Williams'

      comments on Second Sight's Part Two Report and had been reflected in POL's

      draft reply to the same. The email otherwise indicates that Andrew Parsons had

      advised on points which required further input from POL, with wording to be

      considered by Melanie Corfield from a communications perspective, and that

      he otherwise provided advice on the proposed drafting of the response

      [POL00041057J.


My role in briefings — background


61    In my role as a programme manager of the Scheme I was required to prepare

      briefing materials for members of the Board, including Paula Vennells and Alice

      Perkins, and, on occasion, draft correspondence for Paula Vennells, to inform


                                  Page 30 of 168
                                                                                   WITNO9830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




     their engagement with MPs about the Scheme. I was also involved in preparing

     briefing materials for the relevant Minister (see paragraphs 64 to 94).


62   The information included in briefing documents was drawn from areas of

     expertise across the business, as well as from my knowledge of the Scheme

     and that of my POL colleagues, including Belinda Crowe, Tom Wechsler, Mark

     Underwood and Mark Davies. Where the information required was beyond the

     capacity and capability of my immediate POL colleagues, for example, details

     around the safety of convictions and/or technical information concerning

     Horizon, I believe I approached the relevant experts from across POL, including

     POL's external advisors, as well as approaching Fujitsu. This can be seen, for

     example, with reference to the email chain of 14 December 2014, where advice

     and input was sought from Jarnail Singh and Andrew Parsons in respect of a

     briefing then being prepared for Jo Swinson [POL000405081 ahead of the

     Westminster Hall debate. This is discussed in greater depth in paragraphs 77

     to 94 below. My role with respect to preparing briefings was to draw all the

     information and details together and present it in a concise and coherent

     manner, which would be easily digestible to the recipient. My role working on

     the Scheme meant that I had a more overarching vantage point of the matters

     to be included in briefing documents than some of the individuals who

     contributed specific information towards it. I also drew on my experience of

     preparing briefings whilst working in the civil service. I had received feedback

     that the way I structured and presented information was found to be easily

     navigable and digestible, including by the CEO.


                                  Page 31 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




My role in briefings — specific briefings


63    I have been asked about a number of specific briefings, which I refer to below.

      I have relied on the documents provided to me by the Inquiry and by POL to

      reconstruct my involvement, as well as that of others, and to help sequence

      events.


Briefing note 26 October 2014


64    Ahead of Paula Vennells' telephone conversation with Lord Arbuthnot on 28

      October 2014, I prepared a briefing note for her, dated 26 October 2014

      [POL00040288]. I believe this call was arranged to discuss Lord Arbuthnot's

      concerns about the Scheme. Since I was tasked with preparing this briefing

      note only around five weeks after I had commenced my employment at POL, I

      would have relied heavily on discussions with POL colleagues, in particular

      Belinda Crowe and Rodric Williams, as well as Bond Dickinson LLP, and on my

      reading of the case documents for cases in the Scheme, to inform the content

      of this note. I believe that the content in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the documents

      touching on "the integrity of Horizon" is likely to have been supplied by Belinda

      Crowe and/or Rodric Williams as well as Bond Dickinson LLP.


Briefings/letters connected to the 17 November 2014 meeting of Paula Vennells and

MPs


65    On 5 November 2014, Paula Vennells wrote to Lord Arbuthnot to set out POL's

      position on the issues discussed during their phone-call on 28 October 2014,

      and prior to the meeting of 17 November 2014 attended by Paula Vennells,
                                   Page 32 of 168
                                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                                      WI TN09830100




     Lord Arbuthnot, and a delegation of MPs who also had concerns about the

     Scheme [POL00116788]. I believe I was asked by Belinda Crowe and/or Paula

     Vennells to draft this letter. I initially drafted and shared the letter with Belinda

     Crowe and Tom Wechsler for their comment on 30 October 2014 at 13:52

     [POL00211585]. Belinda Crowe then circulated the letter for comment amongst

     POL colleagues and finalised it. The material for this letter was largely drawn

     from the briefing note for the telephone call on 28 October 2014.


66   I also prepared a briefing note for Paula Vennells to help guide the discussion

     in her 17 November 2014 meeting with MPs [POL00116790]. Again, I also

     prepared the briefing by drawing on information and content used in the briefing

     note for the 28 October 2014 telephone call, and with input from POL

     colleagues in the manner described at paragraph 62 above. When I shared the

     draft briefing with POL colleagues for their comment on 15 November 2014, I

     noted in my covering email that Tom Wechsler had contributed to the draft then

     being shared [POL00116787].


67   The briefing outlines the steps which POL had taken in good faith to try and

     resolve the issues with postmasters. This included: establishing the Scheme on

     the advice of Lord Arbuthnot and in consultation with the JFSA; appointing their

     recommendation for Chairman of the Working Group; reinvestigating the

     postmasters' cases, and, providing funding for applicants to the Scheme to

     have professional advisers for both the reinvestigation of their cases and their

     representation at mediations. The briefing includes, at Annex E, details of the

     costs invested by POL in the Scheme at the relevant time.

                                    Page 33 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




68   At the time there was a sense of frustration within POL about accusations being

     made, in the media and on social media, which did not acknowledge the

     genuine efforts being made by POL to resolve the issues raised by sub-

     postmasters through the Scheme. The tone of the briefing note for Paula

     Vennells' meeting with MPs on 17 November 2014, and indeed other briefing

     materials prepared around that period, at times reflects that sense of frustration.

     POL wanted to set out the constructive steps it had taken to try to answer the

     concerns of those applying to the Scheme, clearly and on record. There was

     also concern that the delegation of MPs might adopt an aggressive posture at

     the meeting. The suggestion made in the briefing note that Paula Vennells

     should take an "assertive approach" in the meeting on 17 November 2014

     reflects that impression. My update to Alice Perkins 26 of November 2014

     [POL00149683] reflects that the concern was not misplaced since some of the

     attendees did in fact behave inappropriately towards Paula Vennells, albeit I

     cannot remember the specific details.


69   Paragraph 5 of the briefing note, which states that "the Horizon issue is one

     which [POLJ are absolutely willing to entertain", reflects that, although at the

     time POL had confidence in Horizon, POL was not closed minded and would

     listen to allegations and evidence presented to it on the Horizon issue. The

     briefing also notes that, "in not one of the 106 cases investigated so far has a

     fault with the Horizon system been established. That said, we are being

     extremely careful to avoid any sense of complacency and we will apply the

     same rigour in investigating the remaining cases as we have to date."


                                   Page 34 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




70   As mentioned above in this statement, at the meeting on 17 November 2014,

     the group of MPs proposed that going forward there should be a general

     presumption that POL would agree to mediate all cases, save in some

     undefined exceptional cases, where Second Sight recommended mediation.

     On 25 November 2014 Paula Vennells met with Alice Perkins to discuss this

     proposal. Upon request from Mark Davies, I assisted in the preparation of some

     speaking notes for Paula Vennells ahead this meeting and her meeting with the

     Board on 26 November 2014 [POL00308179] [POL00308180].


71   Following the meeting with MPs on 17 November 2014, I prepared a note of

     advice for Paula Vennells to inform her consideration as to how to respond to

     the proposal advanced by MPs that POL mediate all cases in the Scheme

     where this was recommended by Second Sight [POL00149669]. I shared this

     for comment with Tom Wechsler and Mark Underwood on 26 November 2014

     [POL00149668]. The advice, including the recommendation, was the product

     of discussions between those involved in the Scheme at POL and at Bond

     Dickinson LLP. This would have included Belinda Crowe, Tom Wechsler, Chris

     Aujard, Andrew Parsons, as well as Paula Vennells. Our recommendation was

     that Paula Vennells should not accede to the request to mediate all cases in the

     Scheme, on the basis that this would entail the mediation of "criminal cases"

     (cases in which the postmaster or assistant had been prosecuted and convicted

     of a criminal offence arising in the context of their work in branch) in relation to

     which POL had received legal advice "in the strongest terms" that doing so

     would subject POL to "intolerable risk". POL obtained written advice from Brian


                                   Page 35 of 168
                                                                            WI TN09830100
                                                                          WI TN09830100




Altman KC further to a discussion in conference with Rodric Williams and Gavin

Matthews, of Bond Dickinson LLP, on 31 July 2014. His advice, dated 5

September 2014, addressed Sir Anthony Hooper's suggested approach to the

issue of criminal appeal in cases which an applicant in the Scheme had

admitted a criminal offence [POL00006368] and concluded that there was "an

unacceptable risk to POL in providing or being held to a position on criminal

appeal at the early stage of mediation". Belinda Crowe shared this advice with

me by email on 15 September 2014, the day I joined POL, and shortly after it

had been circulated by Rodric Williams to POL colleagues [POL00209031]. It

would also entail the mediation of cases where POL was not, on any reasonable

view, responsible for the branch losses. This view was based on our reading of

the reports for cases in the Scheme, including CRRs prepared by Second Sight

which, as discussed at paragraph 37 above, often recommended mediation

even where the preceding content of their report did not align with this

recommendation. To agree to mediate all cases would also have had cost

implications for POL, and fundamentally it would have deprived the Working

Group of its central purpose and therefore undermined the Scheme's

functioning. Sir Jonathan Swift went on to comment:


      "...on a surprising number of occasions Second Sight felt unable to

      choose between a bare assertion on the part of the SPMR and the

      indications provided in the evidence trail. In none of the cases we

      sampled were Second Sight willing to conclude that the shortfall was due

      to the Horizon computer system causing those losses, although they did


                            Page 36 of 168
                                                                                  WITNO9830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




           speculate that the disproportionate appearance of power failures in the

           CQRs was likely to contribute to some extent. In general, Second Sight

           accepted that the most likely cause of shortfalls was operator error on

            the part of SPMRs and their staff. This accords with the conclusions in

            the Part Two Report." (The Swift Review, 8 February 2016)

           [POL00006355].


72   On 26 November 2014, 1 prepared a corresponding update for Alice Perkins

     [POL00149683] in advance of a trip she was making to a conference in Turkey,

     where she was likely to encounter Lord Arbuthnot. This briefing note was to

     inform Alice Perkins of the advice given to Paula Vennells not to accept the

     proposal to mediate all cases in the Scheme. This note recycled much of the

     content which was used in the advice note to Paula Vennells discussed above

     at paragraph 71. The note indicates, under the "Suggested lines" heading, that

     there had been some inappropriate and discourteous behaviour towards Paula

     Vennells by some of the attendees at the 17 November 2014 meeting. As

     described at paragraph 62 above, these notes were prepared in consultation

     with POL colleagues.


73   Following discussion with Alice Perkins on 25 November 2014 and the POL

     Board on 26 November 2014, Paula Vennells decided not to accede to the

     request from MPs that POL mediate all cases in the Scheme. Belinda Crowe

     had pre-emptively drafted a letter from Paula Vennells to Lord Arbuthnot to

     convey this message, which she circulated to POL colleagues on 21 November

     2014. I circulated an amended version of the draft letter, along with the draft

                                 Page 37 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




     advice for Paula Vennells discussed at paragraph 71 above, for comment from

     POL colleagues on 26 November 2014 [POL00168751], before sharing a

     version which had been reviewed by Tom Weisselberg KC with Gavin Lambert

     on 27 November 2014 [POL00124611]. The draft letter to Lord Arbuthnot

     explained that Second Sight and the JFSA were the "principal drivers" of the

     design of the Scheme, including the establishment of the Working Group and

     the recommendation for its independent Chairman. To agree to the presumption

     to mediate all cases prior to any consideration of their merits would deprive the

     Working Group of its key role in the Scheme. The draft letter also noted that "no

     fault with the [Horizon] system has been identified in any of the now 114 cases

     that have been comprehensively reinvestigated by Post Office or as part of

     Second Sight's general work". This statement reflected POL's understanding of

     the cases that had been thoroughly reinvestigated through the Scheme and

     Second Sight's findings recorded in their Interim Report. Sir Jonathan Swift later

     commented on the Scheme in the following terms:


            "We were impressed at the work carried out by POL. In many cases

            significant amounts of evidence were able to be collated. Having

            reviewed the CQRs, it was clear that very many of the SPMRs (for

            understandable reasons) were unable to give much by way of specific

            instances of concern, or anything other than vague or generic

            complaints" (The Swift Review, 8 February 2016) [POL00006355].


74   At the time of preparing this letter, POL had also received advice from Tom

     Weisselberg KC (see paragraphs 40 to 42). While speaking to his clerk, I must

                                  Page 38 of 168
                                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




     have mentioned this draft letter and, when he offered to share it with Tom

     Weisselberg KC for a quick view prior to its finalisation, I agreed. He proposed

     a number of amendments in tracked changes, which I then shared with Gavin

     Lambert (POL Chief of Staff), Paula Vennells, Chris Aujard (then POL General

     Counsel), Avene O'Farrell (Paula Vennells' personal assistant), and Mark

     Davies [POL00124610].


75   As anticipated, Alice Perkins did encounter Lord Arbuthnot at the conference

     they attended in Turkey. On 1 December 2014, she sent an email detailing her

     encounter to Paula Vennells, Belinda Crowe, Mark Davies, Chris Aujard and

     me [POL00116853]. I assume I was included in this email since I had been

     involved in preparing the briefing note for Alice Perkins ahead of her trip to

     Turkey.


76   On 3 December 2014, Belinda Crowe forwarded Alice Perkin's email to Tom

     Wechsler. In a subsequent email exchange between Tom Wechsler and 1, Tom

     indicated that he was "increasingly of the same view as Patrick", which was that

     "[Lord Arbuthnot] has more personal attachment to this than may immediately

     be apparent". I believe that this refers to my understanding of Lord Arbuthnot's

     personal regret about a military Chinook helicopter crash, which occurred in the

     Mull of Kintyre in 1994. At the time, this crash was blamed on pilot error, but

     later it was suggested that there had been a cover-up and that it had been

     caused by a faulty onboard computer system. I understand that at the time of

     the crash Lord Arbuthnot was defence procurement minister, and he later



                                  Page 39 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      apologised for misleading MPs when he was in office after he had dismissed

      the doubts they had expressed about the Chinook's electronics.'


Briefing for Jo Swinson, ahead of the Westminster Hall debate


77    On 11 December 2014, I was asked by Richard Callard, who led the Post Office

      Shareholder team at what was then the Shareholder Executive ("ShEx"), to

      prepare background information for ShEx to use in a briefing for Jo Swinson,

      then the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment Relations and

      Postal Affairs, ahead of a Parliamentary debate regarding Horizon on 17

      December 2014 ("the Westminster Hall debate") [UKG100002627]. The

      briefing document took the form of a list of questions and associated information

      and answers covering the scope, operation, progress and results of the

      Scheme, which POL considered relevant to the Westminster Hall debate. I

      shared an early draft of this document with Belinda Crowe, Andrew Parsons,

      and Mark Underwood on 12 December 2014 [POL00150097]. My covering

      email indicates that it was to be discussed on a call shortly thereafter

      [POL001500961.




1 "The Chinnook cover-up continues: When new evidence is presented it is dismissed

as           irrelevant",         Guardian,         30          June          2000
(https://www.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,3604,338086,00.htm), "New inquiry
into the 1994 Mull of Kintyre Chinook crash announced", Guardian 8 September 2010
(https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/sep/08/inquiry-mull-kintyre-chinook-crash)
                                    Page 40 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




78   On 12 December 2014, I also shared the early draft with Richard Callard for

     comment [UKG100002668]. He fed back that, "the tone is right and there is a

     good balance of detail vs clarity".


79   On 14 December 2014 at 07:27, Belinda Crowe shared a version of the briefing

     document which included her comments. In her covering email she stated that,

     "My comments [are] on Rod and Andy's", indicating that the document had

     already been circulated amongst POL's legal advisers who had commented on

     the draft [POL00040508]. Belinda Crowe also copied in Chris Aujard and Mark

     Davies, "so they can see where we've got to". Her email also notes that

     "Finance will have to sign off the figures", and she asks Andrew Parsons, "could

     you and Jarnail please liaise with [sic] about getting a definitive position on the

     prosecution position". Jarnail Singh was a senior lawyer in POL's criminal law

     team at the time, and was also a recipient of Belinda Crowe's email. This

     exchange illustrates how input was sought from the relevant subject matter

     experts across POL's business, including legal advisers (as I described in

     paragraph 62 above).


80   I responded to Belinda Crowe's email at 07:34 and stated that the briefing

     document was approaching completion, "subject to the point you make about

     needing a view on prosecutions and some general tidying up which I am doing

     now. / note Rod would like CK to have a look in the morning". I understand "CK"

     to be a reference to Cartwright King, who were POL's external legal advisers

     on criminal law matters at the time.



                                   Page 41 of 168
                                                                                  WI TN09830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




81   At 11:01 Jarnail Singh emailed to provide input on various criminal law points,

     to inform the briefings then being preparing for BIS [POL00101857]. Later that

     day, at 11:17, Mark Underwood shared an updated version of the briefing

     document, titled "Sparrow Question v13.doc", on the same email chain. It

     appears that shortly before this, at 11:13, he had shared the same version of

     the briefing document with me and Belinda Crowe on a separate email chain,

     and at 11:19, I forwarded this to Richard Callard, with both Belinda Crowe and

     Mark Underwood in copy. [UKG100002718][UKG100002719].


82   On 14 December 2014, at 16:32 Richard Callard responded to my email of

     11:19 to attach a clean and marked up version of the briefing document, called

     "Sparrow Q and A 17th December vl.docx" and "Sparrow Q and A 17th

     December v1 (tracked). docx" respectively [UKG100002729] [UKG100002730].

     In his covering email Richard Callard indicated that he had made a few changes

     and highlighted some outstanding issues in the briefing document, and also

     requested comments from POL in respect of a speech which it appears he was

     preparing at the time for Jo Swinson to deliver in Parliament [UKG100002728].


83   On 14 December 2014 at 20:35, Mark Underwood shared a version of the

     briefing document, called "Sparrow Questions V15.docx", with the large POL

     copy list, including Andrew Parsons [POL00040509]. His covering email stated

     that   the   attached   document,   "includes small edits made       by BIS"

     [POL00040508].


84   On 15 December 2014 at 10:03, I emailed Richard Callard, with Belinda Crowe

     in copy, and attached a version of the briefing document called, "Sparrow
                               Page 42 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




     Questions V17 FINAL.docx" [UKG100002743]. In my email I stated that this

     briefing document was subject, "to double checking of the criminal law points",

     and advised that "we should have that in the next hour" [UKG100002742]. I

     believe this relates to the request from Belinda Crowe in her email of 14

     December 2014 at 07:27, discussed in paragraph 79 above. Andrew Parsons

     and Jarnail Singh would have been responsible for checking any civil and

     criminal law points respectively, the latter likely consulting Cartwright King the

     external legal counsel advising on criminal matters. The briefing document

     covers criminal law issues at various points, for example, the Q&A on, "Why did

     POL agree to incorporate convicted cases in to the Scheme" and on, "Why

     aren't POL mediating criminal cases". I believe these (and any other criminal

     law questions) may have been the questions on which Belinda Crowe sought

     confirmation from Andrew Parsons and Jarnail Singh. I have never practised

     criminal law and I would not seek to substitute the understanding of someone

     who had relevant expertise with my own.


85   On 16 December 2014, Belinda Crowe and I met with Richard Callard to

     discuss different aspects of preparation for the Westminster Hall debate, and at

     12:09 Richard Callard emailed us both with a list of actions and requests for

     information further to our meeting [POL00101909]. I responded at 13:13 to

     provide the information requested about costs paid by POL within the Scheme

     and the number of cases which POL had agreed to mediate. In respect of the

     action, "to get in touch with Sir Anthony to request making the letter available

     to Parliament (and to share it with JA?)", I responded, "Belinda is on the case


                                   Page 43 of 168
                                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




     — email sent and follow up call soon". I believe this may refer to a letter from Sir

     Anthony Hooper to Jo Swinson, which he wrote either on his own initiative or

     upon request from the Minister, in which he provided his views as to how the

     Scheme was progressing [POL00102166]. My email also asked that, "should

     Jo [Swinson] get sight of James Arbuthnot's speech in advance, you could

     either share this with us or, if that's not possible, share with us the broad thrust

     of it so we might put Jo in the best possible place to answer and [sic] helpfully

     and accurately as possible". My email to Richard Callard also discussed

     arrangements for me to meet with him the following day, and I stated, "I do think

     it's important I am there, if only to gauge atmospherics". I cannot recall

     attending Parliament for the Westminster Hall debate, although from this email

     it appears that I may have done so, or at least had the intention of doing so.


86   On 16 December 2014 at 13:21, Richard Callard requested that we include

     quotes from Second Sight's July 2013 report to support, "where we say there

     were no system wide problems with the system". I responded at 14:43 with the

     quote from Second Sight's Interim Report which provided, "We have so far

     found no evidence of a system wide (systemic) problems with the Horizon

     software. "


87   On 16 December 2014 at 16:45, I emailed Mark Davies, Chris Aujard, Rodric

     Williams, Tom Wechsler, Melanie Corfield, Jane Hill and Ruth Barker to share

     the briefing document, called "UPDATED — Horizon Q&A 16 December

     2014.docx" [POL00150316], and Jo Swinson's speech, called "UPDATED

     HORIZON Post Office Speech 16 December 2014.doc" [POL00150315] for the

                                   Page 44 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




     Westminster Hall debate. My cover email makes clear that both of these

     documents had by then been shared with Jo Swinson and I expressed thanks

     to everyone for their "valuable input" [POL00150314]. I did not write Jo

     Swinson's speech. My understanding is that this was written by Richard Callard

     or his colleagues at BIS, and they would have drawn from the information that

     POL provided to them.


88   At 19:56 on 16 December 2014, Jo Swinson's private secretary emailed

     Richard Callard further to a meeting between Jo Swinson and Lord Arbuthnot

     [POL00101944]. This email set out Lord Arbuthnot's, "main 'asks", and also

     confirmed that he, "no longer plans to share his speech with us ahead of time".

     Richard Callard copied Belinda Crowe and I into his response at 20:54, in which

     he gave his provisional views and requested our input on how we might

     formulate a response to some of Lord Arbuthnot's asks. It was consistent with

     my role at the time for Richard Callard to have copied me into this email, and

     for Belinda Crowe to subsequently task me with formulating some responses.

     Some of the requests from Lord Arbuthnot felt at the time to be disproportionate,

     for example he had asked for an independent review of the Scheme, which was

     itself an independent process which had not yet concluded, and my email of

     21:08 and Mark Davies' response at 21:29 reflects this view. For completeness

     my email states: `Needless to say some of the `asks' cannot seriously be

     entertained, surely?", and Mark Davies replies, "agreed".


89   On 17 December 2014 at 08:36, I emailed Richard Callard to share a document

     called, "Legally Privileged and Confidential — further lines for WHD.docx", in

                                  Page 45 of 168
                                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




     answer to the various requests made the previous day [UKG100002850]. I

     copied a number of internal colleagues into this email "for the sake of

     expediency", these being Mark Davies, Belinda Crowe, Rodric Williams, Jarnail

     Singh, Mark Underwood, Chris Aujard, Tom Wechsler and Melanie Corfield, as

     well as Andrew Parsons. In my covering email, I stated, "I would be particularly

     grateful for the views of Jarnail on the criminal aspects of this and Andy P to

     check! have done the Statute of Limitation bit justice." At 11:41 Jarnail Singh

     responded to share a marked-up version of the "further lines" document for Jo

     Swinson [POL00308923] [POL00040517]. This illustrates the approach taken,

     as described in paragraph 62, of consistently consulting colleagues with the

     relevant legal expertise where their specialist input was sought.


90   At 08:55 I emailed Richard Callard again, with the same copy list, to suggest

     how Jo Swinson might respond to any accusation from Lord Arbuthnot that

     there have been, or are likely to be, cases of wrongful conviction or

     miscarriages of justice. My suggestion was that the Minister should immediately

     respond to say that, "if he is in possession, or aware of the existence of, any

     evidence to support those allegations, he should immediately disclose this to

     the police." It was a source of concern for POL that there might be evidence of

     wrongful convictions and the issue had been raised at various times in media

     reports, I believe. As far as I was aware, despite the allegations being made,

     no-one had come forward with any specific information or evidence to enable

     POL to follow up. Rodric Williams responded to my email at 09:28 to suggest

     that the Minster direct anyone with evidence of wrongful convictions towards


                                  Page 46 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




     POL's legal team or to his office rather than the police. I then forwarded this

     suggestion onto Richard Callard, with the caveat that I was, "not sure it matters

     too much"


91   Following the Westminster Hall debate, I was involved with the task of preparing

     a document to collate and address all the accusations which had been made

     against POL by various parties, including during the Westminster Hall debate

     ("POL's Response to the Westminster Hall debate"). It appears as though

     Tom Wechsler initiated and was initially leading on this piece of work, as he

     shared a first draft by email on 8 January 2015 at 15:33 [POL00040790]. In his

     covering email, Tom Wechsler stated that this document, "would be for the [sic]

     us to offer to the Minister to place in Parliament and for us to use with MPs etc

     / publicly". I responded to Tom Wechsler at 12:09 and noted points which

     required technical advice (for example, branch account discrepancies) as well

     as where legal advice was required from Rodric Williams (in respect of the

     accusation that POL bring criminal cases even when the CPS had advised

     against it and on the statute of limitations). It appears as though this email

     followed a conversation I had with Tom Wechsler, and possibly Mark Davies,

     as I stated at the outset of my email that "we spoke".


92   On 8 January 2015 at 16:43, Angela van den Bogerd responded on the email

     chain with answers to some of the technical points I had raised in my email of

     12:09. It appears as though I took over with the finessing of POL's Response

     to the Westminster Hall debate, as I circulated a "slightly reworked version" at

     19:03 [POL00040790] [POL00040791]. My role was to bring the information

                                  Page 47 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




     together, to signpost the document appropriately, and to ensure that it was

     presented clearly. As my role evolved at POL, my colleagues would increasingly

     involve me in these aspects of preparing external facing documents.


93   On 13 January 2015, I shared a draft of POL's Response to the Westminster

     Hall debate with Richard Callard [UKG100002943]. As described at paragraph

     62 above, any statements and assurances on matters beyond my knowledge

     or expertise or those that worked with me on the Scheme — including the

     integrity of Horizon and the safety of convictions — was derived from the

     information and advice provided by expert colleagues and advisors from across

     POL. For example, Paragraph 40 of this document stated that, "To date no

     evidence has been identified by Post Office as part of its reinvestigation of each

     and every case, nor advanced by Second Sight or an individual Applicant, to

     suggest that the conviction of any Applicant to the Scheme is unsafe"

     [UKG100002944]. I believe this assurance came from POL's legal advisers

     whose role it was to support all aspects of the Scheme — this includes in-house

     lawyers, as well as external firms including Cartwright King and Bond Dickinson

     LLP. The Settlement Analysis reports, prepared by Bond Dickinson LLP

     following their review of cases specific documentation including the applicants'

     Case Questionnaire Response, the Post Office Investigation Report and

     Second Sight's Case Review Report, consistently relayed that there was no

     evidence either of flaws with the Horizon system or of convictions being unsafe.

     For example:




                                  Page 48 of 168
                                                                          WITNO9830100
                                                                        WI TN09830100




Scheme   case Statements      from     Bond    Dickinson      Settlement

number        Analysis


M046          There was "No evidence of failure in Horizon or POL

              procedures" and the Applicant "Pleaded guilty and

              convicted of fraud. No new evidence to call the safety of

              the conviction into question" [POL00040331].


M130          "There is evidence that errors were made by staff and

              there is no evidence that Horizon was at fault".

              [POL00228329]


M067          There was "No evidence of failure in Horizon" and "All

              indications point to the losses being a result of user error,

              mismanagement and/or theft. There is no evidence to

              suggest that the losses in the branch were caused by

              Horizon." [POL00211412]


M003          There was "No evidence of failure in Horizon or POL

              procedures" and "The Applicant was convicted of false

              accounting following a guilty plea" [POL00061838].


M109          There was "No evidence to suggest Horizon at fault.

              Applicant has accepted that he falsely inflated the cash

              on hand figures that meant identification of the cause of

              the loss is difficult/impossible" [POL00089549].


                      Page 49 of 168
                                                                                   WITNO9830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




       M097               There was "No evidence of failure in Horizon or POL

                          procedures" [POL00046011].




94    Paragraph 41 of POL's Response to the Westminster Hall debate noted that,

      "Post Office has written to everyone who has suggested that they have or have

      seen evidence that a conviction is unsafe and asked them to disclose that

      evidence so it can be acted on. To date no-one has provided that evidence."

      The confirmation that no-one had provided any such evidence would have

      come from POL's legal team. I refer to the paragraphs on remote access at

      paragraph 133 to 177.


Emails re options paper— 26 January 2015


95    As mentioned at paragraph 47 above, on 26 January 2015, I shared an options

      paper with Paula Vennells, for her comment. I believe I would have drafted this

      document in consultation with POL colleagues, in the manner described in

      paragraph 62 above. As I made clear in the covering email when sharing the

      paper with Paula Vennells, it had already been circulated to other POL

      colleagues for comment [POL00117056] and I mentioned in my email to Tom

      Wechsler and Mark Davies on 27 January 2015 at 8:37am, that "although I

      drafted the paper, it is reflective of views as a whole". As discussed in

      paragraphs 47, the email discussion involving Mark Davies and Tom Wechsler

      reflects the view then held, and expressed in the options paper, that Second

      Sight had, to some degree, lost its independence and was hostile to POL. I

                                  Page 50 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




      believe that these concerns existed within POL before my arrival. At 15:12 on

      27 January 2015 I shared the options paper with a wider distribution list of POL

      colleagues, ahead of a Project Sparrow meeting at 17:00 that day

      [POL00158192].


Briefing Paula Vennells/Angela van den Bogerd before Business, Innovations and

Skills Committee on 3 February 2015


96    I helped prepared the briefing for Paula Vennells and Angela van den Bogerd's

      appearance at the Business, Innovations and Skills Select Committee on 3

      February 2015. I would have been involved in this exercise because of my role

      on the Scheme and, having been a civil servant prior to joining POL, I may have

      had some insight into the process of appearing before a Select Committee

      which may have been helpful to the structure of the briefing. On 30 January

      2015, I emailed Chris Aujard, Mark Davies, Tom Wechsler, Jane Hill, POL's

      parliamentary affairs officer, Melanie Corfield, Rodric Williams, and Belinda

      Crowe, and I appear to have shared my thoughts following a run through

      meeting the previous day with Paula Vennells and Angela van den Bogerd to

      discuss topics and questions which by might be asked by the Select Committee

      [POL00151000]. The circulation list for this email is reflective of the POL team

      who were in some way engaged in the preparation for the Select Committee,

      together with Paula Vennells, Angela van den Bogerd and Bond Dickinson LLP.


97    Again as I have explained, I was largely reliant on the information that was

      provided to me by advisers and subject matter experts from across the business

      about areas beyond my expertise, such as legal advice about the safety of
                               Page 51 of 168
                                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      prosecutions and whether there were flaws in the Horizon system. It was in this

      context that I felt assured that the statements made in my email of 30 January

      2015 about the lack of evidence of an unsafe conviction and the absence of

      evidence of a systemic flaw with Horizon in any of the cases were accurate.

      None of the CRRs, prepared by Second Sight, the reinvestigation reports,

      prepared by Angela van den Bogerd's team, or the advice on whether cases

      should be mediated, produced by Bond Dickinson LLP, that I had seen at the

      time suggested there was any evidence of an unsafe conviction in the Scheme.

      Similarly, none of these reports provided evidence of a systemic flaw with

      Horizon, and Second Sight had stated in their Interim Report that there was no

      evidence of a systemic flaw in Horizon.


Assistance with preparation for 4 February 2015 meeting


98    As discussed at paragraph 48, on 4 February 2015, I also helped prepare some

      slides for a meeting between Mark Davies, Paula Vennells and Alice Perkins to

      inform a decision they were taking regarding the future structure and operation

      of the Scheme.


Engagement with MPs


99    On occasion I was also asked to attend meetings with MPs about the Scheme

      in my capacity as one of its programme managers. For example, on 8

      December 2014 Paula Vennells, Mark Davies and I attended a meeting with

      Oliver Letwin. He was one of the MPs in attendance at the meeting with Paula

      Vennells and Lord Arbuthnot on 17 November 2014. The purpose of this

                                  Page 52 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      meeting was to inform Mr Letwin about some of the issues we were

      encountering with cases in the Scheme. In many cases, some of which we

      discussed with Mr Letwin on an anonymised basis, there were clear

      explanations for the accountancy discrepancies, and they did not refer to issues

      with Horizon. I shared a brief note of this meeting with POL colleagues shortly

      afterwards [POL00101711]. This note reflects that we discussed the CRRs

      prepared by Second Sight and that these, "were drafted in such a way as for

      the reader to come to the obvious and natural conclusion that the SPMR was

      at fault" but which then went on to provide that "mediation was nonetheless

      recommended". Examples of this are provided at paragraph 37 above.


100   In my note of the meeting I refer to, "sowing the seeds of doubt...over the

      reliability of all [Mr Letwin] is being told" by Second Sight, JFSA, Lord Arbuthnot

      and the sub-postmasters. I recognise that this could be misconstrued, but it

      simply reflects POL's desire from the outset of this meeting to ensure that Mr

      Letwin was receiving a balanced, rather than partial, view of the situation. POL

      wanted to ensure that Mr Letwin understood the situation from POL's

      perspective, on the basis of our exposure to and experience of progressing

      cases through the Scheme.


101   POL offered to speak with MPs about the cases of any sub-postmasters within

      their constituency, on the basis that their constituent consented for us to do so

      given that we would be sharing details of their case and would otherwise be

      bound by confidentiality. The purpose of these meetings was to field any

      questions MPs had about their constituents' cases and to otherwise provide

                                    Page 53 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      them with an update as to their progress through the Scheme. It was in this

      context that on 21 July 2015 I attended meeting with Matt Warman MP. I

      attended this meeting in my capacity as a programme manager of the Scheme

      and on the basis that I was well placed to discuss the relevant case.


102   On 15 July 2015 Mark Davies and I attended a meeting with Andrew Bridgen

      and Kevan Jones, chaired by Baroness Neville-Rolfe. As Mark Davies recorded

      in his note of this meeting, the approach of Messrs Bridgen and Jones at this

      meeting was volatile and aggressive, and they refused our repeated offer to go

      through their constituents' individual cases so that they might have the benefit

      of the full facts [POL00318364].


103   On 8 September 2015 Mark Davies, Jane Hill and I attended a meeting with

      lain Wright, Chair of the BIS Select Committee. I attended this meeting in my

      capacity as a subject matter expert in respect of the Scheme. I do not have a

      strong recollection of this meeting, but note that Mark Davies shared a summary

      of the key points discussed by email to Jane Hill and I afterwards

      [POL00153151], and I also circulated a more detailed note of the meeting on 9

      September 2015 [POL00153164] [POL00153165].


104   I believe that POL sought this meeting in order to get a sense of whether there

      would be a follow-up Select Committee meeting following the meeting of 3

      February 2015, and in light of the Panorama broadcast. Paragraphs 9 and 10

      of the note of this meeting indicate that Mr Wright invited our candid views as

      to whether a Committee would be useful at that stage, and "we advised him

      that an inquiry at this stage would certainly add heat, but shed no further light,
                                    Page 54 of 168
                                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      on this issue. That did not. .preclude a useful session at a later stage"

      [POL00153165]. This view was on the basis that the Criminal Cases Review

      Commission ("CCRC") was engaged, "to examine the accusations being made

      in the criminal sphere and, on the civil side, we had 50 or so mediations to

      conduct between now and Christmas."


105   The summary note from Mark Davies reflects Mr Wright's position in respect of

      whether to hold a further Select Committee, in that, "he was undecided on

      whether to ask for a further session/inquiry: there were serious allegations

      about a very important public business: but equally he was not interested in

      simply providing `another day in court" [POL00153151]. This note also

      suggested that, when writing to Mr Wright as a follow-up to our meeting on 8

      September 2015, "we might even consider suggesting a hearing following

      CCRC but make point tha [sic] before then seems premature". As these notes

      from this meeting reflect, POL was not opposed to a Select Committee inquiry

      per se, but rather considered that the timing was premature given that the

      CCRC process should first run its course, and the mediations, which were then

      ongoing, should be held. Paragraph 14 of the note I circulated provides that we

      would keep him updated on progress with these processes, "so that he might

      make an informed decision about the timing and nature of any inquiry he

      determines necessary" [POL00153165].


106   Paragraph 6 of the note I circulated following this meeting provides that we

      discussed remote access in detail and, "why what was being alleged did not

      (because it simply could not) happen." This assurance reflected our

                                  Page 55 of 168
                                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      understanding of the position of remote access at that time which I refer to in

      detail elsewhere in this statement. The note goes on to provide that we would

      write to Mr Wright to set out POL's rebuttals to the various accusations,

      including those featured in Panorama. This letter was sent to Mr Wright on 10

      September 2015 [POL00026723].


107   On or around 11 September 2015, MPs tabled an Early Day Motion ("EDM") in

      the House of Commons about Horizon. I was involved in preparing and

      finalising a letter to be sent to the MPs who had sponsored the EDM, with input

      from various POL colleagues as described below. It was felt important to write

      to the MPs who had sponsored the EDM to ensure they had a more rounded

      understanding of the issues (as understood by POL at the time), including

      details of the Scheme, and to address the points cited in the EDM.


108   At 10:41 on 11 September 2015, Mark Davies emailed Melanie Corfield, Mark

      Underwood, Martine Munby (Head of internal communications), Rodric

      Williams and me with some comments and rebuttals in respect of the various

      points and allegations made in the EDM [POL00153243]. Having reviewed this

      email chain, it appears as though Mark Underwood initially prepared a draft

      letter to the EDM sponsors and circulated this at 15:38. Further to comments

      by Mark Davies, Mark Underwood amended the letter and then, on 14

      September 2015, it appears that I came to be responsible for making any further

      amendments to the draft letter. Jane Hill, then POL Head of Public Affairs, was

      added to the email chain on 14 September 2015 and provided input on the draft



                                  Page 56 of 168
                                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      letter. My email to Jane Hill of 11:50 reflects that we looked to her for direction

      on the plan for how best to communicate the letter to the relevant MPs.


109   On 14 September 2015 at 12:13, 1 circulated the final draft of the letter to MPs

      [POL00153244]. This letter indicated that the EDM had called for a "full

      independent judicial inquiry", and that this had reflected other calls for some

      form of public inquiry into POL's handling of the Horizon issue. The draft letter

      to MPs stated POL's view at the time that, "it would be premature to establish

      any other inquiry who mandate includes a review of the criminal cases until

      such time as the CCRC has completed its vital work'. This letter also noted that

      POL continued to offer meetings to MPs with one or more constituents in the

      Scheme in order to discuss their case(s) in full.


110   The letter also relays the findings of Second Sight's July 2013 report that their

      investigation, "found no evidence of system-wide issues with Horizon and its

      associated processes." The letter also stated that, "No evidence has been

      presented to suggest that the Horizon system... does not work as it should".

      This reflect POL's experience (described in paragraph 90 above) that no-one

      had come forward with any specific information or evidence to enable POL to

      follow up. As was consistent when preparing any external documents or

      correspondence, the information in this letter was drawn from appropriate

      sources of expertise from across POL.


111   To answer the Inquiry's question 38, to the best of my knowledge, POL did not

      have a strategy for dealing with calls from MPs to set up an independent inquiry.

      There was, however, a strong sense, which was shared amongst the POL team,
                                  Page 57 of 168
                                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                                      WI TN09830100




      that the suggestion of a public inquiry was premature at that stage. This was on

      the basis that there were steps being taken and processes then underway to

      address these issues which had not yet run their course, such as the referral to

      the CCRC and the ongoing mediation of cases which had been through the

      Scheme. These points were made in POL's letter to MPs who had sponsored

      the EDM (discussed at paragraph 109), and in our meeting with Mr Wright on 8

      September 2015 when discussing a possible further committee (see

      paragraphs 103 to 105 above).


112   Later on, when Nick Read, then POL CEO, was told by Alex Chisholm, then

      Permanent Secretary at BEIS, that it would be sensible to conduct a non-

      statutory inquiry, I felt strongly that the inquiry should be placed on a statutory

      footing and explained why to Nick Read who agreed with me. POL continued

      to promote the shift of the inquiry onto a statutory footing to Paul Scully after he

      was appointed Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at BETS.


Correspondence on the case of Harjinder Singh Butoy


113   I have been asked about correspondence relating to the case of Harjinder Singh

      Butoy. [POL00150875] refers to correspondence sent to Paula Vennells by

      Toby Perkins MP ("Mr Perkins") about his constituent Mr Harjinder Singh Butoy

      ("Mr Butoy"). I can see that Angela van den Bogerd and Belinda Crowe were

      asked to take the letter forward by Paula Vennell's office. Belinda Crowe's email

      of 24 December 2014 at 09:03 confirms that his case was not being considered

      under the Scheme and that he had been convicted in 2008. Angela van den

      Bogerd's reply on 24 December 2014 at 09:17 suggests that the Mr Perkins'
                                Page 58 of 168
                                                                                   WITNO9830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      letter expresses concern about an unsafe conviction, in which case POL's

      position should be explained.


114   Angela van den Bogerd's email of 15 January 2015 19:55 explains her view

      that POL should respond to Mr Perkins explaining that the process to be

      followed was through the courts. As explained at paragraph 71, POL had

      received advice from Brian Altman KC that conviction cases should not be

      mediated in the Scheme. On 16 January 2015, Belinda Crowe emailed me to

      ask me to draft a response. I prepared a draft having considered the various

      email exchanges and I asked Jarnail Singh to confirm that its content was

      correct [POL00150875].


115   [POL001508761 contains the draft I prepared for Angela van den Bogerd. The

      draft includes the statement that: "Post Office has not seen or been provided

      with any information to support a suggestion that Mr Butoy's conviction may, in

      any way be unsafe". I believe this statement was made on the basis of POL's

      review of the prosecution file supplied by Cartwright King and was confirmed to

      be correct by Jarnail Singh and was approved by Angela van den Bogerd.


116   At all times during my employment at POL I have been, and remain, reliant on

      the information and expert advice provided to me by my colleagues and/or

      external advisers engaged by the business with the requisite locus and

      qualifications to provide the information or advice sought. My experience of

      professional life has been to trust my colleagues, their advice and judgement,

      and to rely on the information that they provide to me.


                                   Page 59 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




117   As far as I recall, nobody from POL's legal team, including its external advisers,

      raised anything that called into question the safety of the convictions of sub-

      postmasters and my understanding of the views of Angela van den Bogerd's

      team, Jarnail Singh's team as well as that of Cartwright King, was that there

      was no evidence of an unsafe conviction or evidence of a systematic flaw with

      Horizon in any of the cases in the Scheme. To the best of my knowledge, they

      had not come across anything that suggested there were any unsafe

      convictions more generally and my impression was that they took their

      responsibilities seriously. In addition, the default reliance on independent

      external legal advisors, with their own obligations and duties to the Court on all

      aspects of prosecutions added a further measure of confidence to what was

      communicated to me on such issues by colleagues.


Role liaising with ShEx, UKGI and BIS


118   In the context of my role as a programme manager for the Scheme I was also

      tasked with providing information about the Scheme to government

      stakeholders upon request. I had regular contact with Richard Callard via

      weekly and monthly emails. Richard Callard also received separate updates

      from POL's Board and he regularly caught up with Paula Vennells, Chris Aujard,

      and, Jane MacLeod.


119   I can see that on 11 December 2014, 1 was introduced to Richard Callard via

      email in the context of a request for briefing materials for Jo Swinson ahead of

      the Westminster Hall debate [UKG100002627]. It appears from this email chain

      that Belinda Crowe had initially spoken with Peter Batten on 10 December
                                 Page 60 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      2014, who was the outgoing Assistant Director at ShEx, and then received a

      follow-up email from Richard Callard, who was working on the briefing with

      Peter Batten. Belinda Crowe then responded to Richard Callard's email,

      copying me in to introduce us, and from this point Richard Callard and I

      continued to liaise via email, and, as our email exchange suggests, via

      telephone. Prior to commencing my role at POL, I had been a civil servant, so

      I had some experience of working with government. It was not unusual for

      Belinda Crowe to task me with liaising with Richard Callard, and for me to act

      as a point of contact with POL's government stakeholders in respect of the

      Scheme.


120   Richard Callard sat on the POL Board with Paula Vennells and Alice Perkins;

      however, I was not involved in conversations at that level. Rather, my role was

      at the working level of sharing information and providing updates. Belinda

      Crowe, Tom Wechsler, Mark Underwood and I were the key points of contact

      with ShEX in respect of the Scheme and we would typically engage with either

      Richard Callard or his colleague Laura Thompson.


121   As described in paragraphs 77 to 90, I liaised with Richard Callard in context of

      the preparation of Jo Swinson ahead of the Westminster Hall debate and he

      was also involved in preparing POL's Response to the Westminster Hall

      debate, which was shared with ShEx in draft form on 13 January 2015

      [UKG100002943]. It was usual for POL to liaise with ShEx when updating

      Ministers or vice versa.



                                   Page 61 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




122   Having reviewed the documents provided to me by the Inquiry, I can see that,

      as a point of contact for ShEx, I was copied into an email from Laura Thompson

      on 2 April 2015, following their receipt of a letter from the CCRC regarding a

      number of applications from individuals alleging their convictions were unsafe

      [POL00151752] and given that this was a legal matter I responded to direct

      Laura Thompson to liaise with Rodric Williams.


Liaison with Ministers


123   Following the closure of the Working Group, I continued to have a role liaising

      and otherwise assisting in POL's engagement with government stakeholders,

      including at times with the relevant Minister. An example of this is when on 6

      July 2015, I shared with POL colleagues a letter which I had drafted to be sent

      by Paula Vennells in response to a letter she had received from Baroness

      Neville-Rolfe, dated 2 July 2015, in which POL had been invited to attend a

      meeting with the Minister and MPs, including Andrew Bridgen, to discuss

      matters relating to the Scheme and Horizon [POL000271641. It was fairly typical

      of my role at the time that I should have been tasked with drafting this letter. My

      covering email, when sharing the draft letter with POL colleagues, indicated that

      Jane MacLeod had, "seen and is happy with this letter" [POL00152539]. This

      email also indicated that the POL team did not think it appropriate for Paula

      Vennells to attend the meeting with MPs proposed by Baroness Neville-Rolfe.

      As I recall, there had been a suggestion that Paula Vennells had been

      duplicitous at the Select Committee on 3 February 2015. In light of this, there

      were concerns that any meeting she attended risked not achieving POL's

                                    Page 62 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




      objectives to resolve the issues. Instead, the draft letter proposed that Mark

      Davies and I attend the meeting at the Department. Mark Davies and I attended

      the meeting with Baroness Neville-Rolfe, Andrew Bridgen and Kevan Jones on

      15 July 2015, discussed at paragraph 102 above.


124   As the draft letter makes clear, by this time POL was offering to mediate all

      cases in the Scheme, and had also offered every MP with a constituent in the

      Scheme the opportunity to discuss their case [POL00152540]. The draft letter

      notes that, "in none of the cases [in the Scheme] has our computer system been

      shown to have caused the losses complained of and in none of the cases has

      any evidence emerged to suggest convictions are unsafe". This confirmation

      was derived from POL's investigations and legal team. I am aware that advice

      had been sought specifically by POL's legal team from Cartwright King and

      Brian Altman KC [POL00006583], which was also commented on by Sir

      Jonathan Swift in the Swift Review at paragraph 96. Moreover, Sir Jonathan

      Swift also said, "We emphasise that none of the Second Sight reports identify

      systemic flaws in the Horizon system likely to have caused the losses incurred

      at Scheme branches...POL is entitled to note at this point in time that there is

      no evidence that the Horizon system — i.e. — the computer system — is

      responsible for the losses which have resulted in convictions" (The Swift

      Review, paragraph 95). The draft letter also notes that POL was, "under a duty

      to disclose any material which is capable of assisting a defence or undermining

      the prosecution, even after the prosecution has concluded" and, "it has

      complied with that duty and continues to do so". The confirmation of POL's


                                   Page 63 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      compliance with this duty came from the legal team, who had (as mentioned)

      written to Scheme applicants asking them to come forward with any evidence.


Panorama


125   In May 2015 POL was contacted by BBC journalists in respect of an episode of

      Panorama concerning the Horizon IT system and associated issues with

      postmasters. I was not typically involved in liaising with the media or journalists

      directly.


126   POL considered it important provide a background briefing to those working on

      the Panorama programme on the basis that it provided a rare opportunity to set

      out the approach it had taken to investigate and to attempt to resolve the issues

      complained of. On 9 June 2015 Mark Davies, Angela van den Bogerd and I met

      with two BBC journalists, Matt Bardo and Tim Robinson, to provide this briefing.

      I was involved in this briefing because of my role on the Scheme and hence my

      ability to provide a summary. As far as I am aware, there was no specific

      strategy for engaging with journalists other than to ensure that the reporting on

      this issue was fair and fully informed.


127   I began the briefing meeting by providing a background summary of the

      establishment of the Scheme and its operation. In the course of this, I stated

      that, "in no case that we have come across have we found any evidence

      whatever that the Horizon system is responsible for the losses that occurred in

      branch". This statement was a reflection of the cases at the time which had

      been reinvestigated in the Scheme.

                                    Page 64 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




128   Angela van den Bogerd and I went on to explain the process by which

      discrepancies in branch accounts can be addressed by way of a transaction

      correction. When asked whether it was now or had ever been possible for

      anybody from POL or Fujitsu to interfere with transactions or transaction data

      on a branch terminal without the knowledge of the sub-postmaster, I stated that

      "it is 100% true to say that we can't change, alter or modify existing transaction

      data so the integrity is 100% preserved." I went on to say that there was process

      which had only ever been used once to overcome a technical error which could

      not be corrected by a transaction correction or a transaction acknowledgment,

      called a balancing transaction. This statement reflected my understanding and

      knowledge of remote access at the time. The information relayed to the

      journalists in respect of remote access and the technical possibilities for

      amending branch accounts was provided by Fujitsu, as described in paragraph

      62. POL was in contact with Fujitsu to obtain their assistance when preparing

      for the briefing meeting [POL00316805]. The Panorama episode aired on 17

      August 2015.


129   More generally, I have been involved with communicating with the press, but

      this has been more limited. I very rarely communicated with the press directly;

      I am sometimes asked to comment on statements prepared by POL's

      communication team and others.


130   Following the broadcast of the BBC Panorama episode I helped draft another

      letter to Baroness Neville-Rolfe in early September 2015. I note in my email to

      Jane McCleod on 2 September at 22:16, that Baroness Neville-Rolfe was

                                    Page 65 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      concerned about the allegations made by Panorama, and BIS therefore

      commissioned a full rebuttal. It had then been reported to me by POL

      colleagues and Richard Callard that Baroness Neville-Rolfe was discomforted

      by an email she had received from Andrew Bridgen, Kevan Jones and Oliver

      Letwin requesting a meeting in respect of the "very serious findings" in the

      Panorama episode [POL00153064]. It was these episodes of discomfort and

      concern on the part of Baroness Neville-Rolfe, as reported to me by POL

      colleagues and BIS officials, that I referred to as "wobbles" in my email. It was

      therefore decided by Mark Davies, Mark Underwood, Melanie Corfield, Jane

      Hill and Rodric Williams and me that we should write to Baroness Neville-Rolfe

      directly to set out the steps that had been taken to address the ongoing

      concerns of the sub-postmasters, and to provide further information in respect

      of specific cases to balance against some of the allegations made in Panorama.


131   I shared a draft of this letter with POL colleagues on 3 September 2015,

      although there seems to be some discrepancy in the chronology of emails on

      the email chain which I attribute to the fact that Jane MacLeod was abroad and

      travelling, presumably in a different time zone, at the time she received this

      email and responded [POL00153064]. In my covering email, when I initially

      shared the draft letter to Baroness Neville-Rolfe, I noted that I had, "sought to

      address the issue of the 'public inquiry' suggestion reasonably head on". In my

      subsequent email to Jane MacLeod, of 2 September 2015 at 22:16, I noted that

      "the relative lack of challenge by Government of the call for a 'public inquiry'

      is...currently the most damaging aspect of the project and we feel it necessary


                                   Page 66 of 168
                                                                                          WI TN09830100
                                                                                        WI TN09830100




      to begin the process of placing a marker down that this is a place that we, as

      an organisation, can't be taken to. The letter makes clear why".


132   I do not think that the government's approach to oversight changed following

      Baroness Neville-Rolfe's appointment as the relevant Minister. The Horizon

      issue was evolving all the time, and the BBC Panorama broadcast in August

      2015 would, in my view, inevitably have led whoever occupied the ministerial

      seat at the time to become more concerned and immediately engaged with this

      matter.


REMOTE ACCESS


133   My understanding of the extent of remote access, what was and what was not

      possible to do through it, and the extent to which any such access would be

      visible to a sub-postmaster or anyone else, evolved substantially over time. My

      recollection of how this unfolded at different points in time is set out below.


134   I have reviewed [POL00091395] (email from Belinda Crowe, dated 20

      November 2014, 14:22), [POL00149277] (email from me, dated 20 November

      2014, 9:54 and chain), and [POL00149296] (email from me, dated 21 October

      2018, 18:48) and can see that very shortly after I joined POL, the issue of

      remote access has arisen in the context of the Scheme. This is, I believe, the

      first time I came across the issue of remote access in relation to specific cases,

      although I may have been told that this was one of the points of contention as

      part of my introduction to the work more generally.




                                    Page 67 of 168
                                                                                  WI TN09830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




135   Belinda Crowe's email [POL00091395] suggests that the recipients of the

      email, including me, met earlier in the day and agreed that we needed to set

      out the position on remote access in more detail. Belinda Crowe said she would

      set up a meeting with Fujitsu and others. Her email also forwards on an email

      from James Davidson of Fujitsu (dated 17 April 2014), which includes Fujitsu's

      answers to a series of questions about remote access asked of him by my

      colleague Rodric Williams on 14 April 2014 before I joined POL. At the time, I

      was unaware of the context of Rodric Williams' 2014 email.


136   [POL00149277] is an email chain which starts with an email I sent to Melanie

      Corfield, Belinda Crowe and Tom Wechsler on 20 October 2014 at 9:52 asking

      to be copied into emails concerning remote access. Melanie Corfield was a

      member of POL's communication team.


137   [POL00149296] (email from me, dated 21 October 201, 18:48) sets out my

      response to Belinda Crowe's request for comments on an email she sent to

      Angela van den Bogerd and Andrew Parsons (and which I was copied into)

      about the text of an email she planned to send to Fujitsu in advance of a

      telephone call the following day. Belinda Crowe's email states that she would

      like to achieve: "a common understanding of what is possible in relation to

      Horizon; whether POL has used the right terminology in the past; what POL

      should say in relation to cases in the Scheme; and, ensuring POL has a robust

      statement it could stand behind to "close the matter down." [POL00091397]

      indicates that the meeting was cancelled but that James Davidson of Fujitsu

      emailed Belinda Crowe on 22 October 2014 at 14:29 which he considered, "sets

                                  Page 68 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      out how Integrity in Horizon is assured and how this forms the basis for

      responding to the various challenges made."


138   In my response to Belinda Crowe, I said that I thought it was important to ask

      a question so that there was absolute clarity about governance structure and

      the processes through which requests for access must follow, setting out who

      at POL authorised the requests to Fujitsu. I also thought that it would be helpful

      for there to be a worked example to illustrate this, and to understand whether

      there was difference between Horizon online (the second version of Horizon)

      and its predecessor. I also thought that it would be sensible to ask for

      confirmation that remote access had not taken place in respect of the terminal

      at any branches in cases considered by the Scheme.


139   [POL00091397] indicates that on 23 October 2014 Belinda Crowe forwarded

      James Davidson's email of 22 October 2014 at 14:29 on to me, Rodric William

      and Tom Wechsler, stating that she "did not understand all of this", and that it

      raised further questions.


140   It appears from the documents [POL00149488] that Mark Underwood and I

      were tasked with trying to obtain straightforward answers from Fujitsu.

      [POL00149488] indicates that Mark Underwood and I met with Fujitsu on 6

      November 2014. From the follow up email dated 7 November 2014 at 11:45,

      Mark Underwood and I were tasked with drawing up "plain English questions"

      on remote access — about what it is and what is not possible to do when not

      using a sub postmaster's user ID.


                                   Page 69 of 168
                                                                                         WITNO9830100
                                                                                       WI TN09830100




141   It is clear from the email exchange between Mark Underwood and I on the

      morning of 7 November 2014 that our understanding of remote access following

      our meeting with Fujitsu was, to use Mark's words, "that there is no functionality

      that allows FJ to edit, remove or manipulate a transaction remotely in any way.

      Any change takes the form of an insertion with distinct ID that is easily

      identifiable in the audit trail it leaves."


142   Mark Underwood's email to me on 11 November 2014 13:37 [POL00149488]

      suggests that Andrew Parsons (referred to as AP) prepared a paper which

      covered the scenarios that enable transactions to be addedlinjected into a

      branch account, leaving Mark and I to focus at a very high level on preparing

      questions in writing for Fujitsu on the audit trail linked to additions/injections. I

      cannot remember precisely when I read Andrew Parsons' draft paper, but I

      recall that the three scenarios were in branch; transaction acknowledgments

      and transaction corrections; and, balancing transactions. Our understanding

      was that if a transaction was added to a branch account, it would leave a distinct

      identifier, which could be searched for.


143   With reference to suggested questions to Belinda Crowe about the status of

      cases in the Scheme, having reviewed documents provided to me by POL, I

      can see that Mark Underwood emailed me on 20 November 2014 at 11:56

      following a telephone call with James Davidson and reported that "the auditors

      have searched the data and no `remote access scar'is present and thus did not

      take place" [POL00149598]. On 20 November 2014 at 10:49 Mark Underwood

      emailed Tom Wechsler. A further email from Mark Underwood to Tom Wechsler

                                      Page 70 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      (and copied to me) on 20 November 2014 at 10:47 notes that Fujitsu confirmed

      during a telephone call that they had downloaded branch data for the 150

      Scheme cases and "everything appears golden" [POL00149578].


144   On 20 November 2014 10:47, Mark Underwood emailed Tom Wechsler, with

      me in copy, attaching a paper produced by Andrew Parsons' [POL00212049]

      together with a bulleted lists of points for public rebuttals about what could and

      could not be done in relation to remote access [POL00212048]. Mark

      Underwood's email indicates he planned to send his amendments to Andrew

      Parsons' to consider, following which the paper would have been sent to Fujitsu

      to answer the questions posed and confirm the processes described were

      correct. Andrew Parsons' responded on 25 November 2014 at 14:37 and

      suggested sending to Fujitsu, "as they will pick up on technical points"

      [POL00212720].


145   Mark Underwood's email of 26 November 2014 13:29 [POL00149674] indicates

      that our questions were sent to them reasonably soon afterwards — Mark

      Underwood's email of 26 November 2014 13:23 states that he spoke to James

      Davidson that morning about the papers that had been sent over.


146   At the time that I was engaged in trying to obtain answers from Fujitsu to

      questions concerning remote access, I did not have any reason to think they

      were being unhelpful, and they responded to our requests, albeit there was

      evidently some frustration within Fujitsu. [POL00149674] records James

      Davidson's frustration with statements made about Horizon by Second Sight,

      including consideration of legal action by Fujitsu against Second Sight. This is
                                   Page 71 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




      reflected in my email to Tom Wechsler of 19 December 2014 at 07:26, in which

      I noted that we "were somewhat disappointed by the efforts of Fujitsu to assist

      in plain English answers to the questions we prepared with [Bond Dickinson]'s

      help" [POL00062410]. It did not appear to me at the time that this was the

      product of evasiveness or reluctance to help. In my email of 19 December 2014,

      I stated that the issue of remote access was "one we can definitely close off, /

      am sure" [POL00062410]. It appeared to me at the time, perhaps naively, that

      it should be possible for Fujitsu to answer the questions we asked of them in a

      straightforward way.


147   [POL00062410] records that remote access had been discussed in the

      Westminster Hall debate on 17 December 2014 and that Tom Wechsler felt that

      POL needed an "agreed line".


148   I have    reviewed POL's response         to the Westminster Hall debate

      [POL00040791] and paragraphs 34 — 36 which concern remote access. Tom

      Wechsler circulated a first draft on 8 January 2015 and I sent a re-worked draft

      on 9 January 2015 [POL00040790]. POL's response was a collective effort and

      I am not sure who had the final sign-off in relation to whether or not balancing

      transactions should be referred to.


149   The issue of remote access was revisited again in the course of POL preparing

      its response to Second Sight's Part Two Report. From the email chain of 8 April

      2015, it appears that Mark Underwood liaised with Pete Newsome of Fujitsu on

      a call, and Pete Newsome then followed up to provide a step by step breakdown

      of the process by which Fujitsu could inject a "balancing transaction" into a
                                Page 72 of 168
                                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      branch database [POL00041040]. This was previously understood to be

      possible, but Pete Newsome was providing more detail about the necessary

      process for this. As the subsequent email chain with Mark Underwood and

      Andrew Parsons demonstrates, this information then informed the content of

      POL's response to Second Sight's Part Two Report, then in preparation.


150   The email from Mark Underwood to James Davidson of Fujitsu on 7 April 2015

      reflects that in their Part Two Report, Second Sight had sent two POL / Fujitsu

      documents to POL regarding a bug from 2010, known to cause a receipts and

      payments mismatch (also known as "the 76 bug'), which had arisen in a pilot,

      and indicated that POL / Fujitsu could alter branch data to resolve the bug

      [FUJ00081944]. The documents show that Mark Underwood immediately wrote

      to James Davidson of Fujitsu to seek an explanation. I asked Mark Underwood,

      Andrew Parsons and Pete Newsome of Fujitsu to co-ordinate so that POL could

      go back to Second Sight with something meaningful and accurate

      [POL00353224]. Mark Underwood then posed a series of further questions to

      Fujitsu in light of the information contained in the documents referred to in

      Second Sight's Part Two Report. In the course of an email chain between Mark

      Underwood and Pete Newsome of Fujitsu on 8 April 2015 at 15:51

      [POL00021667], Pete Newsome indicated that the errors were resolved using

      a balancing transaction, a process POL was aware of. He stated, "There is only

      one process Fujitsu can use which is the insertion of auditable additional

      transactions described in the document so the words below must have been a

      loose business description for a meeting with non-technical attendees."


                                  Page 73 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      [POL00314275]. Andrew Parsons' took forward the drafting and his draft

      response to Second Sight [POL00226072] indicates that POL responded on

      that basis, as well as highlighting that the issue had been disclosed to Second

      Sight in 2013. I then sent the final version to Ian Henderson.


151   These documents show the team trying to better understand what impact this

      had on remote access in the context of responding to Second Sight. It is also

      clear from the document that the team did not consider it from the point of view

      of disclosure in proceedings, which I believe POL would have undertaken

      before Mark Underwood or I had joined the business. It is also unlikely to have

      occurred to us since Second Sight were drawing our attention to documents

      POL had previously sent them and so it did not appear to be new information.


152   To the extent that I understood any alteration of branch data to be possible, my

      understanding was that this could only be achieved by injecting a new

      transaction into the system, rather than changing data or entries which were

      already in the system. I understood that existing data could not be changed,

      altered or deleted. Any new entry or transaction which was added to the system

      could only be done in limited circumstances, and would leave a non-user

      identifier such that it was clear that it did not originate from the user of that

      terminal, i.e. it would be identifiable as not having been caused by the sub-

      postmaster.


Remote Access — Project Zebra




                                   Page 74 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




153   I believe my first awareness of the Project Zebra occurred when I was helping

      to collate material for Sir Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight in the context

      of the Swift Review. I have reviewed a number of documents provided to me by

      POL and I can see from [POL00237265] that an email from Steve Allchorn

      dated 14 December 2015 records that I had a conversation with Jane MacLeod

      ahead of a planned meeting with Sir Jonathan Swift. I cannot now recall the

      details of my conversation with Jane MacLeod; however, I believe this was the

      first time I became aware of the existence of Project Zebra since I was copied

      into Steve Allchorn's email and later exchange with Deloitte's Mark Westbrook

      and Andrew Whitton, which referred to, "Project Zebra Consolidated Report

      Draft Subject to Change 21/08/2014 18_06" and "Project Zebra - Board

      Briefing 040614 v13 Final Draft. "


154   On reviewing other documents provided to me by POL I can also see that on

      23 October 2014 Belinda Crowe shared a Board Paper, dated 6 June 2014,

      with me which included a section titled 'Deloitte Report and Linklaters Advice',

      which appears to discuss the workstream which became Project Zebra

      [POL00027153]. This document was shared with me in the context of

      consideration of closing the Working Group in the Scheme, as discussed in

      paragraph 42 above, to make me aware that this had previously been

      considered. I do not recall noticing or engaging with the section in this Board

      paper regarding Deloitte's work.


155   I do not believe I was supplied with either the Project Zebra Consolidated

      Report or the Board Briefing and it appears from [POL00322386] and

                                   Page 75 of 168
                                                                                   WITNO9830100
                                                                                 WI TN09830100




      [POL00322475] that Mark Underwood and Rodric Williams arranged for the

      Project Zebra documents — referred to as the Deloitte report in the email chain

      — to be delivered to Sir Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight in Chambers. I

      am aware from my involvement in setting up the Swift Review that Sir Jonathan

      Swift met with Deloitte alongside other stakeholders but I was not present at

      those meetings.


156   Whilst preparing this witness statement and reviewing documents provided by

      POL, I have seen [POL00211254] for the first time, an email from Andrew

      Parsons' to Belinda Crowe and Rodric Williams, which refers to Andrew

      Parsons' note on Horizon access and states: "This describes the position as I

      understand it based on the Deloitte report but this needs to go past FJ

      /Deloitte to confirm the position." I note that Andrew Parsons' email responds

      to an email from Rodric Williams to Belinda Crowe and Andrew Parsons on 21

      October 2014 12:48 in which Rodric Williams said, "If this is the remote access

      point — Andy, what progress had been made with Deloitte." It appears to me

      that there was another workstream that I was unaware of and I assume the

      reference to the Deloitte report concerns Project Zebra. I do not know why

      neither I or Mark Underwood were copied in and can only assume it was

      because a decision had been made that it was sensitive and details of it should

      not be widely shared.


157   I can also see from my review of documents supplied to me by POL that on 10

      November 2014 16:44 Andrew Parsons emailed Belinda Crowe, Andy Holt and

      me (with Amy Eames and Rodric Williams in copy) stating that, "I've also had

                                  Page 76 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      some more information from Deloitte that I have included in the note"

      [POL00149483]. I have not located or accessed Andrew Parsons' note and I do

      not remember its content. I can now only assume that the information from

      Deloitte he refers to came from Project Zebra, but I did not know this at the

      time.


158   For     completeness,   while preparing my statement, I also reviewed

      [POL00125594] and [POL00129447], an email from Andrew Parsons to Rodric

      Williams and Mark Underwood sent on 9 March 2015 at 16:07, to which I was

      copied in, and which concerned a paragraph on remote access contained in a

      draft Scheme Report. Andrew Parsons' email forwarded on an email exchange

      between Rodric Williams and Martin Smith of Cartwright King dated 9 March

      2015 at 12:12. It appears from the chain that Rodric Williams and Andrew

      Parsons then discussed the content of Martin Smith's email before Andrew

      Parsons sent across his views to the wider group at 16:07. 1 do not believe that

      I read Martin Smith's email since Andrew Parsons' email was addressed to

      Rodric Williams and Mark Underwood and they appear to have been taking

      forward the drafting of this paragraph. I can see that Martin Smith also raised a

      point made to him by Simon Clarke that the draft paragraph did not reflect

      aspects of the Deloitte Report which commented on balancing transactions and

      the absence of controls that would detect when an authorised user had sent "a

      `fake' basket into the digital signing process." Andrew Parsons' email to the

      wider group did not refer to the absence of controls re fake' baskets, but did

      discuss whether the draft paragraph should refer to balancing transactions.


                                   Page 77 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




159   In his 16:07 email Andrew Parsons' appears to have taken the view that the

      paragraph was accurate on the basis of conversations with Fujitsu confirming

      that a balancing transaction allowed Fujitsu to inject a new transaction but did

      not allow transaction data to be edited or removed. He pointed out that the

      paragraph of the Scheme Report was "arguably incomplete" since it only

      referred to transaction corrections and transaction acknowledgments as the

      method of addressing accounting errors. It appears that the team accepted

      Andrew Parsons' view and chose not to refer to balancing transactions. I do not

      believe I was involved in making the decision, but I would have been reassured

      by Andrew Parsons' view that the paragraph was accurate as well as by the

      previously reasoned position he refers to that the balancing transaction process

      was not mentioned because "it was so rare that it is immaterial."


160   Having reviewed documents while preparing this statement, I believe that

      aspects of Deloitte's work — in particular, regarding balancing transactions —

      were within my knowledge at an earlier stage, but that I did not know they arose

      within the context of Project Zebra, which I was unaware of until the early stages

      of the Swift Review (paragraph 153 above). For completeness, I can also see

      from [POL00117518] that in the context of my collation of information for the

      work to be taken forward by the Swift Review, Rodric Williams provided a very

      brief outline of the background information concerning the instruction of Deloitte

      by the Board.


Remote Access — Swift Review



                                    Page 78 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  W ITN09830100




161   My understanding of remote access changed again when Sir Jonathan Swift

      del ivered the report compiling his findings and conclusions from the Swift

      Review, dated 8 February 2016 (the "Swift Review Report"), to POL, which

      highlighted that Deloitte's Board Briefing noted that database access privileges

      existed which would enable the deletion of a digitally signed basket, but which

      are restricted to authorised administrators at Fujitsu. Those privileges "would

      enable a person to create or amend a basket and re-sign it with a `fake' key,

      detectable if appropriately checked" [POL00006355 at para 140], and Deloitte

      had not seen a way to prevent a person with the appropriate authorisation

      carrying out such an exercise in an unauthorised manner.


162   Sir Jonathan Swift also commented that Deloitte noted that administrators had

      the ability to delete data from the audit store which could allow, `suitably

      authorised staff in Fujitsu to delete a seated set of baskets and replace them

      with properly sealed baskets, although they would have to fake the digital

      signatures. "


163   I understood from reading Sir Jonathan's Swift's report that Fujitsu accepted

      that Deloitte's interpretation was technically correct, but emphasised the wide

      range of security measures in the software, hardware and environment which

      they said reduced risk of interference. Moreover, Fujitsu stressed — "properly'

      in Sir Jonathan Swift's view — that there is no evidence that any such action

      occurred and that likelihood of all the security measuring being overcome was

      very small.



                                   Page 79 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




164   1 tended to agree with Sir Jonathan Swift's view that: "The fact that such activity

      is possible does not, of course, indicate that it has actually occurred" and with

      his view that whilst it was theoretically possible, there was no evidence it

      occurred and it was inherently improbable.


165   Sir Jonathan Swift considered that an alternative would be that Fujitsu would

      use the functionality to correct system bugs without drawing them to the

      attention of POL or subpostmasters in order to avoid contractual penalties. After

      reading the Swift Review Report, I was aware that the public assurances that

      POL had given were incomplete and I felt that it was essential that POL should

      follow Sir Jonathan's Swift's recommendations that POL commission work to

      confirm the position insofar as possible and seek advice from Brian Altman KC

      in relation to disclosure of the Deloitte reports.


166   Sir Jonathan Swift considered that POL's Westminster Hall Response was

      incomplete because it did not refer to balancing transactions or Deloitte's

      observations about the audit store and 'fake' baskets. I was unaware of the

      latter at the time of my involvement with the preparation of POL's response. I

      was aware of balancing transactions; however my understanding was that POL

      had adopted the position that balancing transaction process was so rare as to

      be immaterial, and that the main way that accounting errors were carried out

      was through the transaction correction and transaction acknowledgment

      process. I believe that I was only aware of one case in which a balancing

      transaction had been used.


Remote Access — Group Litigation phase
                               Page 80 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




167   I explain above that my understanding of remote access evolved over the

      period of time covered by this witness statement. The early Group Litigation

      phase saw a significant evolution in my level of knowledge and understanding.


168   On 13 July 2016, I received an email from Andrew Parsons with a summary of

      the Deloitte Preliminary Report [POL00029990]. I recall reading this email and

      it being significant as it represented a real-time extension of my understanding

      of what was, and was not, possible for Fujitsu employees to do with respect to

      branch accounts.


169   The email explained that Deloitte identified that a small number of users, called

      super-users, did in fact possess the ability to delete and edit transactions in

      branch accounts although it appeared that this would leave an identifiable

      digital footprint. This ran counter to my and the wider POL business'

      understanding at that time that it was only possible to add or inject a new

      transaction into branch accounts. For example, if I put in £100 into the system

      instead of £1000, my understanding was that you could not change or fix this

      original transaction. Head Office would have to send me a new, separate

      transaction (a transaction correction) for £900 which I would accept to correct

      the mistake and remedy the difference.


170   This was the view I had also shared during the Panorama interview in June

      2015. On the face of it, this email indicated that my knowledge and that of my

      colleagues (based on what we had previously been told by James Davison and

      others of Fujitsu) was materially inaccurate.


                                   Page 81 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




171   I do not know if others within POL had this knowledge prior to this Deloitte's

      report, but this email was the first time that I believe I was made aware of this

      information.


172   The email concludes with two actions which were to be taken forward by Bond

      Dickinson LLP.


173   The email chain from 21 July 2016 which consists of communication largely

      between legal teams (Rodric Williams and Andrew Parsons) and Mark Davies

      [POL00029998], shows that POL was trying to understand the situation as new

      information was being fed in to them.


174   When the new information emerged we realised that what we had understood

      and had shared publicly with respect to remote access was not 100% accurate.

      It was at this point that POL had to, as Andrew Parsons explains

      [POL00029998j, review everything that had previously been said by POL in

      relation to this issue to establish the extent to which it needed changing in the

      light of the new information we were actively receiving. As reflected by Andrew

      Parsons in one of these emails, it was essential that POL deal with this issue

      "candidly", as Andrew put it, and volunteer a correction regardless of whether

      that put POL in a bad light.


175   Although I do not think I had any input in drafting the wording of the corrections

      and explanations offered by POL in the light of this new development, my

      understanding was that it would need to be done carefully and in consultation

      with Fujitsu. I recall that this was a very technical issue and there was a concern

                                     Page 82 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     W ITN09830100




      that while making the language accessible, we still reflected the position

      accurately.


176   It was my view then, and continues to be, that POL's IT capability during this

      period was very limited. Our IT expertise was largely, if not entirely, external

      until Rob Houghton was brought into the organisation at which point our in-

      house IT function began to develop and grow to some degree. Until then, I

      believe that there was a significant imbalance in the capability of the POL

      customer and the Fujitsu supplier, leading to an over-reliance on the latter by

      the former for IT expertise. Anecdotally, at the relevant time, my observation

      was that the part of the office designated as the IT function was staffed, in the

      main, by Fujitsu contractors. By way of example, I note that James Davidson's

      email signature at [POL00091395] identifies him as working for both Fujitsu and

      POL.


177   At this stage or subsequent to it, while I was copied into some of the emails

      which discussed these important and material issues, I was not involved in

      formal discussions, decision-making, and drafting with respect to remote

      access issues. This would have been dealt with by internal and external legal

      teams and their IT counterparts.


CRIMINAL CASES REVIEW COMMISSION


178   I was aware that there had been an influx of referrals made to the CCRC in

      March 2015, but I had very little involvement in discussions related to this. I was

      briefly involved in an email chain with POL colleagues where we tried to

                                    Page 83 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      understand what had prompted these CCRC referrals [POL00063478]. We tried

      to identify if there was a particular group, or if the individuals who had referred

      their cases shared a common adviser, who we could engage with to try and

      understand their concerns and how we might help. I also liaised with ShEx in

      respect of this, and confirmed that Rodric Williams was the person best placed

      within POL to speak to about this matter [POL00151752]. Since this was a legal

      matter, I believe it would have been dealt with by Rodric Williams and POL's

      legal team.


THE SWIFT REVIEW


179   Following the unsatisfactory conclusion of the Scheme and the end of Second

      Sight's work, POL was keen to satisfy itself that the steps it had taken in its

      attempts to understand and, where possible, resolve what lay at the heart of

      the complaints it had received were objectively appropriate and sufficient. I

      cannot recall whether ShEx or POL first had the idea of using the arrival of a

      new Chairman at Post Office to commission a piece of work to meet that

      objective. The idea was that the incoming Chairman was well placed to be

      tasked to undertake this work since he had, by definition, no prior interest in

      these matters and no pre-existing relationships with anyone involved and could

      therefore approach the exercise objectively and dispassionately. In the event,

      Sir Jonathan Swift and his junior, Christopher Knight, were retained to conduct

      a review of the matters raised and steps taken to resolve them. The `Swift

      Review', as it has became known, was conducted for Tim Parker in a personal

      capacity, reporting back to the (then) Minister, Baroness Neville-Rolfe. Sir

                                    Page 84 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight were given unrestricted access to all the

      relevant information help by POL, as well as to Second Sight and others, in

      undertaking this work. The Swift Review reported its findings, many of which

      were complimentary about POL's actions, but some of which were not. He

      made eight recommendations for follow up work, some of which were more

      straightforward to discharge than others, but follow up work on each was begun

      shortly after his final report was presented to Tim Parker. Quite soon thereafter,

      legal proceedings were issued against POL by Alan Bates & Others. In-house

      and external lawyers for POL expressed the view that the commencement of

      legal proceedings would likely impact how POL would most prudently take

      forward the follow up work from the Swift Review which was still outstanding

      due to its complexity. Advice was sought from Leading Counsel (Anthony de

      Garr Robinson KC) who was of the firm view that the work that remained

      outstanding should be still taken forward but as part of POL's preparations for

      defending the litigation. His advice was proactively shared with Sir Jonathan

      Swift who indicated that he was content to proceed on that basis.


180   On 8 October 2015, on behalf of incoming Chairman, Tim Parker, POL

      instructed leading counsel Sir Jonathan Swift to carry out an independent

      review to determine whether any further action needed to be taken by POL to

      respond to the concerns about Horizon raised by individuals and MPs, including

      whether POL's reliance on Horizon had resulted in miscarriages of justice

      [POL001566171.




                                    Page 85 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




181   My recollection is that POL remained concerned about unresolved disputes

      following the closure of the Scheme, and wished to provide reassurance that it

      was doing all that it was reasonable to do to seek to resolve those disputes.

      Jane MacLeod or possibly me, felt that POL's incoming Chairman, Tim Parker,

      who was without any vested interests, could perform that role supported by

      external counsel, who was entirely independent of the team at POL. Tim Parker

      had no existing relationships within POL and it was felt that he could be

      completely impartial. As indicated above, it was felt important that this work be

      undertaken by Tim Parker in his personal capacity, in order to preserve its

      independence and integrity, free of the influence of any vested interests at POL,

      whether at Board level or otherwise. I can see from documents provided to me

      by POL that this appears to have been discussed with Baroness Neville-Rolfe

      in a meeting she attended with Jane MacLeod, at which Baroness Neville-Rolfe

      advised she would ask Tim Parker to review POL's position [POL00041135].


182   What became the Swift Review was formally triggered on 10 September 2015

      when Baroness Neville-Rolfe, then Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at

      BIS, wrote to Tim Parker asking him to determine whether "any further action is

      necessary" by POL [POL001566171.


183   I was part of the POL team responsible for instructing Sir Jonathan Swift and

      Christopher Knight. The other members of the team included Jane MacLeod,

      in her capacity as General Counsel, alongside Rodric Williams and Mark

      Underwood. Rodric Williams, Mark Underwood and I reported to Jane MacLeod



                                   Page 86 of 168
                                                                                        WITNO9830100
                                                                                      WI TN09830100




      and we had all been closely involved with the Scheme and the efforts

      undertaken by POL to try and resolve the issues with sub-postmasters.


Emails re selecting counsel and the scope of the review


184   I believed that Tim Parker should determine the terms of reference for the

      review, and I emphasised this to my colleagues in my email of 24 September

      2015 [POL00065606]. I do not recall any dispute about the broad purpose of

      the Swift Review within POL, and there was none that I was aware of at the

      time.


185   On 25 September 2015, Jane MacLeod met with Tim Parker to discuss aspects

      of the exercise. Jane MacLeod's subsequent email to Tim Parker on 1 October

      2015 [POL00027126], suggests she was asked to recommend leading

      barristers to conduct the review and that Tim Parker also asked her to provide

      draft wording to describe its scope.


186   On 30 September 2015, I provided Jane MacLeod with the biographies of three

      candidates for consideration for her to share with Tim Parker [POL00153300].

      I also shared a draft covering letter for Jane MacLeod to send to Tim Parker,

      which included a draft form of words outlining the scope of what became the

      Swift Review [POL00153304]. It was drafted with input from Mark Underwood,

      and I intended it to be a starting point for Tim Parker to consider and develop

      as he felt appropriate, together with leading counsel: it was not intended as a

      final draft. This is reflected in my covering email to Jane MacLeod, where I

      noted, "the letter sets outa starter for 10 on the question of scope but is explicit

                                    Page 87 of 168
                                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




      in that it/s offered purely as a straw man to be knocked down/amended by Tim

      on Counsel's advice" [POL00153300]. I believe the draft text on the possible

      scope of the review reflects discussions with other members of the POL team

      as to what might encapsulate the exercise best. For example, at the time,

      Rodric Williams had been very busy and, as I noted in my email to Jane

      MacLeod [POL00153300], he had not had a chance to consider the draft text

      on scope of the review, although it had benefited from some exchanges with

      him.


187   On 1 October 2015, Jane MacLeod emailed Tim Parker with a different

      selection of leading counsel, using an amended version of my text, and

      including an amended version of the draft scope for the Swift Review

      [POL00027126].


Preparation of instructions to counsel & settling scope


188   I drafted the instructions to Sir Jonathan Swift [POL00156617], which were

      reviewed and approved by Jane MacLeod. Ordinarily this task would have fallen

      to Rodric Williams, but he did not have capacity, so I assisted instead. I would

      have received input from my immediate POL colleagues, including Rodric

      Williams, Jane MacLeod, Mark Underwood, and possibly more broadly from

      others, including Angela van den Bogerd, where specialist input was required.

      I imagine I also sought the input of Andrew Parsons at Bond Dickinson LLP.


189   The draft text about the scope of the Swift Review (paragraph 3 of the

      instructions) was again only included as a starting point to enable a wider

                                   Page 88 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      conversation about what the Swift Review was trying to achieve — it was not

      intended to be prescriptive. I can see that paragraph 4.1 of the instructions

      request counsel's advice "on the scope of the Review and how this is framed"

      [POL00156617]. Paragraphs 32 and 33 of the instructions also asked counsel

      to attend a meeting with Jane MacLeod on 8 October 2015, the purpose of

      which was, "to settle the Review's scope and agree a process for conducting,

      concluding and reporting on the Review within the desired timeframe".


190   The meeting on 8 October 2015 with Sir Jonathan Swift was attended by Jane

      MacLeod and Rodric Williams and possibly me, although I cannot recall for

      certain. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss and reflect on the written

      instructions and to consider the possible terms of reference for the Swift

      Review. On 9 October 2015, following the discussions of the previous day, Sir

      Jonathan Swift circulated a seven-point draft outline which he called, "A starting

      point for the terms of reference" [POLOO102582].


191   On 10 October 2015, Jane MacLeod responded to Sir Jonathan Swift attaching

      a draft chronology of the Scheme, to assist with his background understanding

      of the issues, and confirming that a meeting has been scheduled for him with

      Tim Parker for 20 October 2015 [POL00104218]. The Scheme chronology

      document was prepared by Mark Underwood. I am not sure whether this was

      prepared specifically for Sir Jonathan Swift.


192   On 12 October 2015 Jane MacLeod emailed Sir Jonathan Swift with a

      preliminary response to the first five of the seven points he had listed for

      consideration as the terms of reference for the Swift Review [POL00104216].
                                  Page 89 of 168
                                                                                           WITNO9830100
                                                                                         WI TN09830100




      The preliminary response under each of these points summarises how POL

      had addressed or responded to the issues raised by Sir Jonathan Swift as he

      considered the definition of the scope of his work. I do not recall contributing

      to the drafting of this email to Sir Jonathan Swift, although it is likely that I would

      have been involved in discussions about the issues which are reflected in it.


193   On 14 October 2015, Jane MacLeod emailed Sir Jonathan Swift informing him

      that a huge amount of information had been collated [POL00102604]. Jane

      MacLeod then shared an updated version of the Scheme chronology document

      [POL00130957] and asked Sir Jonathan Swift to indicate which documents and

      material he would particularly like sight of at that stage, so that we could

      prioritise sharing it with him. As stated above, Mark Underwood prepared the

      Scheme chronology and would also have been responsible for collating this

      material and, I think, sending it to Sir Jonathan Swift. I was not involved in this

      exercise.


194   On 15 October 2015, Jane MacLeod emailed Sir Jonathan Swift again

      [POL00162692], attaching a note with preliminary responses to the remaining

      points raised by Sir Jonathan Swift in his initial note on the possible terms of

      reference for the Swift Review [POL00162693]. I do not recall having any

      involvement in collating this response document but, again, I imagine I was

      involved in discussions about it content.


195   On 20 October 2015, Jane MacLeod met with Sir Jonathan Swift and Tim

      Parker to discuss the Swift Review. I did not attend this meeting. On 21 October


                                     Page 90 of 168
                                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      2015, Jane MacLeod shared a summary note of what had been discussed at

      this meeting with Rodric Williams, Mark Underwood and me [POL00102616].


196   Jane MacLeod's note of the meeting on 20 October 2015 sets out discussions

      of the areas of focus for Sir Jonathan Swift's investigation, as well as key people

      he would like to speak with, which included Lord Arbuthnot, Alan Bates and

      Second Sight. It also set out the key documents and information which Sir

      Jonathan Swift required immediately, which included copies of the CCRC

      requests, example prosecution reports with their supporting evidence

      (preferably those of the three cases referred to in Panorama), and

      documentation which describes the investigation process that POL went

      through under the Scheme. It is likely that members of my team would have

      coordinated the collation of these documents and arranged for them to reach

      Sir Jonathan Swift. One of the actions for POL was to set up a meeting with

      Christopher Knight, who was appointed as junior counsel on the Swift Review,

      to discuss how best to provide access to the required documents.


197   Mark Underwood, Jane MacLeod and I arranged to meet Christopher Knight

      on 27 October 2015 at POL's London headquarters at Finsbury Dials. Ahead of

      that meeting, I circulated an agenda which reflected the areas of discussion

      from the meeting with Sir Jonathan Swift and Tim Parker of 20 October 2015,

      including the four strands of the enquiries which counsel would undertake

      [POL00153365]. My covering email to Christopher Knight noted that the agenda

      was in draft only, and he should feel free to add to it as he saw fit

      [POL00153364].

                                    Page 91 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




198   On 28 October 2015 at 12:29, I emailed Christopher Knight with a summary of

      the discussion in our meeting the previous day, and attached a list of agreed

      actions [POL00102638] [POL00131182]. This summary note reflects our

      discussions with Christopher Knight with respect to how he and Sir Jonathan

      Swift might approach each of the four strands of the enquiries to be undertaken,

      which had been identified by Sir Jonathan Swift in his meeting with Tim Parker

      on 20 October 2015. This note also reflects comments by Jane MacLeod from

      the meeting with Christopher Knight on 27 October 2015 about the difficulty of

      positively proving that there were no bugs or flaws in the Horizon system that

      could have caused discrepancies in the branch accounts. This is what I refer to

      in my note of that meeting using the shorthand, "an exercise in proving a

      negative". Jane MacLeod commented that such an exercise would be further

      complicated by the age of the Horizon system because it would have been

      updated at various points and, therefore, any exercise seeking to prove this

      negative position (i.e. that there were no flaws or bugs with the Horizon system

      that could have led to discrepancies in branch accounts) would entail scouring

      every line of code in the entirety of the system, including prior iterations which

      may have since been updated.


199   The email summary of this meeting reflects that I would be the primary point of

      contact for Christopher Knight going forward, and that both Mark Underwood

      and Steve Allchorn would also be available to provide any information he or Sir

      Jonathan Swift might need. I believe that I probably introduced Chris Knight to

      Steve Allchorn in the office on the same day as our meeting. I asked him to


                                    Page 92 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      assist with the provision of material to counsel in the Swift Review. Together,

      Mark Underwood, Steve Allchorn and I we were responsible for ensuring that

      both Sir Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight had everything they needed,

      and we responded to various requests they made for information and

      documents to enable them to undertake the Swift Review.


200   Following the meeting on 27 October 2015, I had an email exchange with

      Christopher Knight in which we discussed the status, and clarified the contents,

      of the various materials and information provided to him and Sir Jonathan Swift

      [POL00153392]. In this email exchange, we also agreed that it was a priority to

      arrange a demonstration of the operation of the Horizon system for him and Sir

      Jonathan Swift, in order for them to better understand the context of the review

      they were undertaking. I think, but cannot be sure, that this idea first came from

      Christopher Knight.


201   Sir Jonathan Swift interviewed a wide range of stakeholders during the course

      of his review, which he lists in the body of the Swift Review Report at paragraph

      10.


202   On 30 October 2015, Jane MacLeod provided the first update to Tim Parker on

      the progress with the Swift Review [POL00102649]. I had provided Jane

      MacLeod with an initial draft of the update to Tim Parker, after first running this

      past Mark Underwood for his input [POL00153429] [POL00153430]. I believe

      that Jane MacLeod had agreed to provide Tim Parker updates in relation to Sir

      Jonathan's Swift's work on a fortnightly basis so that he could be satisfied that

      progress was being made and was made aware of any issues as they arose.
                               Page 93 of 168
                                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      With reference to the following quote from this document: "At this stage we

      propose that Jonathan will provide you with a legally privileged report...lt is not

      our intention that this report would be made public, and we will therefore need

      to consider the best way for your findings to be presented in a way that can be

      made public", my understanding is that POL wanted to ensure that nothing was

      considered by Sir Jonathan Swift to be off-limits while nonetheless reserving

      POL's legal position over his findings. While no detailed thought had been given

      as to how those findings might ultimately be made public (something POL would

      agree with Sir Jonathan Swift at the relevant time), I believe I am right in saying

      we probably envisaged a shortish, non-technical, document detailing the scope

      of the Swift Review, its principal findings, and next steps (if any). However, as I

      say, this was not considered in any detail at all.


203   On 10 November 2015, Sir Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight attended a

      demonstration of the Horizon system at Finsbury Dials, POL's headquarters,

      where we had a model Post Office, staffed by colleagues whose names I cannot

      recall. After this demonstration, I (along with Mark Underwood, I think) met with

      Sir Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight and they provided us with an update

      on their progress, including their plans for meetings with key stakeholders, and

      made some further requests for information which they considered might be

      helpful to them as they carried on their work. This discussion is reflected in my

      email to counsel and the POL team on 12 November 2015 [POL00153634].

      Christopher Knight responded to this email on the same day to request further

      information and to give his view on the sequencing of meetings that he and Sir


                                    Page 94 of 168
                                                                                          WITNO9830100
                                                                                        WI TN09830100




      Jonathan Swift wanted to have with various key stakeholders, including Second

      Sight, Lord Arbuthnot and Sir Anthony Hooper [POL00153634].


204   Following my email to Counsel of 12 November 2015, Mark Underwood

      emailed Steve Allchorn and me with a list of actions, and included a reminder

      that we were due to provide Tim Parker with an update on the Swift Review the

      following day. At that stage, there was little to report as we were still in the early

      stages of work on the Swift Review. I recognised that Tim Parker was extremely

      busy, and thought that he might not appreciate a detailed account of the various

      procedural steps we were taking at the outset of the Swift Review, such a

      liaising with counsel about arranging meetings with stakeholders and providing

      them with information requested. At the time I was of the view that Tim Parker

      would be more interested in any substantive update on the Swift Review, rather

      than in a procedural update of the type which we were then in a position to

      provide. In my email of 13 November 2015 at 10:09 I asked Mark Underwood

      and Steve Allchorn for their views on whether they considered any report to Tim

      Parker would be necessary at that stage, and indicated that I would have

      deferred to Jane MacLeod as to whether any update was required

      [POL001536381.


Impact of potential postmaster litigation on the Swift Review


205   On 19 November 2015, I was copied into an email from Jane MacLeod to Mark

      Davies, which forwarded an email from a journalist requesting comment on an

      announcement by the JFSA that they would be commencing litigation against

      POL. In her email, Jane MacLeod sought to canvass opinion on the risks and
                                 Page 95 of 168
                                                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                                                     WI TN09830100




      potential liability arising from the litigation. On 20 November 2015, Rodric

      Williams responded to Jane MacLeod 's email with, in his words, "a couple of

      preliminary thoughts", and noted that "We should seriously consider

      suspending Tim Parker's review.. we should be very careful about generating

      through the TP review material which is disclosable in the civil action". I did not

      have a view on this suggestion as I was, and am, not a litigator. However, I

      could see that the litigation would change the backdrop against which the Swift

      Review follow-up work was taking place and that this might well have

      implications for whether and how it was to be taken forward. However, this view

      was not based on any particular expertise in, or insights about, litigation or its

      attendant disclosure obligations about which I know very little.


206   Mark Underwood and I had regular update meetings at a working level with

      Christopher Knight to discuss the progress of the Swift Review, and how we

      might facilitate their ongoing work through, for example, the provision of

      information and/or arranging meetings with key stakeholders. Occasionally

      these meetings would also be attended by Sir Jonathan Swift and Jane

      MacLeod. One such review meeting took place on 2 December 2015, for which

      I circulated the agenda [POL00158278]. Item 4 on the agenda circulated for this

      meeting sought counsel's view on what impact, if any, the threatened

      postmaster litigation would have on the Swift Review, "as of now" and "if [a]

      letter of action [is] received?" [POL00158279]. I cannot recall what counsel

      advised about this item at the meeting. However, I suspect that counsel's

      advice, as reflected in later correspondence [POL00103324], was that the


                                    Page 96 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      litigation could have an impact because there would almost certainly be an

      overlap between the follow up work to the Swift Review and the matters to be

      litigated so if and when a letter of claim was received we should seek advice

      from whoever was then instructed to advise POL on the litigation. As discussed

      in paragraphs 221 to 226 below, a decision was later taken for work arising from

      the Swift Review to be addressed through equivalent work taken forward in

      response to the Group Litigation.


The final report and recommendations


207   The findings and conclusions from the Swift Review were compiled in the Swift

      Review    Report    [POL00006355].      Sir   Jonathan     Swift   made    eight

      recommendations for further steps POL could take in respect of its response to

      the handling of the sub-postmasters' complaints about Horizon. POL produced

      a summary table of the recommendations from the Swift Review, which

      included a proposal for what action should be undertaken to address each

      recommendation [POL00103106].


208   Having reviewed Jane MacLeod's email to Tim Parker of 22 January 2016, I am

      reminded that Tim Parker received a first draft of the Swift Review Report in the

      week commencing 11 January 2016 when he indicated that he wished to accept

      all the recommendations in the report and take them forward where possible

      [POL00103110].


209   Jane MacLeod's email to Tim Parker noted that on 20 January 2016 a pre-brief

      meeting with BIS officials about the progress of the Swift Review had taken

                                   Page 97 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      place. I cannot remember whether or not I attended this meeting. Her email

      also noted that, at this pre-brief meeting, BIS officials had been advised that

      "the [Swift] review is being conducted for/Tim Parker] personally". This reflects

      my understanding that the Swift Review was undertaken personally for Tim

      Parker, as discussed at paragraph 181 above, and therefore did not fall to be

      disclosed to the POL Board.


210   On 22 January 2016 Jane MacLeod spoke with Sir Jonathan Swift to discuss

      how POL should take forward the recommendations in the Swift Review Report.

      They had also discussed whether there were any limitations on the extent to

      which Tim Parker could brief the Minister on the Swift Review. This was to

      inform Tim Parker's meeting with Baroness Neville-Rolfe on 26 January 2016

      (see paragraph 211 below). Jane MacLeod emailed Tim Parker on 22 January

      2016 with a summary of the discussion with Sir Jonathan Swift, which reflects

      his advice that any update to the Minister should be verbal to avoid the risk of

      it otherwise being disclosable under a freedom of information request

      [POL00103110]. Jane MacLeod attached an updated version of the table

      containing POL's proposals to address the Swift Review's recommendations,

      which had been agreed by Sir Jonathan Swift [POL00103111 ]. [POL00103110]

      indicates that Jane MacLeod forwarded this email and the attachment to Paula

      Vennells immediately after it was sent to Tim Parker.


211   POL also liaised with ShEx from time to time to provide updates on the progress

      with the Swift Review and its anticipated conclusions. For example, following

      Tim Parker's meeting with Baroness Neville-Rolfe on 26 January 2016, I then

                                    Page 98 of 168
                                                                                  WI TN09830100
                                                                                WI TN09830100




      spoke with Laura Thompson, who had been present at the meeting. I can see

      from [POL00027116] that on 26 January 2016 I emailed the note of my

      discussion with Laura Thompson, in which she reported on the meeting

      between Tim Parker and Baroness Neville-Rolfe, to my POL colleagues. I was

      generally POL's point of contact at working level with ShEx/BIS in respect of

      the Swift Review, as I had been with the Scheme, and my main point of contact

      at SheX//BIS was Laura Thompson and sometimes Richard Callard. I do not

      believe that I communicated with MPs about the Swift Review.


212   On 5 February 2016, Jane MacLeod emailed Tim Parker setting out a summary

      of the actions being taken to address each of the recommendations from the

      Swift Review Report [POL00153884]. It appears that I, along with Rodric

      Williams and Mark Underwood, had shared information with Jane MacLeod

      which she had found helpful in composing her email.


213   My recollection is that recommendations one and two were progressed by

      Rodric Williams, who instructed Brian Altman KC. To address recommendation

      seven, Bond Dickinson were instructed to prepare a report to assess whether

      misleading advice was given to sub-postmasters by NBSC call handlers. This

      report was subsequently shared with Sir Jonathan Swift on 3 June 2016, who

      then confirmed by return email on 21 June 2016 that he was content that

      discharged this recommendation [POL00104091].


214   I was involved in preliminary discussions with Deloitte who were instructed to

      progress with recommendations three, four, five, and eight. My role in respect


                                  Page 99 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      of this is discussed at paragraphs 228 to 240 below in relation to Project

      Bramble.


215   On 19 February 2016, Mark Underwood emailed Sir Jonathan Swift to seek his

      views on a draft letter for Tim Parker to send to Baroness Neville-Rolfe to brief

      her on the outcome of the Swift Review, which included a high-level summary

      of its findings and of further work then being undertaken [POL00103131 &

      POL00103132]. I drafted the letter with input and assistance from POL

      colleagues (Mark Underwood's covering email makes it clear that the draft had

      been a collective effort), which was shared with Sir Jonathan Swift. I am not

      sure exactly why it would have fallen to me to draft this letter, although I was

      well placed to do so given that I had held a coordination role from the POL side

      in respect of the Swift Review throughout this exercise, so was familiar with its

      purpose, issues, findings and recommendations.


216   On 24 February 2016 Sir Jonathan Swift responded to Mark Underwood and

      shared a marked-up version of the draft letter, with his amendments in tracked

      change [POL00131715]. In his covering email, he made clear that his tracked

      changes were suggestions, and that POL should "feel free to adopt/or not, as

      you consider appropriate" [POL00103134]. It seems reasonable to infer that if

      Sir Jonathan Swift had attached great significance to any of his proposed

      amendments, he would have made this clear in his covering email.


217   In his marked-up version of the draft letter, Sir Jonathan Swift proposed that

      POL remove the following text:


                                   Page 100 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    W ITN09830100




             "However nothing in the materials we reviewed suggested that there is

             any evidence that the Horizon system was responsible for those losses

             which resulted in convictions. In addition, we have seen evidence that

             Post Office's policy and practice in respect of disclosure of information

             were effective in ensuring that those facing prosecutions were not

             deprived of information or evidence which would have been helpful to

             them in their defence".


      He proposed it should be replaced by the following text:


             "The Post Office has previously taken advice from solicitors and Leading

             Counsel expert in criminal law on the adequacy of the Post Office's

             policy and practice on disclosure where it acts as prosecutor. Based on

             that I am satisfied that proper disclosure was made".


218   I understand that, by this proposed amendment, Sir Jonathan Swift was stating

      more precisely, in terms of his findings, that he was satisfied that POL had taken

      expert advice on disclosure, which provided the basis for being satisfied that

      proper disclosure was made. Had he seen evidence to suggest that Horizon

      was responsible for losses which resulted in convictions, then Sir Jonathan

      Swift would not have made this statement.


219   I have been asked to explain the reasons for why some of the wording proposed

      by Sir Jonathan Swift in his marked-up version of the draft letter to Baroness

      Neville-Rolfe was changed in the final version of the letter that was sent on 4

      March 2016. I have reviewed documents which show that a version of the letter

                                   Page 101 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      which incorporated the proposed wording of Sir Jonathan Swift was sent to,

      and   approved    by,   Tim   Parker   on   1 March     2016    [POL00103138]

      [POL00240197]. It appears that Rodric Williams subsequently amended the

      letter before it was sent. A version of the letter with Rodric Williams'

      amendments in tracked change, was shared with Jane MacLeod and I on 2

      March 2016 [POL00240226] [POL00240227]. The final letter was reviewed and

      approved by Jane MacLeod. In any event, the wording included in the letter

      which was sent to Baroness Neville-Rolfe is consistent with the findings of the

      Swift Review Report, as stated in paragraph 95, which provides that "...POL is

      entitled to note at this point in time that there is no evidence that the Horizon

      system - i.e. the computer system - is responsible for the losses which have

      resulted in convictions".


220   Following receipt of the letter before claim POL sought advice from leading

      counsel on the question of what impact the postmaster litigation would have on

      the way in which the Swift Review was to be conducted. On 24 May 2016 Rodric

      Williams emailed Sir Jonathan Swift, with Christopher Knight, Jane MacLeod

      and me in copy, to provide an update on POL's progress with the eight

      recommendations made in the Swift Review Report [POL00103207]. In this

      email, Rodric Williams also sought advice on whether, in light of the sub-

      postmaster litigation, it was "reasonable for POL to address any further steps it

      might reasonably take in respect of the SPMR cases through the proceedings,

      rather than in response to your report and recommendation?". On 27 May 2016

      Jane MacLeod spoke with Sir Jonathan Swift to ask his advice on this point.


                                    Page 102 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    W ITN09830100




      Jane MacLeod emailed Tim Parker later that day to share Sir Jonathan Swift's

      advice that Anthony de Garr Robinson KC, the barrister retained to advise POL

      on its defence to the sub-postmaster proceedings, "should first be requested to

      advise POL whether in light of the litigation, the various work teams [sic] should

      be continued, paused or re-defined" [POL00168551].


The impact of the Group Litigation


221   On 28 April 2016, the sub-postmasters' group litigation Claim was served on

      POL.


222   On 27 May 2016 Jane MacLeod sent an email to Tim Parker [POL00168551]

      which demonstrates clearly that POL was concerned about how best to take

      forward the work streams arising from the Swift Review, whilst being mindful of

      the impending litigation. My own view, at the time and now, is that POL was

      committed to carrying out the recommendations of the Swift Review.


223   Sir Jonathan Swift had suggested to POL that it seek advice from Anthony de

      Garr Robinson KC [POL00168551]. On 9 June 2016 Jane MacLeod attended

      a conference with Anthony de Garr Robinson KC to discuss the sub-postmaster

      litigation, during which he was asked for advice on whether the work being done

      for the purposes of the Swift Review should be continued. On 10 June 2016

      Jane MacLeod emailed Tim Parker to convey Anthony de Garr Robinson KC's

      "strong advice.. .that the work being undertaken under the aegis of your review

      should not continue in light of the litigation." [POL00168551]. The email




                                   Page 103 of 168
                                                                                         WITNO9830100
                                                                                       WI TN09830100




      indicates that he felt the subject matter of the work should be continued and

      carried out in preparation for the litigation rather than as a standalone exercise.


224   A letter from Bond Dickinson LLP to POL, dated 21 June 2016, also confirmed

      the "very strong advice" of Anthony de Garr Robinson KC was "that Mr Parker's

      review should cease immediately", together with his advice that "it would still be

      prudent for Post Office to implement the 4th 5th 6th and 8th recommendations

      of Mr Swift...as appropriately adapted to meet the needs of the litigation"

      [POL00022751]. The Bond Dickinson LLP letter also expanded on Anthony de

      Garr Robinson KC's advice, stating that the work on implementing the Swift

      Review recommendations "should be instructed and overseen exclusively by

      Post Office's legal team.. .so as to maximise the prospect of asserting privilege

      over this work and protect against the risk that material related to these actions

      could be disclosed to the Claimants in the Group Action."


225   On 21 June 2016 Tim Parker wrote to Baroness Neville-Rolfe to confirm that he

      had "instructed that the work undertaken pursuant to my review should now

      stop", on the basis of "very strong advice from Leading Counsel' that this work

      "should come to an immediate end, and instead address the issues through the

      equivalent work taken forward in the litigation" [POL00022776]. I had no reason

      to think that the steps taken on the advice of leading counsel were anything

      other than standard behaviour by a corporate entity in the face of litigation.


226   The decision to redirect work on the Swift Review recommendations was sense

      checked with Jonathan Swift KC. On 26 July 2016, Rodric Williams emailed Sir

      Jonathan Swift and Christopher Knight, attaching Bond Dickinson's letter of 21
                                 Page 104 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      June 2016, to update them that following the advice of Anthony de Garr

      Robinson KC, "the Chairman instructed that the work being undertaken in

      response to your recommendations should end, and instead be addressed

      through equivalent work taken forward in the Group Litigation." [POL00103324].

      In this email, Rodric Williams asked whether this approach raised any issues.

      Sir Jonathan Swift responded the same day to confirm that "as we discussed

      [on 27 May 2016], counsel instructed on the litigation are much better pleased

      to make this type ofjudgement'.


227   I held the view that POL should proactively disclose the Swift Review Report to

      the CCRC, as demonstrated by email to Mark Underwood, Rodric Williams and

      Jane MacLeod of 5 April 2016 [POL00153946].


DELOITTE PROJECT BRAMBLE


228   Project Bramble was set up to help satisfy the recommendations of the Swift

      Review relating to suspense accounts, transaction logs review, balancing

      transactions, and audit store controls (recommendations three, four, five, and

      eight) [POL00153883].


229   POL instructed Deloitte to carry out the investigation and I am reminded by

      [POL00153883] that on 4 February 2016, I ran a meeting that led to the initiation

      of Project Bramble. I do not recall being specifically appointed to initiate the

      work; instead, it was a continuation of my work on the Swift Review.


      The meeting was attended by me and my POL colleagues, Gary Hooton, Mark

      Underwood, as well as Rod Ismay (remotely, I believe). Jon Wear, Andrew
                                   Page 105 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      Whitton and Mark Westbrook attended from Deloitte. It took place before the

      finalisation of the Swift Review and I believe this was because we anticipated

      that Tim Parker would want POL to get on the front foot and make rapid

      progress with the recommendations made by Sir Jonathan Swift, which had

      already been provided to us in draft.


230   During the course of the meeting I believe that I would have explained the

      context of Project Bramble in light of the Swift Review Report and the Scheme.

      The agenda at [POL00153883] indicates that I emphasised that the whole

      exercise was legally privileged and related to matters of genuine sensitivity. It

      seemed to me that, since Sir Jonathan Swift had prepared and presented his

      report to Tim Parker on a privileged basis it followed that any follow-up work

      that flowed from it should also be undertaken on a privileged basis. There was

      no discussion about needing to protect the work; I believe it was taken as read.

      I did not question the fact that it needed to be privileged because there was a

      threat of litigation and no reason to think that asserting privilege was any way

      remarkable.


231   I cannot recall the specifics but I am confident that we would have received

      specific advice about treating the information sensitively; however, if we did I

      imagine it would have been given by our in-house legal team as well as Andrew

      Parsons. I do not believe that, either before or after the meeting, we thought

      about whether or not the output of Project Bramble would be published because

      it was intended to be an internal report which would contain information



                                   Page 106 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




      connected to the operation of the Horizon system which would also be

      commercially sensitive.


232   I was keen to ensure that the recommendations were discharged expeditiously,

      and I believe I maintained a general interest in the progress of the report;

      however, after initiating Project Bramble, going forward I was not particularly

      engaged in the details for the reasons set out below. Instead, my colleague

      Mark Underwood assumed the role of internal point-person on the POL side in

      its interface with Deloitte.


233   I can see from the documents provided to me by the Inquiry that Deloitte in fact

      went on to prepare a number of draft reports, which include:


                 Deloitte's Sparrow Interim Report dated 8 July 2016;

             • Bramble Interim Report dated 27 July 2016;

             • Bramble Draft Report dated 31 October 2016;

             • Bramble Draft Report dated 1 September 2017;

             • Bramble Draft Report dated 3 October 2017;

             • Bramble Draft Report dated 15 December 2017; And

             • Bramble Draft Report dated 19 January 2018


234   I do not know whether a final report was ever prepared.


235   At the time when Deloitte produced the Sparrow Interim Report dated 8 July

      2016, I had been appointed as Deputy Corporate Service Director in the

      Corporate Services Group and the focus of my work changed, for instance I

      was helping Jane MacLeod integrate new teams within a larger function. While
                               Page 107 of 168
                                                                                         WITNO9830100
                                                                                       WI TN09830100




      I was no longer involved in a detailed way, I would have been aware of Project

      Bramble in the background, and I would have maintained some level of interest

      in it as I mention in paragraph 232 above.


236   By the time the Bramble Draft Report dated 1 September 2017 was produced,

      I had moved roles again to become Corporate Affairs Director. At this point,

      Project Bramble was no longer taking place within my function and, while I may

      have been vaguely aware that it was likely to be ongoing, I had no further

      involvement in it. I do not recollect it even coming up in the meetings I was by

      then attending.


237   At the time of the Bramble Draft Report dated 19 January 2018 was prepared,

      I would have been completely removed from Project Bramble, and I was

      unaware that it had gone on for so long.


238   I do not recall reading the reports or, if I did, I did not read them to a sufficient

      degree of granularity. The last memory I have of my understanding of the

      content of the Project Bramble reports was that the controls in relation to remote

      access and the management of the system were tight, if not technically perfect.

      I think I was broadly aware of the fact that whatever invisible' remote access

      was found to be technically possible could only be undertaken by Fujitsu staff

      with a real determination to overcome a multiplicity of technical hurdles and

      significant security controls. In the absence of any obviously compelling and/or

      rational motive for going to such lengths, it was not immediately apparent at the

      time that remote access by Fujitsu staff could credibly account for losses in

      multiple branches.
                                    Page 108 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




239   I did not consider whether any of the issues raised in the reports should be

      disclosed to convicted sub-postmasters or the claimants in the Group Litigation

      proceedings, not because of any lack of care or integrity on my part, but simply

      because the question would never have been put to me as someone who was

      unqualified to make any such determination and far removed from the litigation.


240   I did not give the reports or a briefing about the reports to anyone within the

      POL senior management, the POL Board, UKGl or BEIS because I only initiated

      Project Bramble and was no longer involved with it once I moved roles.

      However, I would have reported back to Jane MacLeod, Mark Westbrook (from

      Deloitte), Andrew Whitton, Rod Ismay and Andrew Parsons about setting up

      Project Bramble.


Freedom of Information


241   On 7 October 2014, I emailed Rhiannon Kett of Bond Dickinson LLP about a

      FOIR that POL received [POL00101446]. Fujitsu had advised that disclosure

      would not prejudice their commercial interest, but I wanted to clarify whether

      there were grounds to use sections 43(2) and 31 of the FOIA. I am unable to

      recall precisely what the FOIR which prompted this email chain was, but judging

      from its content it was for Second Sight's interim report.


242   On 27 March 2015, POL received a FOIR from Scott Darlington. Mr Darlington

      requested a full copy of Second Sight's Part Two report. This report was long in

      the making, and there was heightened interest about it because some




                                   Page 109 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    W ITN09830100




      participants in the Scheme wanted to wait until the report was published to

      decide how to conduct mediation.


243   On the same day, Andrew Parsons emailed and said that his initial reaction was

      that he did not think we should share the report with Mr Darlington

      [POL00151730]. He considered Mr Darlington was trying to circumvent the

      Scheme's processes.


244   I participated in the decision about how to handle Mr Darlington's FOIR and I

      believe that I sought/would have sought advice from internal lawyers about

      legitimate grounds under which it might be possible to withhold the report until

      such time as it had been through its final round of amendments and been

      finalised.


245   Tom Wechsler's view — explained in response to Andrew Parsons' email — was

      that it appeared Mr Darlington was trying to obtain a draft version of the report

      so he could compare it to a potentially amended final report, in order to identify

      any differences, and potentially contend that Second Sight has been "gagged",

      to use Tom Wechsler's words.


246   I do not recall what happened after this and am unsure if it led to anything, as

      the Part Two Report was published shortly after, on 9 April 2015.


247   At the relevant time, I did not lead on FOIR. However, when I worked more

      directly with Jane MacLeod as Deputy Corporate Services Director the team

      tasked with coordinating responses to FOIRs came under my wing. This

      required me to ensure that our processes for responding to FOIRs were working
                                   Page 110 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      effectively in accordance with the requirements of the legislation. I had a lot of

      experience working on freedom of information issues when I worked at the

      MOJ, which is why Tom Wechsler refers to me as a "genuine expert in Fol".

      Tom Wechsler worked at the MOJ at the same time as me and was aware that

      I was heavily involved with preparations for the commencement of the FOIA on

      1 January 2005.


THE GROUP LITIGATION


Involvement in POL's conduct of the group litigation and the PLSG


248   In June 2016, following my participation in the Scheme and Swift Review, I was

      asked to join the Postmaster Litigation Steering Group ("PLSG") in my capacity

      as a member of the Corporate Services Group.


249   My understanding of the PLSG was that it was intended to act as a working

      group to inform the key issues connected to the sub-postmasters' claim ("the

      Claim") in the early stages of the litigation, in order to assist POL's legal team

      take forward POL's response to the Claim. This was chiefly a legal exercise led

      by POL's internal legal team with external input from Andrew Parsons of Bond

      Dickinson LLP and Anthony de Garr Robinson KC. The group was asked for

      their views on a range of issues including, I think, various pre-litigation legal

      applications such as orders for costs though I do not remember the detail.


250   The external legal team, together with POL's legal team, had the greatest

      influence on the running of the group and the contributions made to it. The usual

      course of PLSG meetings was for Rodric Williams to circulate an agenda setting
                                   Page 111 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      out what the members of the PLSG needed to discuss and where input or

      advice was needed. For example, Bond Dickinson LLP would need to

      understand all aspects of our operations, from how we recruited, trained and

      supported postmasters; details of how some of our products worked; and, how

      our contract with suppliers, including Fujitsu, was structured and what provided.

      Bond Dickinson LLP was also responsible for drafting a `one-pager', which

      consisted of briefing notes to inform the conversations and decisions (see email

      from Andrew Parsons on 13 July 2016 [POL00024988]).


251   Each member of the PLSG was a subject matter expert, selected to provide

      support and act as a gateway into the function of their POL business area, to

      enable the legal team to acquire specific knowledge that might assist in

      preparations for litigation [POL00025509]. As I recall, either Rodric Williams

      and/or Jane MacLeod determined the architecture of the PSLG. Tom Moran

      (General Manager) was appointed to Chair the PLSG because of his general

      seniority and understanding of how POL worked in practice; Rob Houghton was

      our IT expert; Angela van den Bogerd was looking at the support given to sub-

      postmasters and was well acquainted with the issues that the litigation would

      touch on; and Tom Wechsler had previously been involved with the Scheme

      and was now acting as the Chief of Staff to the CEO, Paula Vennells.


252   Because of the nature of the issues at the centre of the Claim — namely legal,

      IT, finance, and accounting issues — I was not a relevant subject expert, and

      therefore my involvement with the PLSG was limited. My recollection is that I

      did not make any significant or determinative contributions to the conduct of the

                                   Page 112 of 168
                                                                                          WITNO9830100
                                                                                        WI TN09830100




      group and litigation strategy, beyond my previous involvement in the Scheme

      where I could offer an element of insight.


253   I had a very limited role in making drafting suggestions or otherwise reacting to

      PSLG documents. I may have discussed issues outlined in these documents in

      the course of colleague-to-colleague conversations.


254   The Terms of Reference of the group [page 2, POL00025509], when seen on

      paper look methodical and set; however, in practice and over time, they evolved

      and became increasingly run by external counsel.


255   As I lacked the relevant technical knowledge, I became even less involved in

      the PLSG's work over time because it became more about running a litigation

      exercise, and so there was very little I could offer or was needed for. My

      engagement with and input into the group remained tangential to my day to day

      role.


Role and responsibilities in relation to the Group Litigation


256   The Letter of Claim from Freeths dated 28 April 2016 [POL00025510 &

      POL00025511] was circulated to members of the PLSG in an email from Rodric

      Williams on 6 June 2016 [POL00025507] and it was apparent that all previous

      resolution efforts had not succeeded. I do not recall if I read the Letter of Claim

      in its totality or not: it was not expected that I would since litigation was not part

      of my day-to-day role. However, having seen the document [POL00023488] I

      can see that I provided some limited comments on POL's draft Letter of



                                    Page 113 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




      Response to Tom Moran in response to Andrew Parsons' request to provide

      comments by the following PLSG meeting [POL00023490].


257   Around the time when POL's Letter of Response was being prepared there was

      some concern about whether new information relating to remote access had

      come to light. Work was undertaken to understand the extent to which this was

      consistent with what had previously been said publicly by POL on this issue.

      This is reflected in the email exchange between Jane MacLeod and Andrew

      Parsons of 29 July 2016 [POL00110482]. Although I was copied into this email

      exchange, I do appear to have engaged with it.


258   All of the significant decisions made with respect to the management of litigation

      and the strategy as a whole were accountable to the CEO and the Board. At

      the relevant time, Richard Callard of UKGI sat on the POL Board with Paula

      Vennells and Tim Parker, along with others. I was not involved in conversations

      at that level.


259   My own role was at a working level and included sharing information and

      providing updates about the ongoing Group Litigation upon request, although

      the non-lawyer contributions required from Corporate Services were extremely

      limited. While not formally part of either of our roles, Mark Underwood and I

      were also continued to act as points of contact for UKGI in respect of this aspect

      of POL's work and we typically engaged with either Laura Thompson or Richard

      Callard. My email to Jane MacLeod on 8 July 2016 [POL00024911], reflects

      that I liaised between Laura Thompson and POL, including Jane Hill, Head of

      Public Affairs, and Mike Granville, Head of Corporate Affairs.
                                  Page 114 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   W ITN09830100




Involvement in POL's general litigation strategy


260   I am asked a series of questions about my involvement in POL's general

      litigation strategy, and I set out my responses immediately below.


261   I had limited if any formal input into the decisions taken with respect to POL's

      litigation strategy, including how it dealt with disclosure or the preparation of

      expert evidence within the context of the two trials, or the recusal application

      with respect to Justice Fraser.


262   For completeness, I do recall having informal conversations, colleague-to-

      colleague, as the decisions unfolded within the context of the two trials;

      however, I was not part of the decision-making process. These conversations

      consisted of updates and, later on, the sharing of views on what we believed,

      at the time, to be the surprising outcome of the Common Issues Trial which had

      not been predicted by POL or its legal teams, even as a worst-case scenario.


263   The Board led POL's legal strategy as well and took all material decisions

      including to seek the recusal of Justice Fraser.


264   Decision-making about disclosure and expert evidence fell within the remit of

      the external legal team (Bond Dickinson LLP and Anthony De Garr Robinson

      KC), Jane MacLeod and Rodric Williams. I don't recall having any involvement

      in these decisions.


265   I do not believe that these responsibilities in decision-making shifted over the

      course of the two trials.


                                   Page 115 of 168
                                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




Oversight and Disclosure


266   My involvement with the group litigation, including the oversight of the drafting

      of   POL's    Generic    Defence      and   Counterclaim   (the   "Defence    and

      Counterclaim") remained limited and tangential because the conduct of

      litigation did not fall within my remit.


Involvement in the Defence and Counterclaim


267   I was kept in the loop as a representative of the Corporate Services group within

      the PLSG, as the Defence and Counterclaim was being drafted, because of the

      of my earlier involvement with the Scheme. This mostly occurred through being

      copied into email correspondence between our internal and external legal

      teams, which included Jane MacLeod, Mark Underwood, Rodric Williams, and

      Andrew Parsons.


268   I do not recall if I read all the emails with respect to the Defence and

      Counterclaim. As this was a predominantly legal exercise with subject matter

      experts brought in as a when needed to plug the gaps in relevant POL company

      knowledge, it was not expected that I would review every email and attachment

      and provide my views since it was not a central part of my day-to-day role.


269   With respect to the drafting of the Defence and Counterclaim, my recollection

      is consistent with what is outlined in Jane MacLeod's email to Andrew Parsons

      on 14 July 2017 [POL00024627]. Having seen the documents provided to me

      by POL, I can see that I offered to review the draft Defence [POL00154156] and

      provided my comments. My email to Andrew Parsons on 13 July 2017
                                     Page 116 of 168
                                                                                         WITNO9830100
                                                                                       WI TN09830100




         [POL00117755] reflects the scope and nature of the input that I would have

         offered.


270      I recall that there were PSLG meetings and briefings held with respect to the

         Defence and Counterclaim. I do not believe I attended the briefing of the

         General Executive by Jane MacLeod and Andrew Parsons, which is mentioned

         in an email from Jane MacLeod to Andrew Parsons on 14 July 2017

         [POL00024627].


271      Whilst I had an understanding of some of the issues and pleadings outlined in

         the Defence and Counterclaim, and would have informally discussed them in

         the course of colleague-to-colleague conversations, I had a negligible role in its

         drafting and no role in the decision making as to what points POL raised in the

         Defence and Counterclaim.


Involvement in decisions with respect to disclosure within the context of the

trials


272      My involvement in any discussions relating to disclosure in relation to the Group

         Litigation is set out below and was limited and did not extend to decision-making

         because any significant or determinative contributions to discussions and

         decisions would have been made by the executive and legal teams and those

         with expertise in IT, finance, and accounting.


273      I recall attending meetings in my capacity as a member of the PLSG where the

         Group Litigation and POL's strategy with respect to disclosure was discussed,

         however I would not have engaged in these discussions and, since it was not
                                      Page 117 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      my area of expertise I am unlikely to have listened closely to the details of the

      discussion.


274   I recall, for example, attending the meeting on 16 October 2017 where there

      was an update on POL's litigation strategy [POL00006431] which included

      some discussion around disclosure. However, I cannot recall very much of what

      was said, only that there was discussion around the high volume of disclosure

      that Freeths / the Claimants were requesting and how costly of an exercise it

      would have been for POL to comply. I do not believe that I would have been

      actively engaged in these discussions.


275   In relation to the specific aspects of disclosure I am asked about, my knowledge

      of Fujitsu's Known Error Log ("KEL") was and remains limited. I had a layman's

      understanding of what it was in so far as it had become part of the lexicon

      around the time of the Group Litigation and I would hear the term referred to in

      conversation around POL. In meetings, people with the relevant expertise

      would contribute to the discussion as and when these topics arose, but as my

      knowledge in this area was limited, I did not actively engage with or immerse

      myself in the detail. As such, I would not have been approached for my views

      on the subject. I did provide my comments on a draft public statement which

      dealt with issues of disclosure of KEL documents. The original text was drafted

      by Melanie Corfield, and after providing input to the best of my ability and

      knowledge, I passed it on to Ben Foat and Mark Davies for their final review.

      [POL00285929].



                                   Page 118 of 168
                                                                                      WITNO9830100
                                                                                    WI TN09830100




276   I cannot recall when I first heard about the KEL or who had told me about it. It

      likely was brought up during the course of a PLSG meeting, but I cannot say

      for sure. My understanding was that the KEL was a repository for identifying

      every day, non-impactful or significantly disruptive IT bugs, as and when

      someone came across an issue. My understanding at the time reflects what

      was stated at paragraphs 36 and 37 in the fourth witness statement of Andrew

      Parsons [POL00000444], that the KEL was more of a living document that was

      continuously updated and changed rather than a storage database, and that

      POL would not have had access to the KEL. I also understood that the KEL

      would not have held data on branch accounts or actual transaction data, but

      what I do not know is whether or not it held information which was relevant to

      branch accounts. I would not have had a role in determining its significance

      and therefore the decisions and details with respect to its disclosure.


277   My understanding of the PEAK database in terms of what it was and its

      significance, was less well developed than in relation to the KEL. I do not recall

      the PEAK database being discussed in the meetings I attended during that time

      and I do not recall having sight of the letter from Bond Dickinson LLP dated 28

      November 2018 [POL00003363] until it was shared with my solicitors within the

      context of this Inquiry.


Common Issues trial


278   In the context of my role as a programme manager of the Scheme, I was tasked

      with providing information about the Scheme to government stakeholders upon

      request. When the Group Litigation trials commenced, I continued in this role,
                                Page 119 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      now as the Corporate Affairs Director, to act as a conduit between POL and

      government stakeholders on a range of topics including, at times, the litigation.

      Meetings, like the one referred to in my email to Jane MacLeod on 21 February

      2018 [POL00154252], were held with POL's legal team to establish a practical

      way to keep the government stakeholders informed of the progress of the trials.

      The Draft Indicative Agenda attached to my email of 21 February 2018

      [POL00154253] would be reflective of the type of information that was shared

      during these meetings.


279   As can be seen in the email exchange from 28 August 2018 [POL00024179], I

      would help Jane MacLeod facilitate the flow of information between POL's

      internal and external legal teams to key government stakeholders. Often this

      would happen through briefings of Paula Vennells who would then meet with

      ministers and / or the Permanent Secretary at the time, Alex Chisolm.


280   Because of the obvious issues around sharing privileged information, we had

      to strike a balance between the desire to be forthcoming to the stakeholders

      and adhering to the protocol of sharing confidential and privileged information

      in the context of active litigation. There was a lot of back-and-forth internally

      and also with the Department to establish the level of detail that could be

      shared. I was not involved in the drafting of the Information Sharing Protocol

      [UKG100007924].


281   I believe the Group Litigation would have been one of a number of things on

      the agenda for discussion during briefings with the Minister and there would

      have been a limited amount of time to share updates. Jane MacLeod's email to
                                 Page 120 of 168
                                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                                   WI TN09830100




      Alice Cookson on 24 August 2018 [POL00024179] reflects the level of detail

      about the Group Litigation which would have been shared.


282   Eventually POL's in-house legal team and UKGI would have been

      corresponding directly with the Department and there would have been no need

      for my continued involvement.


283   Apart from these duties, my attendance at PLSG meetings and being copied

      into correspondence, I was not involved in any other sub-committee or roles

      involving the Group Litigation. I very rarely attended Board meetings, the only

      two occasions which appear relevant in this context are the Postmaster

      Litigation Subcommittee meeting on 15 May 2018 [POL00006754] which, from

      memory, was the first, and more comprehensive outline of how the Group

      Litigation was going to be run, and a meeting at which the Swift Review was

      considered.


284   I recall hearing about the judgment of Justice Fraser which was critical of POL's

      conduct during the Common Issues trial. I was not involved in any formal

      discussions or decision-making with respect to POL's response to these

      criticisms.


285   From conversations with colleagues, I was aware of POL's decision to seek the

      recusal of Justice Fraser. Rodric Williams also updated me, Jane MacLeod,

      Angela van den Bogerd, Mark Davies, Mark Underwood, and others about the

      recusal application on the day it was being heard [POL00359910]. I broadly

      understood the process around it, again through general conversation with

                                   Page 121 of 168
                                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                                   W ITN09830100




      colleagues. I knew that it was the professional judgement of POL's external

      lawyers that POL should seek recusal as well as an appeal because Justice

      Fraser's judgment was so far outside the ballpark of expected outcomes and

      was not expressed in neutral terms. I understood that POL wanted to satisfy

      itself before taking such a step and make sure that it was on solid ground by

      seeking advice from our external legal team.


286   I had no other involvement with the preparation, strategy, discussions, and

      decision-making in the context of the Common Issues trial.


Rapid Response Team


287   The purpose of the Rapid Response Team ("RRT") was to ensure that the

      business side of POL was prepared for the outcomes of the judgement of the

      two trials from an operational, commercial, and reputational standpoint, and that

      the appropriate steps would be taken after the judgements were handed down.


288   I do not recall very much about the RRT but I believe that I was tasked with

      maintaining the government stakeholder interface when and where it might be

      necessary.


289   During the Horizon Issues trial, I recall that there was concern within POL that,

      amongst all the possible outcomes, Horizon might be found not to be fit for

      purpose. The downstream commercial implications of a judgment of this kind

      would have been significant — for example, it would have affected customers,

      corporate clients, those contracted for business purposes, all for whom we

      would be in potential breach of contract. There was therefore a possibility that
                                   Page 122 of 168
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




      there would be some business interruption after the judgments were handed

      down, given that POL had approximately 12 -15 million people coming through

      its doors. This was something POL had to take seriously.


Horizon Issues trial


290   During the course of the Horizon Issues trial, I continued to attend PLSG

      meetings and was copied into correspondence. However, my involvement was

      tangential at best because of my lack of expertise and knowledge concerning

      the key issues.


291   I did continue to assist with communicating updates to government and

      parliamentary stakeholders as and when needed, however the information that

      was shared would have been points that were discussed amongst and agreed

      upon by our internal and external legal teams. I recall, for example, drafting a

      letter to Members of Parliament updating and reassuring them of POL's position

      and process in the Horizon Issues trial [POL00023629]. This letter was drafted

      with the benefit of the advance judgment and with possible "comms points"

      provided by Andrew Parsons in his email to me and Mark Underwood on 29

      November 2019 [POL00022837].


292   I would have likely read through parts of the expert reports of Jason Coyne and

      / or Robert Worden on the Horizon IT System to gain a general impression of

      the contrast between the two, but would not have done so in great detail.


293   I had no other involvement with the preparation, strategy, discussions, and

      decision-making in the context of the Horizon Issues trial.
                                  Page 123 of 168
                                                                                          WITNO9830100
                                                                                        WI TN09830100




GENERAL REFLECTIONS


294   I have been asked to reflect on my time at POL and to set out whether, with the

      benefit of hindsight, I might have handled certain aspects of my work in relation

      to the matters being considered by the Inquiry differently. As I hope to have

      made clear in my statement, of the three particular phases of activity I am asked

      to consider in particular, I played a significant role in only one: "How POL

      handled challenges to the integrity of Horizon by SPMs, Members of

      Parliament, journalists and members of the public". In that regard, I think the

      work I was engaged in was conducted in good faith and involved me, and others

      at POL, doing a significant number of sensible and reasonable things as we

      attempted to understand and to resolve the complaints and disputes brought

      forward as part of the Scheme. That in no way diminishes or detracts from the

      unequivocal and genuine sense of regret I feel for the distress, loss, and

      suffering felt by those affected in general, and by those wrongly prosecuted in

      particular. I therefore join myself to the apology POL has quite rightly made for

      its failings during this period. It is, naturally, hard to see through this darkest of

      chapters in the organisation's history. Nonetheless, I continue to believe in its

      importance in society and I know just how attached people are to their local

      community post office, as well as to the postmasters and postmistresses

      helping them behind the counters. My hope is that this Inquiry, combined with

      the rapid overturning of wrongful convictions and the speedier delivery of

      redress to all those affected, will bring us closer to the point at which the Post




                                    Page 124 of 168
                                                                             WITNO9830100
                                                                           WI TN09830100




Office can once again be identified as the force for good many of us considered

it to be, rightly I think, for so long.




                                Page 125 of 168
                                                       WITNO9830100
                                                      WITN09830100




Statement of Truth


I believe the content of this statement to be true.


Signed:                   GRO             .......


Dated:        ....4. .,   :...          .........
                                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                                  WI TN09830100




Index to First Witness Statement of Patrick Bourke


 No.    URN                  Document Description                Control Number


  1     POL00035285          Draft Post Office Mediation POL-0032220

                             Scheme, Second Sight Case

                             Review Report for Applicant

                             Margaret Bateman. (M020)


  2     POL00040448          Post      Office         Mediation POL-0036930

                             Scheme      DRAFT         Second

                             Sight - Case Review Report

                             (Pauline THOMSON)


  3     POL00040446          Post      Office         Mediation POL-0036928

                             Scheme      DRAFT         Second

                             Sight - Case Review Report

                             (Rubbina SHAHEEN)


  4     POL00035026          Draft - Post Office Mediation POL-0031961

                             Scheme - Second Sight -

                             Case Review Report on

                             Wendy       Buffrey,        Case

                             Reference: M041


  5     POL00149601          Instructions        to    Leading POL-BSFF-0008721

                             Counsel        to    advise    in

                                Page 127 of 168
                                                                  WI TN09830100
                                                             WI TN09830100




                  Conference In the matter of

                  POL        complaints      and

                  Mediation Scheme


6   POL00116814   Email to ChrisAujard, Rodric POL-0114611

                  Williams, Mark R Davies and

                  others from Patrick Bourke

                  Re: Scheme - Con with

                  Counsel


7   POL00149688   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0008806

                  Rodric Williams re: Judicial

                  Review.


8   POL00307631   Email from Belinda Crowe to POL-BSFF-0145681

                  Patrick      Bourke,       Tom

                  Wechsler      CC:       Belinda

                  Crowe RE: "What if .." a JR

                  question


9   POL00307633   Email from Belinda Crowe to POL-BSFF-0145683

                  Patrick      Bourke,       Tom

                  Wechsler and Belinda Crowe

                  RE: JR issues




                     Page 128 of 168
                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                                 WI TN09830100




10   POL00027369   Post Office Ltd Board Sub POL-0024010

                   Committee         -    Initial

                   Complaints    Review     and

                   Mediation Scheme: The way

                   forward


11   POL00027153   Post Office Ltd Board - Initial POL-0023794

                   Complaints    Review     and

                   Mediation    Scheme:    Sub

                   Committee

                   Recommendation, prepared

                   by Chris Aujard and Mark

                   Davies


12   POL00149685   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0008803

                   Tom Wechsler RE: He was

                   sat next to me.


13   POL00006575   Sparrow      Sub-Committee POL-0017849

                   Minutes 12 Jan 2015


14   POL00117056   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0117890

                   Tom Wechsler and Mark R

                   Davies with email from Paula

                   Vennels forwarded. Relates

                   to response to Second Sight

                      Page 129 of 168
                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




                   Report and possibility of

                   closing the scheme.


15   POL00102065   January      Options          v.4 POL-0101648

                   Mediation Scheme and BBC


16   POL00130853   Post Office - Risks and POL-0120752

                   Second Sight Report


17   POL00102109   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0101692

                   Mark R Davies and Belinda

                   Crowe; re: Next steps


18   POL00022352   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0018831

                   Andrew     Parsons,      Chris

                   Aujard and others regarding

                   Second Sight - Contractual

                   issues


19   POL00021728   RE,      Second      Sight     - POL-0018207

                   contractual issues


20   POL00006364   Bond     Dickinson     Note    - POL-0017632

                   Termination of Second Sight


21   POL00223073   Email from Tom Wechsler To: POL-BSFF-0061136

                   Melanie    Corfield,    Patrick



                      Page 130 of 168
                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                    WI TN09830100




                   Bourke, Chris Aujard and

                   others re FW: Sparrow paper

                   for     the    Board    -    Action

                   required


22   POL00102254   Post      Office      LTD    Board POL-0101837

                   Project Sparrow - Update

                   and Options Report, 2015


23   POL00040938   Email chain from Andrew POL-0037420

                   Parsons to Belinda Crowe,

                   Amanda A Brown, Rodric

                   Williams        and    others    re

                   Second Sight Part two and

                   the workplan for the meeting

                   tomorrow with second sight


24   POL00040952   Email         sent    from    Jane POL-0037434

                   MacLeod to Patrick Bourke

                   and others re: Responding to

                   Second sight part 2


25   POL00040953   Draft Letter to Second Sight POL-0037435

                   (Ian) from Jane Macleod re:




                         Page 131 of 168
                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




                   Second      Sights   Briefing

                   Report - part 2


26   POL00041013   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0037495

                   Andrew Parsons re: Draft

                   response to second sight

                   part 2 report of 11 March

                   2015 -260315- clean doc


27   POL00041014   Reply of Post Office Limited POL-0037496

                   to Second Sight's Briefing

                   Report — Part Two (Draft)


28   POL00041057   Email    sent from Andrew POL-0037539

                   Parsons to Patrick Bourke

                   and others re: Comparison of

                   POL reply


29   FUJ00087144   Email    chain    from     Pete POINQ0093315F

                   Newsome to: Mark

                   Underwool,               Harvey

                   Michael, Kevin Lenihan


                   CC:     Patrick      Bourke,

                   Andrew RE: Second Sight's




                      Page 132 of 168
                                                                          WI TN09830100
                                                                        WI TN09830100




                   final Part Two Report - your

                   expertise required


30   POL00226090   Letter from Patrick to Ian POL-BSFF-0064153

                   Henderson          RE:         Draft

                   response to SS


31   POL00041059   Draft Complaint Review and POL-0037541

                   Mediation Scheme Reply of

                   Post      Office     Limited      to

                   Second       Sight's     Briefing

                   Report — Part Two


32   POL00040508   Email from Mark Underwood POL-0036990

                   to Patrick Bourke, Belinda

                   Crowe,      Parsons      Andrew,

                   Sparrow Questions


33   POL00040288   Briefing for Chief Executive           POL-0036770


34   POL00116788   Letter to James Arbuthnot POL-0117653

                   MP from Paula Vennells RE:

                   Complaint      and     Mediation

                   Scheme.


35   POL00211585   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0049648

                   Belinda     Crowe and Tom

                      Page 133 of 168
                                                                          WITNO9830100
                                                                     WI TN09830100




                   Wechsler re: Draft Letter

                   CEO - JA - 291014.docx


36   POL00116790   Steering     Brief, Aims and POL-0117655

                   Approach


37   POL00116787   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0117652

                   Belinda     Crowe,      Mark   R

                   Davies and others - Re: CEO

                   Meeting with MPs - 17/11/14

                   - draft briefing


38   POLOO149683   Project Sparrow note                POL-BSFF-0008801


39   POL00308179   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0146229

                   Mark R Davie - Re: Paula

                   Notes


40   POL00308180   Note from Paula Vennells: POL-BSFF-0146230

                   Update for Board/Alice


41   POLOO149669   Draft Advice reply to James POL-BSFF-0008787

                   Arbuthnot written by Patrick

                   Bourke


42   POL00149668   Email      chain   from    Mark POL-BSFF-0008786

                   Underwood          to     Patrick



                      Page 134 of 168
                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                               WI TN09830100




                   Bourke and Tom Wechsler re

                   DRAFT ADVICE - PV -

                   JA.docx.


43   POL00006368   Advice to POL on suggested POL-0017636

                   approach to criminal case

                   mediation, by Mr Altman QC


44   POL00209031   Email from      Belinda Crowe POL-BSFF-0047094

                   to    Patrick    Bourke   RE:

                   Escalation points for WG

                   [BD-4A.F1D20472253]


45   POL00006355   Review on behalf of the POL-0017623

                   Chairman of Post Office Ltd

                   concerning the steps taken

                   in    response    to   various

                   complaints made by sub-

                   postmasters


46   POL00168751   Email from Mark R Davies to POL-0164048

                   Patrick Bourke, Chris Aujard,

                   Melanie Corfield re:


                   Draft Advice and Letter from

                   PV to JA


                        Page 135 of 168
                                                                         WITNO9830100
                                                                    WI TN09830100




47   POL00124611    Letter regarding Draft Letter POL-0130433

                    from      CEO       to      James

                    Arbuthnot MP


48   POL00124610    Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0130432

                    Gavin Lambert and Paula

                    Vennells,    cc'd    to others,

                    regarding FW: Draft Letter -

                    letter not attached


49   POL00116853    Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0117712

                    Tom Wechsler and others -

                    Re: JA


50   UKG100002627   Email from Richard Callard UKG1013441-001

                    to     Patrick     Bourke     RE:

                    Sparrow Questions.


51   POL00150097    Sparrow          Questions    for POL-BSFF-0009215

                    Parliamentary Debate the

                    17th December 2014


52   POL00150096    Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0009214

                    Belinda      Crowe,      Andrew

                    Parsons, Mark Underwood

                    re Q&A so far.


                         Page 136 of 168
                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                     WI TN09830100




53   UKG100002668   Email from Richard Callard UKG1013482-001

                    to Patrick Bourke cc Belinda

                    Crowe re Draft Q&A


54   POL00101857    Email Chain from Melanie POL-0101440

                    Corfield to Jarnail Singh,

                    Patrick   Bourke,      Belinda

                    Crowe     and     Others    re

                    Additional Briefing for BIS -

                    Subject to LPP


55   UKG100002718   Email thread from Patrick UKG1013532-001

                    Bourke to Richard Callard cc

                    Mark      Underwood        and

                    Belinda   Crowe      RE:   FW:

                    Sparrow Questions


56   UKG100002719   Sparrow     Questions       for UKG1013533-001

                    Parliamentary Debate 17th

                    December 2014


57   UKG100002729   Horizon     Questions       for UKG1013543-001

                    Parliamentary Debate 17th

                    December 2014.




                       Page 137 of 168
                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                  WI TN09830100




58   UKG100002730   Email from Rodric Williams UKG1013544-001

                    to     Helen   Lambert,       Jane

                    MacLeod,       cc:      Elizabeth

                    O'Neill     and      others    re:

                    Litigation and Appointment -

                    next steps


59   UKG100002728   Email chain from Richard UKG1013542-001

                    Callard to Patrick Bourke cc

                    Belinda Crowe and Mark

                    Underwood         Re:   Sparrow

                    Q&A


60   POL00040509    Question Sheet on Horizon POL-0036991

                    for    Parliamentary     Debate

                    17th December 2014


61   UKG100002743   Information Sharing Protocol UKG1013557-001

                    - Group Litigation


62   UKG100002742   Email from Patrick Bourke to UKG1013556-001

                    Richard Callard, CC Belinda

                    Crowe Re: Q&A




                          Page 138 of 168
                                                                     WITNO9830100
                                                                WI TN09830100




63   POL00101909   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0101492

                   Richard Callard RE. Sparrow

                   Actions


64   POL00102166   Letter from Mr Hooper to Ms POL-0101749

                   Swinson re Initial Complaint

                   Review    and        Mediation

                   Scheme


65   POL00150316   Horizon    Questions       for POL-BSFF-0009434

                   Parliamentary    debate    17

                   December 2014


66   POL00150315   Westminster     Hall   debate: POL-BSFF-0009433

                   Sub postmaster Mediation

                   Scheme, James Arbuthnot

                   MP. Speech


67   POL00150314   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0009432
                   Mark R Davies, Chris Aujard,
                   Rodric Williams and others
                   re Westminster Hall Debate -
                   Docs with Minister - for
                   information ONLY.



68   POL00101944   Email from Mark R Davies to POL-0101527

                   Patrick Bourke, cc'd Belinda

                   Crowe, Chris Aujard and


                      Page 139 of 168
                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                  WI TN09830100




                    others re: Jo's conversations

                    with      James      Arbuthnot-

                    actions coming out


69   UKG100002850   Email from Patrick Bourke to UKG1013664-001

                    Richard    Callard    re.   FW:

                    Legally     Privileged      and

                    Confidential - further lines for

                    WHD


70   POL00308923    Email chain from Jarnail POL-BSFF-0146973

                    Singh to Patrick Bourke re:

                    FW: Legally Privileged and

                    Confidential - further lines for

                    WHD.docx


71   POL00040517    Report on Further lines for Jo POL-0036999

                    Swinson MP — Westminster

                    Hall Debate


72   POL00040790    Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0037272

                    Angela    Van -Den-Bogerd,

                    Belinda       Crowe,        Tom

                    Wechsler and others, re the

                    dossier



                       Page 140 of 168
                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                                  WI TN09830100




73   POL00040791    POST OFFICE RESPONSE POL-0037273

                    TO WESTMINSTER HALL

                    DEBATE COMPLAINT AND

                    MEDIATION SCHEME


74   UKG100002943   Email from Patrick Bourke to UKG1013757-001

                    Richard Callard cc: Belinda

                    Crowe Re: Draft Dossier

                    Following WHD


75   UKG100002944   Post Office Response to UKG1013758-001

                    Westminster    Hall Debate,

                    Complaint     and    Mediation

                    Scheme


76   POL00040331    Initial Complaint Review and POL-0036813

                    Mediation             Scheme

                    Settlement Analysis


77   POL00228329    Initial Complaint review and POL-BSFF-0066392

                    Mediation             Scheme

                    Settlement analysis for Revti

                    Raman Bhanote re case

                    reference M130




                       Page 141 of 168
                                                                   WITNO9830100
                                                                 WI TN09830100




78   POL00211412   Initial Complaint review and POL-BSFF-0049475

                   mediation             scheme

                   settlement analysis


79   POL00061838   Initial Complaint Review And POL-0058317

                   Mediation             Scheme

                   Settlement Analysis - legal

                   advice


80   POL00089549   Bond      Dickinson     Initial POL-0086524

                   Complaint     Review     and

                   Mediation             Scheme

                   Settlement Analysis - Claim

                   No. M109. Grant Alllen from

                   Winsford Branch


81   POL00046011   Initial complaint review and POL-0042490

                   mediation             scheme

                   settlement analysis - Janet

                   Skinner


82   POL00158192   Email chain from Patrick POL-0146644

                   Bourke to Avene O'Farrell,

                   Chris Aujard, Tom Wechsler




                      Page 142 of 168
                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




                   and others re: RE: 5pm

                   Sparrow meeting


83   POL00151000   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0010112

                   Chris Aujard, Mark R Davies,

                   Tom Wechslen and others

                   re: Select Committee and

                   Future of Sparrow


84   POL00101711   Email from Patrick Bourne to POL-0101294

                   Paula Vennells and Mark R

                   Davies   re:     Meeting   with

                   Oliver Letwin


85   POL00318364   Fwd: MP meeting                   POL-BSFF-0156414


86   POL00153151   Email    chain    from     Mark POL-BSFF-0012263

                   Davies to Patrick Bourke and

                   Jane Hill re: Meeting - key

                   points


87   POL00153164   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0012276

                   Mark Davies and Jane Hill

                   re: Meeting with Ian Wright

                   MP - 8 September 2015




                      Page 143 of 168
                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                               WI TN09830100




88   POL00153165   Notes of meeting between POL-BSFF-0012277

                   lain Wright MP, Mark Davies,

                   Jane Hill and Patrick Bourke


89   POL00026723   Letter from Mark Davies to POL-0023364

                   Ian Wright, RE: Post Office

                   Complaint     and      Mediation

                   Scheme


90   POL00153243   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF- 0012355

                   Jane Hill, Mark R Davies,

                   Mark Underwood and others

                   re EDM


91   POL00153244   Letter from Mark Davies to POL-BSFF-0012356

                   an     MP   re   Post     Office

                   Complaint     and      Mediation

                   Scheme


92   POL00150875   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0009987

                   Jarnail     Singh,       Belinda

                   Crowe, Rodric Williams and

                   others re PV 1989 - Mr.

                   Harjinder Singh Butoy - FAD

                   453340 - Hasland (Horizon)



                        Page 144 of 168
                                                                   WI TN09830100
                                                               WI TN09830100




93   POL00150876   Letter from AVDB to Mr. POL-BSFF-0009988

                   Perkins   re   Mr.   Harjinder

                   Singh Butoy


94   POL00151752   Email from Laura Thompson POL-BSFF-0010864

                   to Patrick Bourke re Letter

                   from Criminal Cases Review

                   Commission


95   POL00027164   Letter    from       Baroness POL-0023805

                   Neville-Rolfe DBE CMG to

                   Paula Vennells re: invitation

                   to meeting


96   POL00152539   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0011651

                   Tom Wechsler cc Mark R

                   Davies,      Jane    MacLeod,

                   Mark Underwood and others

                   RE: Sparrow - PV to BNR


97   POL00152540   Draft Letter to BNR from POL-BSFF-0011652

                   Paula Vennells RE: Post

                   Office    Complaint       and

                   Mediation Scheme




                      Page 145 of 168
                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                     WI TN09830100




98    POL00006583   Interim      Review      of     OK POL-0017668

                    Processes by Brian Altman

                    QC


99    POL00316805   Email from Lesley J Sewell POL-BSFF-0154855

                    to    Mark    R     Davies      Re:

                    Panorama


100   POL00153064   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0012176

                    Jane      MacLeod,       Mark    R

                    Davies,      Mark    Underwood

                    and others re BNR letter

                    draft


101   POL00091395   Email from Belinda Crowe to POL-0090417

                    Tom       Wechsler,      Melanie

                    Corfield, Patrick Bourke and

                    others, re Strictly Private &

                    Confidential - Subject           to

                    Privilege Arising from M008

                    Rivenhail


102   POL00149277   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0008397

                    Melanie      Corfield,    Belinda

                    Crowe and Tom Wechsler re

                    Remote access - reactive

                         Page 146 of 168
                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                WI TN09830100




                    statement    -   in     strictest

                    confidence


103   POL00149296   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF- 0008416

                    Belinda Crowe, Angela Van-

                    Den-Bogerd,             Andrew

                    Parsons re Horizon access


104   POL00091397   Email from Belinda Crowe to POL-0090419

                    Patrick      Bourke,       Tom

                    Wechsler, Rodric Williams

                    and others re Notes for the

                    1600 meeting


105   POL00149488   Email chain from Patrick POL-BSFF-0008608

                    Bourke to Mark Underwood

                    re: Horizon questions


106   POL00149598   Email chain including Mark POL-BSFF-0008718

                    Underwood (POL); Patrick

                    Bourke       (POL);        Tom

                    Wechsler (POL) & others Re:

                    Remote Access          Question

                    Raised




                       Page 147 of 168
                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




107   POL00149578   Email from Mark Underwood POL-BSFF-0008698

                    (POL)     to    Tom    Wechsler

                    (POL); Patrick Bourke (POL)

                    Re: Remote access and

                    papers and plans


108   POL00212049   Draft     Initial     Complaint POL-BSFF-0050112

                    Review         and    Mediation

                    Scheme, Horizon Data


109   POL00212048   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-BSFF-0050111

                    to Belinda Crowe, Patrick

                    Bourke,        Andy   Holt   and

                    others Re: Remote access

                    (BD-4A.FID20472253]


110   POL00212720   Initial complaint review and POL-BSFF-0050783

                    mediation scheme horizon

                    data.


111   POL00149674   Email chain from Patrick POL-BSFF-0008792

                    Bourke to Mark Underwood,

                    Belinda         Crowe,       Tom

                    Wechsler and others re FJ

                    Remote                   Access



                       Page 148 of 168
                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




                    conversation   with       James

                    Davidson


112   POL00062410   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0058889

                    Mark David and others re

                    Hansard      Materials        for

                    Yesterday's Debate


113   POL00041040   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-0037522

                    to Patrick Bourke and others

                    re: Questions for the call

                    concerning         the      draft

                    response to second sights

                    report


114   FUJ00081944   Email from Mark Underwood POINO0088115F

                    to Kevin Lenihan and others

                    re: Second Sight Assertions

                    About      Editing         Data.

                    URGENT.


115   POL00353224   FW:      URGENT          ACTION: POL-BSFF-0178945

                    Second     Sight     assertions

                    about editing data. URGENT




                       Page 149 of 168
                                                                         WITNO9830100
                                                                    WI TN09830100




116   POL00021667   Email from Mark Underwood POL-0018146

                    to    Pete   Newsome       and

                    Michael       Harvey       RE:

                    Questions from the Call


117   POL00314275   Email     chain    from   Pete POL-BSFF-0152325

                    Newsome           to      Mark

                    Underwood         cc    Andrew

                    Parsons,     Patrick    Bourke,

                    Harvey Michael RE: Remote

                    access paper


118   POL00226072   Draft response to SS              POL-BSFF-0064135


119   POL00237265   Email from Mark Westbrook POL-BSFF-0075328

                    to Steve Allchorn, Andrew

                    Whitton CC: Jane MacLeod

                    and Others RE:          Jane &

                    Patrick Discussion Pre QC

                    Meeting


120   POL00322386   Email from Rodric Williams POL-BSFF-0160436

                    to Christopher Knight CC'ing

                    Jonathan       Swift,     Mark

                    Underwood and others RE:

                    POL Chairman's Review of

                         Page 150 of 168
                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




                    further information relating to

                    the Complaint R3eview and

                    Mediation Scheme


121   POL00322475   Email          from         Mark POL-BSFF-0160525

                    Underwood1         to   Rodric

                    Williams, CC Patrick Bourke

                    re:    Chairman's Review -

                    Further       Information      -

                    SUBJECT           TO    LEGAL

                    PRIVILEGE


122   POL00211254   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-BSFF-0049317

                    to Rodric Williams, Belinda

                    Crowe re: Horizon Access

                    [BD-4A.F1D20472253]


123   POL00149483   Email          from         Mark POL-BSFF-0008603

                    Underwood1         to   Patrick

                    Bourke RE: Remote access

                    [BD-4A.F1D20472253]


124   POL00125594   Email from Chris Aujard to POL-0131264

                    Jane MacLeod, cc to Belinda

                    Crowe, Rodric Williams and

                    others      Re:    Sparrow     -

                          Page 151 of 168
                                                               WI TN09830100
                                                             WI TN09830100




                    Independent             Horizon

                    Assessment


125   POL00129447   Email chain from Andrew POL-0135023

                    Parsons to Rodric Williams,

                    Mark Underwood, cc Belinda

                    Crow     and   others    - Re:

                    Mediation Scheme Report

                    [BD-4A.F1D26231777]


126   POL00117518   Email from Rodric Williams POL-0115135

                    to Patrick Bourke cc Mark

                    Underwood re: Actions to

                    Address             Technical

                    Challenges to Horizon


127   POL00029990   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-0026472

                    to Jane MacLeod and Rodric

                    Williams and Patrick Bourke

                    Re:    Deloitte   Preliminary

                    Report


128   POL00029998   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-0026480

                    to Mark R Davies and others




                      Page 152 of 168
                                                                         WI TN09830100
                                                                       WI TN09830100




                    Re: remote access wording -

                    subject to litigation privilege


129   POL00063478   Susan Rudkin case study: POL-0059957

                    Email from Patrick Bourke to

                    Jane       MacLeod,                Tom

                    Weschler, Melanie Corfield,

                    and     others        Re:     CCRC

                    Letters


130   POL00156617   Instructions         to     Jonathan POL-0145682

                    Swift     QC     to       Advise    in

                    Consultation on 8 October

                    2015


131   POL00041135   Letter from General Counsel POL-0037617

                    POL to Baroness Neville-

                    Rolfe     RE     :    Post    Office

                    Complaint      and         Mediation

                    Scheme


132   POL00065606   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0062085

                    Rodric Williams and Jane

                    MacLeod re Draft Speaking




                       Page 153 of 168
                                                                          WI TN09830100
                                                                        WI TN09830100




                    Notes for meeting with Tim

                    Parker - Complaint Review


133   POL00027126   Email from Jane Macleod to POL-0023767

                    Paula      Vennells         RE      FW

                    Project sparrow


134   POL00153300   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0012412

                    Jane       MacLeod,            Rodric

                    Williams           and           Mark

                    Underwood1 Re: Draft to Tim

                    parker


135   POL00153304   Letter from Jane MacLeod to POL-BSFF-0012416

                    Tim      Parker        re     Project

                    Sparrow            -         Barrister

                    recommendations


136   POL00102582   A starting point for the Terms POL-0102165

                    of Reference


137   POL00104218   Email      chain       from      Jane POL-0103801

                    MacLeod to Jonathan Swift

                    re:    FW;    Draft         terms   of

                    reference




                          Page 154 of 168
                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




138   POL00104216   Email chain Jonathan Swift POL-0103799

                    to Jane MacLeod re: Draft

                    terms of reference


139   POL00102604   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0102187

                    Jonathan        Swift,        Mark

                    Underwood and others re:

                    Post       Office:     note     to

                    accompany the updated and

                    attached chronology


140   POL00130957   Mediation                 Scheme POL-0120801

                    Chronology


141   POL00162692   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0151082

                    Jonathan Swift, cc'ing Rodric

                    Williams, Patrick Bourke and

                    another re: Post Office -

                    response to questions 6 & 7

                    of ToR


142   POL00162693   POL       answers    to    JSQC POL-0151083

                    Questions 6 and 7


143   POL00102616   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0102199

                    Patrick      Bourke,       Rodric


                       Page 155 of 168
                                                                       WI TN09830100
                                                                     WI TN09830100




                    Williams         and          Mark

                    Underwood re: Sparrow -

                    download from my meeting

                    with     Tim      Parker       and

                    Jonathan Swift


144   POL00153365   Draft Agenda for Meeting POL-BSFF-0012477

                    with Chris Knight (11KBW)


145   POL00153364   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0012476

                    Christopher      Knight,      Mark

                    Underwood           and       Jane

                    MacLeod re The Post Office


146   POL00102638   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0102221

                    Melanie Corfield cc: Mark

                    Underwood re: FW: Post

                    Office Matter


147   POL00131182   Action     Points      from    the POL-0121026

                    Meeting with Chris Knight,

                    11KBW - 27 October 2015


148   POL00153392   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0012504

                    Christopher                Knight,

                    Jonathan       Swift   and    cc'd


                       Page 156 of 168
                                                                           WI TN09830100
                                                                      WI TN09830100




                    Jane MacLeod and others

                    re: RE: Post Office Matter


149   POL00102649   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0102232

                    Tim Parker re: Post Office -

                    Investigation update


150   POL00153429   Email      trail     from    Mark POL-BSFF-0012541

                    Underwood            to     Patrick

                    Bourke re: What about this ?


151   POL00153430   Email      trail   from     Patrick POL-BSFF-0012542

                    Bourke to Jane MacLeod re:

                    Update to Tim ?


152   POL00153634   Email      from       Christopher POL-BSFF-0012746

                    Knight to Patrick Bourke,

                    Jonathan           Swift,     Jane

                    MacLeod and others re Post

                    Office Matter


153   POL00153638   Email from Mark Underwood POL-BSFF-0012750

                    to Patrick Bourke and Steve

                    Allchorn      re    Post     Office

                    Matter




                       Page 157 of 168
                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                      WI TN09830100




154   POL00158278   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0146569

                    Christopher                  Knight,

                    Jonathan     Swift      and cc;d

                    Jane MacLeod and others

                    re: Post Office - Telephone

                    Conference


155   POL00158279   Agenda      re:       Tim    Parker POL-0146570

                    Review        -         Telephone

                    Conference        2     December

                    2015


156   POL00103324   Email from Jonathan Swift to POL-0102907

                    Rodric Williams, re: Post

                    Office Limited - Update and

                    Request for Further Advice.


157   POL00103106   Recommendations                 and POL-0102689

                    Proposals


158   POL00103110   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0102693

                    Paula       Vennells,         Mark

                    Underwood, Rodric Williams

                    and      others        re:     FW:




                       Page 158 of 168
                                                                         WI TN09830100
                                                                    WI TN09830100




                    Chairman's review - with

                    attachment


159   POL00103111   Annex A: POLs proposals for POL-0102694

                    addressing        the   Report's

                    recommendations,               as

                    agreed with Jonathan Swift

                    QC


160   POL00027116   Email from Tom Wechsler to POL-0023757

                    Paula Vennells re TP/BNR -

                    Phone call with BIS which

                    included discussion about

                    Sparrow


161   POL00153884   Email     chain     from     Jane POL-BSFF-0012994

                    MacLeod to Patrick Bourke,

                    Rodric     Williams,         Mark

                    Underwood1 and others Re:

                    Sparrow


162   POL00104091   Email from Jonathan Swift to POL-0103674

                    Mark                Underwood,

                    Christopher Knight, Patrick

                    Bourke     and      others    re:

                    Private    &   Confidential     -

                       Page 159 of 168
                                                                 WITNO9830100
                                                               WI TN09830100




                    Subject to Legal Privilege,

                    Findings     in     relation    to

                    Recommendation Number 7


163   POL00103131   Email from Mark Underwood POL-0102714

                    to       Jonathan           Swift,

                    Christopher       Knight,   Jane

                    MacLeod and others re: A

                    letter drafted for Tim Parker

                    to send     to the Minister,

                    briefing her on the outcome

                    of your enquiry to date


164   POL00103132   Draft Letter from Mr Tim POL-0102715

                    Parker to Baroness Neville-

                    Rolfe re: Project Sparrow


165   POL00131715   Draft Letter from Tim Parker POL-0121501

                    to Baroness Neville Rolfe


166   POL00103134   Email from Jonathan Swift to POL-0102717

                    Mark                Underwood,

                    Christopher       Knight,   Jane

                    MacLeod and others; re: A

                    letter drafted for Tim Parker

                    to send     to the Minister,

                         Page 160 of 168
                                                                        WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




                    briefing her on the outcome

                    of your enquiry to date


167   POL00103138   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0102721

                    Jane MacLeod re Post Office

                    - Chairman's Enquiry


168   POL00240197   Draft letter from Chairman to POL-BSFF-0078260

                    Minister re Project Sparrow


169   POL00240226   Email    chain    from    Mark POL-BSFF-0078289

                    Underwood         to     Rodric

                    Williams cc Jane MacLeod

                    Patrick Bourke RE: Post

                    Office - Chairman's Enquiry


170   POL00240227   Draft    letter   re     Project POL-BSFF-0078290

                    Sparrow


171   POL00103207   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0102790

                    Jane MacLeod, RE: FW:

                    Post Office Ltd- Update and

                    Request for Further Advice


172   POL00168551   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0163848

                    Rodric    Williams,      Patrick




                       Page 161 of 168
                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                 WI TN09830100




                    Bourke, Mark Underwood

                    RE: Chairman's review


173   POL00022751   Letter from Bond Dickinson POL-0019230

                    LLP to POL RE: advice given

                    on 9 June 2016 in Bates v

                    POL litigation


174   POL00022776   Letter from Tim Parker to POL-0019255

                    Baroness Neville-Rolfe re

                    update       on       handling

                    postmaster's complaints


175   POL00153946   Email chain from Patrick POL-BSFF-0013054

                    Bourke to Mark Underwood

                    Rodric     Williams      Jane

                    MacLeod      RE:      Sparrow

                    Update - CCRC and Brian

                    Altman QC


176   POL00153883   Project      Sparrow         - POL-BSFF-0012993

                    Chairman's             Report

                    Recommendations


177   POL00101446   Email from Rhiannon Kett to POL-0101029

                    Patrick Bourke, cc'd Andrew


                       Page 162 of 168
                                                                    WI TN09830100
                                                               WI TN09830100




                    Parsons, Belinda Crowe re:

                    29517413_1                Legally

                    privileged, FOIA Request -

                    BBC leaked report - section

                    31 [BD.MSG


178   POL00151730   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0010842

                    Belinda Crowe re Freedom

                    of    Information    request    -

                    Second Sight report - New

                    Freedom      of      Information

                    Request


179   POL00024988   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-0021467

                    to Rodric Williams, Thomas

                    P Moran, Andela Van-Den-

                    Bogerd     and      others   RE:

                    Postmaster             Litigation

                    Steering          Group         -

                    Confidential and Subject to

                    Legal Privilege


180   POL00025509   Draft Postmaster Litigation POL-0021988

                    Steering     Group      Meeting




                         Page 163 of 168
                                                                  WITNO9830100
                                                                WI TN09830100




                    Terms of Reference and

                    Membership


181   POL00025510   Bates & Others v POL Claim POL-0021989

                    Form,            Claim           no

                    HQ16XO1238


182   POL00025511   Letter from Freeths to Rodric POL-0021990

                    Williams (POL Solicitor) re:

                    Bates & Others v Post Office

                    Limited Group Action Letter

                    pursuant    to     the     practice

                    direction     on         pre-action

                    conduct


183   POL00025507   Email from Rodric Williams POL-0021986

                    to    POL     employees          re

                    Postmaster                Litigation

                    Steering Group Meeting on 7

                    June 2016


184   POL00023488   RE, Draft Letter of Response POL-0019967

                    - Confidential and Subject to

                    Legal Priv.MSG




                         Page 164 of 168
                                                                     WI TN09830100
                                                                   WI TN09830100




185   POL00023490   Email from Thomas Moran to POL-0019969

                    Andrew Parsons and others

                    re: Draft Letter of Response


186   POL00110482   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0108217

                    Rob      Houghton.     CC'd     -

                    Rodric Williams RE: wording

                    of Letter of response


187   POL00024911   Email     sent    from      Jane POL-0021390

                    MacLeod to Patrick Bourke

                    and      others      cc'd     re:

                    Tim/Minister


188   POL00024627   Email from Jane MacLeod to POL-0021106

                    Andrew Parsons re: PLSG

                    meeting on Wednesday 24

                    May 2017 @12 in Tonbridge

                    (1.11)


189   POL00154156   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0013261

                    Andrew Parsons, Amy Prime

                    and Rodric Williams RE:

                    PLSG         meeting          on




                       Page 165 of 168
                                                                 WI TN09830100
                                                               WI TN09830100




                    Wednesday 24 May 2017 @

                    12 in Tonbridge (1.11)


190   POL00117755   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0114692

                    Andrew Parsons, Amy Prime

                    and Rodric Williams RE:

                    PLSG          meeting            on

                    Wednesday 24 May 2017 @

                    12 in Tonbridge (1.11)


191   POL00006431   Noting paper - Update on POL-0017736

                    Litigation Strategy


192   POL00285929   RE: Letter to Freeths and POL-BSFF-0123992

                    Court - KEL disclosure


193   POL00000444   4th Witness Statement of VIS00001458

                    Andrew       Paul       Parsons

                    (Womble Bond Dickinson),

                    Solicitor to POL


194   POL00003363   Letter from Andrew Parsons VIS00004377

                    to    James      Hartley     and

                    Imogen Randall re: Post

                    Office   Group      Litigation    -




                         Page 166 of 168
                                                                      WI TN09830100
                                                                    WI TN09830100




                     Horizon Issues Trial: Expert

                     Reports


195   POL00154252    Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-BSFF-0013351

                     Jane      MacLeod,       Rodric

                     Williams and cc'ing Mark

                     Underwood) RE: Indicative

                     agenda for sparrow meeting


196   POL00154253    Sparrow meeting - Draft POL-BSFF- 0013352

                     Indicative Agenda


197   POL00024179    Email chain between Andrew POL-0020658

                     Parsons,    Jane      MacLeod,

                     Patrick Bourke and others

                     Re: Litigation.


198   UKG100007924   Information Sharing Protocol UKG1018737-001

                     - Group Litigation


199   POL00006754    Meeting    Minutes      of   the POL-0018012

                     Postmaster             Litigation

                     Subcommittee of POL


200   POL00359910    Re: Group Litigation Update POL-BSFF-0185631

                     -   SUBJECT       TO    LEGAL




                         Page 167 of 168
                                                                    WITNO9830100
                                                                  WI TN09830100




                    PRIVILEGE       -   DO    NOT

                    FORWARD


201   POL00023629   GLO      Communications       - POL-0020108

                    Horizon Issues Trial - Letter

                    to   MPs (Patrick      Bourke)

                    Draft version


202   POL00022837   Email from Andrew Parsons POL-0019316

                    to    Patrick   Bourke,   Mark

                    Underwood, Ben Foat and

                    others, RE Adverse common

                    points in the HIT judgement




                         Page 168 of 168
