                                                                                    WITN01020100




                                                     Witness Name    Paula Anne Venne/ls

                                                     Statement No.   WITN01020100

                                                     Dated           8 March 2024




                     POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




            FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF PAULA ANNE VENNELLS




I, Paula Anne Vennells, will say as follows:


Introduction


1.    I am a former employee of Post Office Limited ("POL"). My career at POL

      began in 2007 in the role of POL Network Director and ended in 2019 as Group

      Chief Executive Officer (the role was known as "CEO").


2.    I make this witness statement to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry

      ("Inquiry"), in response to a Rule 9 Request dated 9 August 2023 ("Request").

      Throughout this witness statement I will use the structure and headings of the

      Request, adding further headings where it assists to signpost my evidence.


3.    I have not been asked by the Inquiry to give a full account of every aspect of

      my work, actions and opinions whilst at POL, but rather I have been asked a
                                     Page 1 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




     list of detailed and specific questions. Accordingly, this statement in response

     to that Request is not a chronological list of all of my actions, but a series of

     answers to questions. In most cases, if I have not been asked about a topic

     then I have not addressed it.


4.   The facts and matters set out in this witness statement are within my own

     knowledge unless otherwise stated, and I believe them to be true. This witness

     statement was taken after communicating with my legal representatives in

     person, in telephone calls and remote meetings and by email. Where I refer to

     information supplied by others, the source of the information is identified; facts

     and matters derived from other sources are true to the best of my knowledge

     and belief. I have done my best to refer to all relevant documents and answer

     all questions fully. As the Inquiry is aware, in excess of 167,000 documents

     have been disclosed at the time of writing this statement (of which around

     30,000 have not yet been reviewed by my legal team or me). Whilst I have

     been shown and have read thousands of documents and have done my best

     to refer to all relevant documents and answer all questions fully, I am sure that

     I will have inadvertently missed or overlooked some documents. I am also

     aware that the disclosure process is still incomplete, however, I am keen to

     assist the Inquiry so I am providing my statement in the knowledge that more

     documents will be disclosed. I would of course be happy to serve a

     supplementary statement addressing any further relevant documents.


     5.    I would like to offer my genuine and unreserved apologies to all those

           affected by the matters giving rise to this Inquiry. I apologise that I and

           those working for me and with me failed the sub-postmasters and their


                                     Page 2 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     families. I am deeply sorry that they have suffered in such a distressing

     way. I watched the Inquiry's Human Impact Evidence and heard the

     subpostmasters describe what they had been through, how isolated they

     felt, and how they had been unsupported by POL. They described the

     life-changing experiences they and their families have endured for so

     many years. I am so very sorry that so much of this happened while I was

     a member of the senior management team and then CEO.


6.   I also offer my apologies to Alan Bates, Ian Henderson, Ron Warmington,

     Lord Arbuthnot and all those who worked with them to secure justice for

     the sub-postmasters. They had the right insights. They were right to

     persevere and I am sorry for where I made their task harder.


7.   The personal tragedies of the sub-postmasters and their families have

     affected me profoundly and reconfirmed my view of how important the

     Inquiry's work is. It has been my priority for the last three years. I have

     followed the evidence closely and read thousands of documents and

     witness statements.


8.   I have set out below the way in which we approached matters at the time.

     I know that it will be difficult for many to read my statement and listen to

     my evidence and I am genuinely sorry for the pain that this will cause.




                             Page 3 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




Background


1. Please set out a summary of your career and qualifications until joining Post

Office Limited ("POL")


9.    I graduated from Bradford University in 1981 with a degree in Russian and

      French Interpreting, with Economics.


10.   Having initially intended to pursue a career as an interpreter, I decided against

      this and joined Unilever in 1981 on their graduate trainee scheme. I was

      assigned to work at a Unilever group company called Van Den Bergh &

      Jurgens. I started as a trainee accountant and began a foundation course in

      accountancy. After a few months, I decided that I wanted a broader, business-

      orientated role and moved into marketing. After that, I worked for another

      Unilever group company as a junior product manager for pharmaceuticals.

      Over the next few years, I worked in product manager and marketing manager

      roles for L'Oreal, BAA, and Hamleys. I was then appointed Marketing Director

      for Lunn Poly and subsequently held similar roles with Reed International

      Exhibitions, Dixons Group and Sears Pie.


11.   From 1998 to 2001 I held the role of Marketing and eCommerce Director at

      Argos/ Gus Pie, following which I held the roles of Marketing Director and then

      Group Commercial Director at Whitbread Pie until 2006.


12.   I was ordained as a minister in the Church of England in 2005.




                                    Page 4 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




2. Please describe what experience you had in respect of (a) managing a large

IT system such as Horizon and (b) managing a company involved in the

prosecution of criminal offences prior to joining POL.


13.   I had no experience of either managing a large IT system or of criminal

      prosecutions when I joined POL.


3. Please summarise your roles and responsibilities whilst you were at POL


14.   I started at POL in January 2007 as Network Director. I reported to the

      Managing Director ("MD"), Alan Cook. I was responsible for approximately

      15,000 Post Offices in Crown and Agency branch networks. I moved into the

      role of Network and Sales Director in late 2009. I continued with the same

      responsibilities as I had in my role as Network Director, but with additional

      responsibility for the national sales department, which included the Financial

      Services sales team and associated regulatory compliance duties. Although

      the title changed, the role continued to be known as Network Director and I

      have used that description in this statement.


15.   I was promoted to Chief Operating Officer on 1 April 2010 and stayed in that

      role for six months, before becoming MD on 18 October 2010. I reported to

      Dave Smith, who at the time was MD. When I became MD, I still reported to

      Dave Smith, who had been promoted to be the Royal Mail Group ("RMG")

      Commercial Director.




                                   Page 5 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




16.   From approximately June 2011 I reported to the RMG Chief Executive, Moya

      Greene. I then reported to Alice Perkins, the POL Chair, from approximately

      November 2011.


17.   I was appointed as CEO on 1 April 2012 and was in post until 30 April 2019. I

      reported to Alice Perkins until Tim Parker took over the role of Chairman in

      2015.


18.   In 2017, my title changed to Group CEO, after POL acquired and built more

      businesses.


19.   So far as my responsibilities in each of these roles is concerned, I will address

      them below where I answer questions about each of my specific roles.


4. Please provide an overview of your professional career since leaving POL.


20.   After leaving POL, I held various Non-Executive Director ("NED") roles with

      Cabinet Office, Dunelm, Ethical Investment Advisory Group ("EIAG"), Imperial

      College NHS Trust (as Chair), and WM Morrisons Supermarket Ltd

      ("Morrisons").


21.   My role as a NED at Morrisons began in 2016, while I was at POL. I was

      approached by the then Chairman of Morrisons, Andrew Higginson, to see if I

      would be interested in joining the board. This was followed by a formal search

      and interview process. My appointment to Morrisons was approved by Tim

      Parker, POL's Chair, the POL Nominations Committee, and the UK

      Government as POL's sole shareholder. I made a commitment to POL before

      I took up the role that it would not affect my job and that I would do most of my

      work for Morrisons in my own time, which I did.
                                    Page 6 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




22.   From 2017 to 2021 I was a member of the Church of England's EIAG. The

      group met around four to six times per year.


Network Director


Background


5. Please describe your role as Network Director within POL. In particular,

please address the following matters:


5.1 Please describe the background to your appointment as Network Director

and the application process.


23.   Before joining POL, the emphasis in my previous work was on retail and

      marketing. I was approached by a head-hunter to apply for the role of POL

      Network Director. It was a competitive process. I underwent psychometric

      testing, and separately had interviews with (from memory) the MD of POL, POL

      Directors, the CEO of the RMG, the Chairman of the RMG, and the RMG

      Human Resources Director ("HRD"). It is possible, though I cannot remember,

      that I met a representative of HM Government ("HMG").


5.2 Please set out the nature of your role as Network Director and explain your

responsibilities.


24.   As Network Director, I sat as a Director on three boards and eight associated

      board committees, including the following: POL, Post Office Financial Services

      ("POFS"), First Rate Exchange Services ("FRES"). POFS and FRES boards

      were joint venture boards with Bank of Ireland ("B0I"). I had five senior

      managers who reported to me. General Managers had the following areas of

                                   Page 7 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      responsibility: Network Change (branch closures, HMG size of network

      commitment, local consultation on Post Office closures, moves, opening,

      liaison with national oversight bodies such as Post Watch, Ofcom, Consumer

      Focus, Age Concern/UK, Citizens' Advice, Which); Network Operations (field

      and central services to ensure Post Offices remained open and trading, agency

      contract management, branch cash audits & training), Agency Development

      (the National Federation of SubPostmasters ("NFSP") liaison, new product

      introductions,   agents'   remuneration);     Crown   Network   (franchising   &

      operations; Union negotiations, sales support); Agency Network (field and

      sales support). The latter two had been restructured to General Manager

      Commercial and General Manager Community by 2009.


25.   My responsibilities included oversight of the national Post Office closure

      programme (the "Network Change Programme"), franchising of Crown Post

      Offices, oversight of industrial relations, cost reduction and restructuring to

      HMG / RMG / POL targets. They also included Retail Network strategy and its

      impact on operations and sales and marketing branch campaign planning, with

      particular focus on peak season mails targets for RMG and financial sales

      targets.


26.   I was involved in strategy, working closely with executive colleagues and senior

      managers to improve prospects for the network of Post Offices. For example,

      we developed two new retail models of Post Office, which were later rolled out

      to more than 7,500 locations. These models (Post Office Mains and Locals)

      improved the sustainability of Post Offices and removed the need for future

      closure programmes, which had devastated local communities during the


                                    Page 8 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      Network Change Programme. The overall POL strategy expanded the financial

      services products offered and encouraged RMG to invest in more competitive

      parcel offerings, to capitalise on the growth of the UK online shopping market

      and sought to prevent high value customers from moving to our competitors.


27.   Throughout my time in this role, and indeed throughout my time at POL, I was

      keen to ensure that I spent sufficient time in Post Offices, balancing that with

      the other demands of the role. I visited hundreds if not thousands of branches

      in my twelve years at POL. Understanding the needs of Post Offices,

      postmasters, colleagues and their customers was a priority to me, and of

      significant value to the business.


28.   When I became Network Director in 2007, POL was a wholly-owned subsidiary

      of Royal Mail Holdings ("RMH"). POL had a board of Directors, which reported

      to the RMH Board.


29.   The POL MD was a member of the RMH Board and reported to the RMG Group

      CEO. The POL executive team reported to the MD and on occasion to the POL

      Board. Some specialist functions (such as Human Resources ("HR"), IT, Legal,

      Finance, and External Communications) had additional "matrix" reporting lines

      to their respective RMG Directors. While in theory at least RMG was

      responsible for reporting on behalf of the group to HMG, in practice the POL

      MD and Directors met separately with the Shareholder Executive ("ShEx").


5.3 Executive decision-making structure within PO when you joined as Network

Director


5.4 Please consider POL00043805 (PowerPoint of Executive Team). Does page

                                    Page 9 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




1 accurately describe the posts within the executive management team that was

responsible for the operation of POL at the time you became Network Director?

If not, please state in what way it is inaccurate.


5.5 In respect of the executive management team, please summarise the

following:


5.5.1 The nature and responsibilities of each role (i.e. "the Marketing Director's

role involved ... ")


30.    I have no current recollection of the precise roles and functions of those who

       reported to me as Network Director. However, I can see from (POL00043805)

       that they were:


              a.   Head of Network Change (Sue Huggins). Whilst I do not recall all

                   the   responsibilities   of   this   role   (these   are   outlined   in

                   (POL00043805)), I do remember clearly that the Head of Network

                   Change had responsibility for the Network Change Programme.

                   This programme closed thousands of Post Offices. Its impact was

                   devastating for all affected communities and for many sub-

                   postmasters ("SPMs"). It was almost universally opposed and

                   required sensitive handling, sometimes impossible in the face of

                   deep opposition but it was Government policy and I and my team

                   were entrusted to deliver it. It involved much of my time, including

                   liaising with Members of Parliament (MPs), to explain the number of

                   closures, how they were balanced nationally across constituencies

                   and how the closures would take place/ be supported.


                                      Page 10 of 861
                                                                      WITN01020100




b.   Head of Agency Development (Kevin Gilliland). I am reminded from

     (POL00043805) that the team reporting to the Head of Agency

     Development included work on managing business activities

     relating to agents within the Network and the development of policy

     for the same (including contractual policy). This work looked into

     business opportunities and remuneration support / growth for all

     types of Post Offices. The team was responsible for retail projects

     to help develop the commercial sustainability of Post Offices. One

     major responsibility was the annual SPM pay negotiations with the

     NFSP, including intervening changes to remuneration, where clients

     (e.g. RMG) varied their input pricing, or liaising with the NFSP on

     potential   changes    to   branch    processes.    For   example

     (FUJ00157278), a document from 2008, notes that Kevin Gilliland's

     team would be the liaison point with the NFSP for a POL-wide review

     of cheque acceptance processes to improve branch conformance.


c.   Head of Outlet/ Network Support (Lynn Hobbs). I do not remember

     exactly what Lynn     Hobbs' role entailed     in 2007,   however

     (POL00043805) indicates that she oversaw National Contract

     Managers and Field Support. She has described her own duties at

     this time in her witness statement (WITN09010100). An email from

     2008, at page 15 of (POL00105417) suggests that she was involved

     in the Network Transformation Programme ("NTP") (including roll-

     out of pay-station terminals and improved compliance) as well as

     costs and cash holdings. A number of documents show her

     involvement in devising branch standards at the relevant time

                      Page 11 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




     (POL00006123; POL00021422; POL00005580; POL00005872).


d.   General Manager Commercial (Richard Barker). As shown in

     (POL00043805),       Richard   Barker   had   responsibility   for   the

     management of Crown and WH Smith branches, and for the specific

     Financial Services Sales and coaching team which was a joint

     endeavour with the BOI, covering financial services and Bureau de

     Change sales. My involvement with this area of my responsibilities

     was also significant, as the conversion of Crown Post Offices to WH

     Smiths agency branches was complex and deeply opposed by the

     CWU and CMA unions. My role in relation to the Crown Post Offices

     carried the additional responsibility alongside the H R Director for

     pay negotiations.


e.   General Manager Community (Adele Henderson). I recall, prompted

     by (POL00043805), that Adele Henderson led a large team of field

     based regional and area managers who had oversight of the Agency

     Network across the UK, with a focus on business development. I

     spent much time with the regional and area managers on branch

     visits to talk with them and the SPMs they supported to understand

     better how POL could create a more commercially sustainable

     network. This work led to the later Network Transformation

     programme, which saved thousands more branches from closing by

     introducing new Post Office models which were designed to open

     longer and to operate at lower cost for POL and for SPMs.




                         Page 12 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




31.   While serving as Network Director, I was a member of the Executive Team.

      The team was comprised of a number of roles, all of whom reported to Alan

      Cook (as shown in (POL00043805), an organisational chart from 2009):


            a.   A Marketing Director, whose responsibilities covered mails, financial

                 services,   telephony and    government services,      marketplaces

                 product selection and commercial negotiation with providers

                 (clients), consumer pricing and margin construction in addition to

                 market research, advertising and public relations.


            b.   A Sales Director, who worked closely with the Marketing Director,

                 but with a focus on building sales strategy and capability across the

                 board. The role had a particular focus on financial services sales

                 through a field based coaching team. The Sales Director additionally

                 had the responsibility for delivering online sales through digital

                 channels.


            c.   An HR Director, whose role was to steer, implement, oversee and

                 where necessary adapt group HR policies and processes, as well

                 as handling industrial relations (inclusive of pay negotiations). The

                 HR Director had responsibility for recruitment, training, succession

                 planning, internal communications and payroll.


            d.   An Operations Director, whose responsibilities included IT, Security

                 & Investigations, POL's cash supply chain and logistics, property,

                 equipment and project management of major changes. The Heads

                 of Security, Supply Chain, IT Services, Change, Property and I think

                 Procurement at one stage all reported to the Operations Director.
                                   Page 13 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




             e.   A Finance Director, responsible for financial and management

                  accounting, government funding, Product and Branch Accounting

                  ("P&BA"), Agents' and Former Agents' Debt, Risk, Compliance and

                  Regulatory Oversight and the Annual Report and Accounts. This

                  role also included branch trading support: the National Business

                  Support Centre ("NBSC"), issuing of transaction corrections ("TCs")

                  branch audit requests, and dispute resolution.


            f.    A Strategy Director, who was tasked with the development of POL

                  strategy, (including preparation for annual Board and Executive

                  Team strategic planning meetings and the working through of these

                  draft plans with RMG). This person together with the Head of

                  Funding who reported to the Finance Director, oversaw applications

                  for and negotiation of governmental funding, as well as State Aid

                  negotiations and budget planning. They were responsible for the

                  programme management office, which oversaw all company-wide

                  programmes, notably a major business restructure and cost

                  reduction programme to reduce Government subsidy.


32.   The Head of Legal Services had a dual reporting line. Their primary reporting

      (i.e. 'solid line') was to the RMG General Counsel ("GC"), with a secondary (i.e.

      'dotted line') to the POL MD.


33.   From memory, this matrix (i.e. solid/dotted line) reporting structure also applied

      to individuals leading IT, Security and HR but the 'lines' were the other way

      round - i.e. the individuals holding these roles reported directly to a POL



                                      Page 14 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      Director or to the MD but with an additional dotted line to the relevant Group

      (RMG) Director.


34.   External Communications were handled by RMG, with POL's Head of Internal

      Communications as the primary interface. If this included personal relations

      issues, the Marketing Director would be consulted.


5.5.2 The level of technical IT expertise of the members of the executive

management team.


35.   So far as I am aware the only member of the Executive Management Team

      with technical IT expertise was the Operations Director. When I joined in 2007,

      that position was held by Ric Francis. When he left, David Smith took over his

      responsibility for IT on an interim basis. The role was then filled by Mike Young.

      I do not know the precise level of IT expertise that any of these individuals had.


5.5.3 Who was responsible for the management and communications of

possible or identified problems in the Horizon IT System


36.   In respect of the Executive Management Team, the responsibility for the

      management and communication of possible or identified problems within the

      Horizon IT system would fall to either the Operations Director or Finance

      Director, depending on the nature of the issue and the process by which it was

      identified.


37.   Issues relating to Horizon software or hardware would usually be identified by

      the IT team and would fall under the remit of the Operations Director, who had

      oversight and responsibility for IT. Issues identified through wider systems such

      as branch trading support, NBSC, or the transaction correction process would
                                    Page 15 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      be the responsibility of the Finance Director, who had oversight of these

      processes. My understanding is that, in practice, issues often required input

      from both IT and Finance (P&BA) so these teams worked closely together.


38.   The responsibility for communicating such issues to the POL Board and wider

      executive team fell to the Executive Team Director who was managing the

      issue. This would either be done on an ad hoe basis or through routine

      reporting channels such as the performance reports provided to the Board and

      Executive Team by the Operations Director/ CIO or a senior manager in the

      IT team.


5.5.4 What internal POL resources were available to the executive team for

expert advice on technical IT matters.


39.   Where input was required on technical IT matters, the first ports of call were

      the Operations Director who oversaw IT, the Head of IT Services, the Head of

      IT & Change, and senior managers in their teams were the first ports of call for

      expert advice. (Titles changed over time to include e.g. Chief Information

      Officer.) As far as I recall, where additional input was required to supplement

      their personal expertise, external (consultancy) advice was available.


POL corporate governance


6. Please summarise your views on the responsibilities of a Board of directors

in the operation of a company solely owned by HM Government. In particular,

please address the following issues:


40.   The Board of Directors was subject to duties imposed by the Companies Act

      2006. Its responsibilities included the strategic and operational decisions for
                                   Page 16 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      ensuring that the company met its statutory responsibilities. This was no

      different for the Board of Directors of a company solely owned by HMG. In

      general, and in contrast to my previous commercial experience, POL was

      operating in the public domain and also had to have regard to the delivery of

      public services, the proper use of public money and the need for good working

      practices. POL had responsibilities towards numerous stakeholders, including

      postmasters.


41.   When I first joined POL, and until the company was separated from RMG, POL

      governance was the responsibility of RMG. The POL Board met infrequently

      and stopped altogether in 2009, save I believe for very limited meetings of

      Directors to sign off the annual accounts. I recall this was because of overlap

      with both the POL Exec team and the RMH Board.


42.   At this time there were no HMG representatives on either the POL or RMG

      Boards or the RMH Board. I do believe that was a shortcoming. This changed

      when I became MD / CEO. The POL Board had an HMG Director, which I

      welcomed, as I had positive working relations with HMG.


43.   Post-separation the POL Board undertook regular governance training and

      briefings, including updates on upcoming changes relevant to a company

      wholly owned by HMG. I understood from a POL Board discussion that POL

      was one of the first HMG companies to work towards full compliance with the

      corporate code.


44.   The POL Board took its responsibilities as a company owned solely by HMG

      seriously and would arrange for briefings by external individuals and agencies,


                                   Page 17 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      so that lessons could be learnt from other companies'/ institutions' experiences

      of corporate governance challenges and events.


45.   The POL Board met with HMG officials in the ShEx / UK Government

      Investments ("UKGI"), whose NED Directors were active in their challenge and

      contribution in board meetings; POL met with ShEx / UKGI / HMG regularly -

      both formally for review meetings and informally at different levels and across

      differing functions, proactively offering briefings, frequently responding to

      challenges and queries from HMG.


46.   As I state above, POL had responsibilities towards numerous stakeholders,

      including postmasters. Various feedback mechanisms were put in place to

      seek their views and input - from surveys to a stakeholder forum, to support of

      the NFSP, to the independent Post Office Advisory Group, to pre-mutualisation

      work groups, to the branch user forum, to SPMs appointed as informal advisers

      to the Group Executive ("GE"), some of whom also engaged with the POL

      Board.


47.   Post Offices offered a vital service to communities across the UK and keeping

      those open and operating in the best interests of millions of customers and tens

      of thousands of colleagues required responsible oversight. POL's own

      reputation was of small import compared to protecting the trust built up daily by

      those colleagues working in Post Offices across the country. This was a view I

      held very strongly and spoke about at conferences and in meetings, including

      POL Board meetings. What has happened to these postmasters, their

      colleagues and their families is the very opposite. They have suffered



                                   Page 18 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      immeasurably and the governance of POL, and of Fujitsu Limited ("Fujitsu")

      and of HMG, fell short for them.


48.   The Inquiry asks me to summarise my views on these responsibilities. Although

      POL colleagues (and I believe those I worked with in HMG) did subscribe

      wholeheartedly to all the above - there were in hindsight areas that could have

      been improved. The principal three being:


             a.   First, to raise data sharing and reporting on Legal and IT matters to

                  the same levels of detail and frequency as financial matters;


             b.   Second, to find ways of not losing sight of the individual - at a data

                  and detailed level. An institution that works in the public sector,

                  responsible for public money and mindful of public interest, is

                  constantly dealing with challenges of scale, which can obscure the

                  individual and problems specific to them;


             c.   Third, to protect corporate memory and to use it wisely, including to

                  keep it alive by encouraging colleagues to be open about difficulties

                  and past errors, so that exposing problems and issues was

                  welcomed. I recall I introduced at one stage a positive "reward'' for

                  the "best" problems shared / lessons learnt.


6.1 Oversight of criminal prosecutions brought in the name of the company.


49.   When I joined as Network Director, I had no understanding of the responsibility

      of a I the Board of Directors for oversight of criminal prosecutions brought in

      the name of the company. I do not think that I appreciated that the company

      itself brought private prosecutions.
                                    Page 19 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




6.2. Oversight of civil litigation brought by or against the company.


50.   My understanding when I joined as Network Director was that the day-to-day

      responsibility for civil litigation was that of the Legal Director (I am not sure if

      that is the correct title) who at the time was Clare Wardle. She reported to the

      RMG GC, who reported to the RMG Board.


6.3. Oversight of the company's IT.


51.   I do not remember clearly but when I joined POL, I have a recollection that IT

      was an expert support function, reporting to the Operations Director. I think that

      the POL Operations Director, with responsibility for IT, reported to Alan Cook,

      MD of POL and also to the RMG CIO.


6.4. Oversight of any accounting system the company used to collate individual

transactions, cash and stock declarations etc. used for the purposes of

preparing management and statutory accounts.


52.   The Finance Director and Operations Director had oversight of different

      aspects of the accounting system used by the company to collate individual

      transactions etc. used for preparing management and statutory accounts.


53.   This work had to be overseen by qualified accounting individuals internally and

      independently assured by external auditors.


54.   Where auditors raised issues, the POL Board (usually via the Audit, Risk and

      Compliance ("ARC") Committee) was responsible for ensuring that those

      issues were addressed. The POL Board had further responsibilities to assure

      itself of the objectivity of the executives preparing the accounts and would meet


                                    Page 20 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      separately (i.e. without the CFO, Financial Controller, CEO) with the Audit

      Partner.


6.5. Oversight of the company's compliance with the Race Relations Act 1978

and/ or the Equality Act 2010


55.   I do not recall, whilst I was Network Director, being involved in any discussion

      of either of these Acts of Parliament or of POL's need to comply. Responsibility

      for compliance with those statutory obligations rested with the MD and HRD of

      POL. Oversight of the company's compliance rested with the POL Board and

      ultimately the RMH Board.


7. Please summarise the corporate structure of POL in relation to the Royal Mail

and any other parent or associated company.


56.   The corporate structure as between POL, RMG, and HMG was complicated

      and went through various iterations whilst I was employed by POL. I

      understand that this question relates solely to the time when I was Network

      Director, between 2007 and the end of March 2010. I will attempt to summarise

      the corporate structure at that time insofar as I can recall it. The corporate

      structure changed both pre and post separation.


57.   The first iteration: from 2007 to (I believe) October 2009, my recollection is that

      POL had its own Board, chaired by a senior NED appointed by RMG. I do not

      remember all of the POL Board members but the RMG CFO was one. I think

      that the POL MD sat on either the RMG Board or RMH Board (I cannot recall

      which) and reported on POL matters. A number of POL Directors reported to

      the POL MD and, I believe, to RMG Functional Directors: Finance, Legal,

                                    Page 21 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      Operations (IT, Security, Estates), the Company Secretary ("CoSec") and HR.

      In my recollection, the RMG Risk & Compliance ("R&C") Director chaired the

      POL Risk and Compliance Committee ("RCC"). I do not recall the other

      committees.


58.   The second iteration: from October 2009 until I left my role as Network Director

      in March 2010, I recall the corporate structure changing. The POL Board stood

      down a small number of Directors, including myself, around this time. I believe

      the remaining POL Board NEDs met with the POL MD and CFO twice yearly

      to fulfil the governance requirement to sign off the annual and half-yearly

      accounts. As I recall it, post separation, POL set up an entirely new governance

      structure, working towards the standards expected by the corporate code

      (which had not yet been fully embraced by all HMG ALB Boards, as I describe

      above). In addition, a full suite of Board committees was stood up and a

      Company Secretariat was put in place.


59.   Although I am confident that structural changes were made at this time, it has

      proved impossible for me to recall the specific facts and extent of these after

      so long. I would expect POL's corporate structure throughout this period to be

      recorded in contemporaneous documents, but I have not been able to locate

      this from the disclosure provided to date. However, should the Inquiry identify

      any documents which shed light on this issue I would be very happy to consider

      and comment on the same.


60.   In respect of associated companies, POL's corporate and governance

      structure was shaped by the following:


      a.   The partnership with BOI for the provision of travel money and financial
                                   Page 22 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           services was governed by two joint boards which had reporting lines to the

           POL Board and the Board of BOI. The POL MD / CEO and two Directors

           (Network / Retail Director and Financial Services ("FS") Director) were

           Directors on the two joint boards. At a later stage, perhaps 2014, a POL

           NED experienced in FS chaired a FS Committee as further oversight to the

           PO Board.


      b.   Post Office Management Services ("POMS"), the Post Office provider of

           motor and home insurance services sold through Post Offices and online

           was originally set up for POL by BOI, and then bought out and run

           independently by POL.


      c.   Post Office acquired Payzone Ltd in approximately 2017/18 and continued

           to run it separately, as a subsidiary company. I cannot recall if the name

           changed post-acquisition.


      d.   Additionally, Post Office was joint owner of The British Postal Museum and

           Archive ("BPMA") and was involved in the refunding and rebuilding of the

           facility. A Post Office Director sat on the BPMA board.


61.   Additionally, further scrutiny was applied from the following stakeholder

      companies: the NFSP, the Communications Workers Union and the

      Communication Managers Association (CMA / Unite). The Chairs met with the

      respective    General   Secretaries    separately,   the   CEO   had   regular,

      approximately quarterly, two-way update meetings and sometimes more

      frequently if matters required. Other senior managers in HR, Finance and Retail

      met with the General Secretaries and their teams more frequently. Additionally,

      all POL colleagues from the Chairs down were available at short notice for
                                    Page 23 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      many ad-hoe meetings. Other stakeholder companies included Postwatch /

      Postcom I Ofcom, Consumer Focus, Which, Citizens' Advice.


8. Please summarise how the POL Board operated when you joined the

company as Network Director.


62.   I cannot recall exactly how POL's Board operated when I joined as Network

      Director. Alan Cook who was MD when I joined as Network Director will be in

      a better position to answer these points in more detail. I will do my best to

      answer, however, there has been limited disclosure of relevant documents

      from this period (for example, a number of POL Board meeting minutes/ packs

      from the period appear to be missing). Three POL Board relevant minutes have

      been disclosed:


            a.   POL Board minutes from a meeting on 21             January 2008

                 (POL00021496);


            b.   POL Board minutes from a meeting on 20 October 2008

                 (POL00021497). These minutes are headed "POLB(08)5th ", which

                 shows there had already been four other POL Board meetings that

                 year; and


            c.   POL Board minutes from a meeting on 19 January 2009

                 (POL00021498).


8.1. How often the Board met.


63.   I have deduced that the POL Board met on the following occasions, based on

      the three POL Board minutes that have been disclosed, references to other


                                  Page 24 of 861
                                                                                             WITN01020100




      meetings       within   those   minutes   and      the   fact   that   the   heading   on

      (POL00021497) (minutes from 20 October 2008) refers to four prior meetings

      that year:


                a.   21 January 2008;


                b.   17 March 2008;


                c.   Meetings on two unknown dates in-between 17 March 2008 and 20

                     October 2008;


                d.   20 October 2008;


                e.   19 January 2009; and


           f.        20 April 2009.


64.   These dates suggest that the POL Board met every two to three months in

      2008. My recollection is that it did not meet more often than that, but I cannot

      be sure.


8.2. The leadership style.


65.   Although my memory of this specific period is imperfect, I believe that the POL

      Board and its Chairman, Sir Mike Hodgkinson, relied heavily on the MD, Alan

      Cook, who was moving POL into a more commercial space. Sir Mike

      Hodgkinson, and the POL Board more widely, did not get involved with day-to-

      day operational decision-making.


66.   My recollection from when I was Network Director is that the POL Board

      operated in a light touch way. The primary board was the RMG Board, to which

                                        Page 25 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           POL matters were reported by Alan Cook. Alan, who was MD for most of my

           tenure as Network Director, was dynamic and hands on as MD. I recall that he

           was very charismatic.


8.3. Who determined the agenda of the meetings.


67.        My recollection is that the POL Board's agenda would be set jointly by RMG,

           POL's MD and the CFO.


8.4. Who regularly attended the Board meetings (including from any Royal Mail

company).


68.        I regularly attended POL Board meetings at this time in my capacity as Network

           Director. In addition, the POL Board minutes referred to above show that the

           following individuals regularly attended POL Board meetings:


      a.        MD: Alan Cook;


      b.        Finance Director: Peter Corbett;


      c.        Operations Director: Ric Francis/ Mike Young;


      d.        Sales Director: David Glynn;


      e.        Marketing Director: Gary Hockey-Morley;


      f.        P&OD / HR Director: Deborah Moore;


      g.        Strategy Director: Sue Whalley;


      h.        Head of POL Legal: Clare Wardle;


      i.        Head of Accounting: Neil Owen;
                                       Page 26 of 861
                                                                                            WITN01020100




      j.        Head of Strategy Planning: Simon Whale; and


      k.        Chairman of RMH Allan Leighton (although he provided his apologies on

                the three occasions for which we have minutes. He did so on a number

                of occasions).


69.        I remember that individuals from the RMG, such as the CEO, CFO, GC I other

           legal directors, would sometimes attend. I also recall that other RMG Directors,

           particularly HR, Estates and Security, would also attend but only infrequently.


8.5. The POL Board's subcommittees, their membership and their terms of

reference.


70.        I have little recollection of what sub-committees existed at this specific point in

           time, although a number of sub-committees were created in subsequent years.


71.        As Network Director I attended the Risk and Compliance Committee. This is

           reflected in three documents relating to the Risk and Compliance Committee

           that have been disclosed, at the time of writing. The first is (POL00021422),

           the Risk and Compliance Committee minutes from 26 March 2008. This shows

           that, other than myself, the following individuals also attended the meeting (with

           their job titles inserted from the documents / my memory where possible):


                  a.   Peter Corbett (Chair and Finance Director);


                  b.   John Scott (Head of Security);


                  c.   Lynn Hobbs (General Manager, Network);


                  d.   Keith Woollard (Head of Compliance);


                                         Page 27 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




             e.   Shaun Delaney;


             f.   Luke March (Compliance Director at RMG);


             g.   David Pardoe (Secretariat);


             h.   Alan Cook (MD) - apologies;


             i.   Kevin Fairbotham - apologies; and


             j.   Martin Ferlinc - apologies.


72.   The second document that has been disclosed to date is (RMG00000074), a

      briefing paper dated November 2008 provided by Peter Corbett, Finance

      Director, ahead of a committee meeting that month.


73.   The third disclosed document is (POl00031322), a Risk and Compliance

      Committee Report dated June 2009. The Committee members listed, other

      than myself, are:


             a.   Luke March (Chair);


             b.   Alan Cook (MD); and


             c.   Gary Hockey-Morley (Marketing Director).


74.   Other attendees at the meeting, which are recorded as the leads on reporting,

      are listed as follows:


             a.   John Scott (Head of Security);


             b.   Peter Tansley (Internal Audit & Risk Management);


                                    Page 28 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




            c.   Keith Woollard (Head of Compliance);


            d.   Lynn Hobbs (General Manager, Network);


            e.   Andrew Spice (Head of Financial Services); and


              f. Kiron Farooki (RMG Legal).


75.   Having reminded myself of the documents, I now recall that the Risk and

      Compliance Committee was attended by a range of people including the MD,

      Marketing Director, Head of Security, General Manager of Network etc and

      other people less regularly.


76.   I have not seen any terms of reference for the Risk and Compliance Committee

      for the relevant period. However, (POL00000168) shows the Committee's

      terms of reference as approved in July 2016. In addition, at page 120 of

      (POL00026973), a noting paperfrom the Committee dated 10 November 2014,

      states that the terms of reference in force at that time required the Committee

      to review and update its terms of reference annually.


8.6. What reports would be regularly submitted to such meetings and by whom.


77.   The POL Board documents referred to above show that the following reports

      were submitted to the meeting on 21 January 2008:


            a.   A status report on actions from the previous meeting;


            b.   A finance functional report;


            c.   A network functional report;


            d.   A sales report; and
                                     Page 29 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




             e.   A strategy report.


78.    The above documents also show the following reports were submitted to the

       meeting on 20 October 2008:


             a.   A status report on action from the previous meeting;


             b.   A finance functional report;


             c.   A network functional report;


             d.   A marketing functional report;


             e.   A sales report;


             f.   An operations report;


             g.   AHR report; and


             h.   A strategy report.


79.    The same documents show that the following reports were submitted to the

       POL Board meeting on 19 January 2009:


      a.    A status report;


      b.    A finance functional report;


      c.    A network functional report, which is at (POL00095532);


      d.    A marketing functional report;


      e.    A sales report;



                                       Page 30 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




      f.        An operations report;


      g.        AHR report; and


      h.        A strategy report.


80.        It follows that the same kind of reports would regularly be submitted to POL

           Board meetings, as listed above. They would be written by senior managers in

           the relevant functional teams and submitted by the functional directors.


8.7. The level of technical IT expertise of those attending the Board.


81.        As set out in paragraph 35 above, I cannot recall the level of technical expertise

           of those attending the POL Board.


8.8. If any members of the executive management team did not attend POL

Board meetings, how those persons would report to the POL Board.


82.        My memory is that if Executive Team members did not attend POL Board

           meetings, they would report to the POL Board via the MD. Such individuals

           also attended POL Board meetings in-person when they were invited to do so.


9. Please describe any material change to the corporate structure of POL or the

operation of its Board at the appropriate point in your witness statement.


83.        In line with the Inquiry's request,   have set out my recollection of material

           changes to POL's corporate structure or to the operations of POL's Board

           within the appropriate sections of my statement. In doing so, I have relied

           heavily on documents disclosed by the Inquiry to aid my recollection, especially




                                         Page 31 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      since there were numerous operational changes during my 12-year period of

      employment by POL.


10. Did you consider POL's corporate governance to be effective when you

joined the company? If your view changed at any time, please set this out in

your witness statement.


84.   As set out above, I joined POL as Network Director in January 2007. As well

      as being on the POL Board (POL00021496) I was part of the Executive Team

      (POL00043805) and I also sat on the Risk & Compliance Committee

      (POL00021422).


85.   Prior to June 2009, POL's Risk & Compliance Committee (RCC) was chaired

      by the POL Finance Director, Peter Corbett. The RCC meeting on 26 March

      2008 (POL00021422) was attended by others including John Scott, Lynn

      Hobbs, Keith Woollard, Shaun Delaney, and Martin Ferlinc. I see from

      (POL00031322) that in June 2009, it was chaired by Luke March, the RMG

      RCC Director. I believe post-separation it was chaired by the POL GC. Other

      RCC members were Alan Cook, Luke March, the RMG RCC Director (initially

      as member before becoming Chair); Network Director (myself and later Kevin

      Gilliland) and David Pardoe provided the Secretariat. As regulation increased

      in respect of FS compliance, I see that the Head of Financial Services, Andrew

      Spice, was also an attendee at the meeting in June 2009; that remained the

      case. Other POL Executive Directors attended when issues arose relating to

      regulation or compliance in their functional areas e.g. Sales/Financial Services;

      mails regulation.    These meetings addressed risk exposure across the

      business, with a particular focus on areas affected by regulation and

                                   Page 32 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      compliance, and although I did not recall this, I see from the minutes that the

      Head of Risk and Finance Director discussed the losses report at this meeting,

      with a request to set up controls over Crown losses and classification of agents'

      losses.


86.   In terms of the effectiveness of POL's corporate governance in 2007 (i.e. the

      effectiveness of accountability, transparency, fairness and responsibility), I set

      out below my recollection of the way in which POL managed risks, whether

      Board composition was balanced, whether (and, if so, how) Board members

      were      regularly   evaluated   and,   whether directors   and   auditors were

      independent. I understand from my lawyers that (at the time of drafting) there

      has been very limited disclosure of POL's governance documents relating to

      the period when I joined POL as ND, so the detail below is largely based on

      my memory, and it may be that I have misremembered or forgotten certain

      details, given the passage of time and the (current) absence of relevant POL

      Board and other minutes relating to governance issues from the 2007 period.


             a.     Risk management: As the RCC minutes indicate, POL followed a

                   standard approach to risk management. I would not, at the time that

                    I was Network Director, have been able to evaluate how satisfactory

                   that approach was.


             b.     Board composition: It is difficult to comment with any thoroughness

                   as I am unsure of my memory on the POL Board composition.


             c.     Board evaluation: I do not recall a POL Board evaluation taking

                   place before separation.


                                        Page 33 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




            d.     Independence of directors and auditors: At that time, I do not recall

                   considering one way or the other whether the NEDs were sufficiently

                   independent from the POL Executive. Looking back now, there were

                   no independent directors on the POL Board during the time I was

                   Network Director, as even the NEDs came from RMG. In hindsight

                   I can see this was not effective governance.


87.   POL's approach to governance changed considerably post-separation. I

      address the changes and their effectiveness at the relevant points in my

      statement.


11. Please summarise the nature and extent of any reporting lines between (a)

the POL executive management team or (b) the POL Board and the following:


11.1 Royal Mail; and


11.2 the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform and/or

Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (or the relevant department).


Executive Management Team and POL Board reporting lines to Royal Mail


88.   During the period that I was Network Director of POL, I was a member of the

      Executive      Team     (POL00043805).          The   2009   POL     organogram

      (POL00043805), shows that the other Executive Team members at this time

      included:


            a.     Gary Hockey-Morley, Marketing Director;


            b.     Mike Young, Operations Director;



                                     Page 34 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




            c.   David Glynn, Sales Director;


            d.   Debbie Moore, HR Director;


            e.   Peter Corbett, Finance Director; and


            f.   Sue Whalley, Strategy Director.


89.   I was also a member of the POL Board from the time that I joined as Network

      Director until it was disbanded in October 2009. From the POL Board Minutes

      of 19 January 2009 (POL00021498) I can see that the POL Board members

      and the Executive Team members were the same people.


90.   The Executive Team members reported directly to POL's MD, Alan Cook.

      Equally, the POL Board also reported to Alan.


91.   Alan was the only member of the POL Executive Team and POL Board to

      attend RMH pie Board meetings. From memory, at the time that I joined POL

      as Network Director in 2007, Alan would report on POL matters directly to

      Adam Crozier, the RMH pie Group Chief Executive, as well as more widely to

      the RMH pie Board; see for example Alan's February 2007 update to the RMH

      pie Board at RMH07/23 paragraph (k) (RMG00000029).


92.   Although he was POL MD, Alan was also the only POL Board/ Executive Team

      member to sit on the RMH pie Board. I recall that from time to time, other POL

      Directors were called to the RMH pie Board or to RMH pie Board Sub-

      Committee meetings to provide updates when required.


93.   Without sight of relevant Board minutes, I do not know how often Alan attended

      RMH pie Board meetings, but I believe he would have had reviews with the
                                  Page 35 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      RMH pie Board during the 2007 to 2010 period that I was Network Director. I

      believe there were also additional reporting lines between the POL and RMH

      pie Boards, but I do not think I was ever aware of the formalities surrounding

      this.


94.   Although the Executive Team and Board members were the same people, at

      this time, they were still regarded as separate bodies and they met separately.

      The POL Board used to meet from a formal governance point of view, until it

      was disbanded later that year. I appreciate that, from a governance

      perspective, the effect was that there was no independent oversight of the POL

      Executive Team by the POL Board. The fact that there were no longer any

      RMH pie NEDs or Executives in regular attendance at POL Board meetings

      may have contributed to the POL Board eventually being disbanded, but I was

      not involved in discussions relating to the decision to disband the POL Board.


Executive Management Team and POL Board reporting lines to the Department

for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform and / or Department for

Business, Innovation and Skills (or the relevant department).


95.   I recall that that there was a regular, reporting structure between the POL Board

      and BERR (Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform)/ BIS

      (Department for Business, Innovation and Skills), which I generally attended

      together with other POL Board directors.


96.   I believe there were also occasional meetings between the POL Executive

      Team I Board members and the relevant government minister responsible for

      oversight of POL, but I do not remember how often these meetings took place

      or who attended them.
                                   Page 36 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




97.    I think there may also have been infrequent meetings between POL and the

       Secretary of State but again, I do not know how often these meetings took

       place, nor do I know who attended them.


98.    For the period that I was POL's Network Director, I believe the POL Executive

       Team I Board's reporting lines to BERR / BIS were through POL's MD, Alan

       Cook. Alan sat on and reported to RMH pie's Chief Executive, and I believe the

       RMH pie Chief Executive and Board members would have reported directly to

       BERR / BIS.


99.    I recall that certain POL Board directors, as leads for specialist areas such as

       HR, IT, Legal and Finance, had a dual reporting line to the POL MD, and also

       to their respective RMH pie Board directors.


100.   As far as I can recall there were no BERR / BIS representatives on the POL

       Board when I was Network Director. I believe that was a shortcoming and when

       I became Chief Executive of POL in 2012, this changed, and a shareholder

       representative then also attended POL Board meetings, which I welcomed.


12 Why did you, Michael Young, David Glynn, Gary Hockey-Morley and Deborah

Moore resign as directors of POL on 31 October 2009? Further, please explain

the following:


12.1. any changes that were made to POL corporate governance at this time:

and




                                    Page 37 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




12.2. how your day-to-day role changed.


101.   I have not been able to locate within the Inquiry's disclosure a copy of my 2009

       resignation, nor copies of the resignations for Mike, David, Gary or Debbie. Nor

       have I been able to find in the RMH pie or POL Board minutes currently

       available on Relativity any reference which explains why we were required to

       resign.


102.   My only memory on this is that I think we were asked to resign from the POL

       Board by Alan Cook. I believe Alan explained that we were being asked to

       resign to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort with the work that the RMH

       pie Board was already conducting.


103.   My day-to-day role did not change after I resigned from the POL Board. Even

       though I was no longer an executive director of the POL Board, my title

       remained 'Network Director' and then 'Network and Sales Director'. I performed

       the same role in relation to Network activities until I became POL's Chief

       Operating Officer in April 2010.


Knowledge of Horizon


13. What knowledge did you have of the Horizon IT System when you started as

Network Director? In particular, please address the following:


13.1. Please describe whether you were aware of either (a) bugs, errors or

defects in the Horizon IT system ("BEDs") (b) a lack of integrity in the same or

(c) complaints addressing BEDs or concerns with integrity.


13.2. Please describe any training provided to you in respect of the same.

                                    Page 38 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




13.3. Please set out what steps you took. if any. to increase your knowledge of

the Horizon IT System at the appropriate point of your witness statement.


104.   I had no knowledge of the Horizon system when I joined POL. I had not heard

       of any problems with the system before I joined, nor was I briefed on any during

       my induction. No-one at POL told me that there were bugs, errors or defects

       ("BEDs"), or that the system lacked integrity, or that there had been allegations

       or concerns about BEDs or system integrity.


105.   As far as I can recall, my induction process as Network Director did not include

       any specific briefings or presentations about Horizon. I spent time with my

       executive colleagues discussing their roles, reporting lines, current issues, and

       agendas. We discussed how their function and the Network function needed to

       work together. Although I do not recall the meeting, I will have met with the then

       Operations Director, Ric Francis, who had responsibility for IT provision,

       including Horizon as well as other areas of importance to the retail network, for

       example cash distribution to branches and retail security.


106.   I spoke to the senior Network managers who reported to me directly (Lynn

       Hobbs, Sue Huggins, Richard Barker, Adele Henderson and Kevin Gilliland)

       and spent time with their teams to understand their functions, objectives, and

       workloads. I also visited many Post Offices to understand the diverse nature of

       the retail network, and the challenges facing SPMs and Crown colleagues

       working in branches of different sizes and in very different community contexts.

       These branches were chosen by the Network field teams and selected across

       the UK, to make sure I was given as wide as possible an understanding of Post

       Offices.

                                     Page 39 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




107.   Senior managers were expected to work in Crown Offices over the Christmas

       period to help with the seasonal surge in business. We therefore had an annual

       training session in the run-up to Christmas on how to operate a Horizon

       terminal. From recollection, it was basic training to enable us to make sales of

       the most common products, such as stamps. The training did not cover

       accounting or any technical IT issues. If I was working in a branch and had a

       query, or a customer presented with a more complex transaction, I deferred to

       one of the Crown staff members for help.


108.   I recall some basic counter terminal training before the first Christmas after I

       joined. I sat in on some classroom training, which could have been for new

       colleagues and / or the introduction of new products. I cannot recall specifically

       but I have a vague memory of requesting a demonstration on HNGx as I

       remember it covered the improved (i.e. reduced) screens for mails products.

       Although my roles (Network Director, COO, MD and CEO) did not allow for

       detailed familiarisation, whenever I could, I would take the opportunities above,

       and not infrequently I would request meetings in what was known as the model

       office, so that I could keep up to speed with Horizon developments.


14. Please consider POL00090428 and FUJ00118186.


14.1. Please set out the detail of any briefing you received on contract between

POL and Fujitsu relating to Horizon.


14.2. Please consider page 23 of POL00090428. During your employment with

POL, were you aware that the Second Supplemental Agreement between POL

and Fuiitsu provided that Cash Account Discrepancies across the TIP Interface

were not to exceed 0.6% between 3 October 1999 and 14 January 2000
                                     Page 40 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




otherwise POL would be entitled to postpone the resumption of the Horizon IT

System?


14.3. Please consider clause 5.3 of the Third Supplemental Agreement

(FUJ00118186). During your employment with POL, were you aware of this

clause?


14.4. lfthe Horizon IT System was allowed an error rate of 0.5% in respect of the

preparation of cash accounts, would you consider that to be robust?


109.   I was not given any briefing about the contract with Fujitsu or made aware of

       these clauses when I joined POL.


110.   I understand that "robustness" is a technical IT concept. I do not have the

       knowledge or expertise to form a view on whether an error rate of 0.5% is

       indicative of robustness or a lack of robustness.


15. Please set out to what extent the POL Board and / or the executive

management team would, prior to February 2009, discuss (a) the Horizon IT

System (b) the actual or possible existence of BEDs (c) actual or alleged

integrity issues in Horizon or (d) sub-postmasters difficulties in balancing their

branch accounts. Please provide details of any discussions that took place.


16. The Inquiry has heard evidence that employees of POL working at the

operational level were told on occasions, both before and after you ioined as a

Network Director, that there were no systemic issues with the Horizon IT

System or problems with integrity. Were you ever given such a message prior

to February 2009? If so, please set out the following (a) who told you this (b)

what they said and (c) what, if anything, you did to test the accuracy of that
                                    Page 41 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




position.


17. If not addressed above, please provide details of the first time you became

aware of allegations of BEDs or a lack of integrity in the Horizon IT System at

the appropriate point of your witness statement.


111.   I do not recall any discussions by either the POL Board or the Executive

       Management Team of any of these issues prior to February 2009. If any

       concerns about Horizon had been escalated to the POL Board or the Executive

       Management Team between 2007 and February 2009, it would have come to

       us from Ric Francis, David Smith or Mike Young.


112.   I do not remember management being given any particular message about

       Horizon prior to February 2009. This may be because I was not conscious that

       there was any challenge to the system that required a message. I believe the

       first I was aware that anyone was questioning Horizon was after the Computer

       Weekly article on Horizon was published in May 2009 (POL00041564).


113.   I remember the Computer Weekly article because it was mentioned by Mike

       Young at a meeting of the Executive Management Team which I attended. To

       explain, the team met weekly and monthly. Only the monthly meetings were

       minuted. My lawyers have been unable to find a record of the discussion with

       Mike Young in the disclosure provided to date, so it is possible that it occurred

       at a weekly meeting.


114.   Mike told us that that the article was critical of Horizon and had been picked up

       by a Welsh language television station. I remember this reasonably well

       because Mike was dismissive of Computer Weekly. I recall he said it was a

                                    Page 42 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




       trade magazine that did not know what it was talking about in relation to

       Horizon. Mike said he was handling it. I spoke to him about it after the meeting

       because I was still concerned. He assured me that there was nothing wrong

       with the system and that the article was nonsense (or words to that effect).


115.   I now have no memory of reading the Computer Weekly article in 2009,

       although I have read it since. It is likely that it was circulated in media cuttings

       and if it was, I probably would have read it; I do not recall. I was assured by

       Mike, POL's most senior IT manager, that it was no cause for concern and that

       the system was working properly. I have no recollection of Mike taking the

       article to the POL Board, however several members of the Executive Team

       were also on the POL Board.


Prosecutorial function


18. Please set out what you knew of POL's role in prosecuting sub-postmasters

for theft and false accounting when you were appointed to the position of

Network Director.


19. Please describe to what extent the POL Board and the executive

management team would, prior to February 2009, discuss POL's involvement in

prosecuting sub-postmasters. Please provide details of any discussions that

took place.


116.   I did not know that POL brought prosecutions against SPMs when I joined POL.

       I have no recollection of the POL Board or the Executive Management Team

       discussing prosecutions prior to February 2009.




                                     Page 43 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




20. Please describe the functions and responsibilities of the Risk & Compliance

Committee. What was your role in attending its meetings?


117.   The RCC was established before I joined POL. I can see from the minutes of

       the POL Board meeting on 15 December 2004 (POL00021486) that it had

       recently been established. The minutes state that the primary objective of the

       RCC was to ensure that the service and conformance elements of the business

       were working together properly, and that this required co-operation between

       POL's Risk and Control, Network, and Sales and Services functions. The scope

       of the RCC's activities at that stage covered audit, compliance, and legal

       issues, including branch control, Vital Few Controls, (I do not now recall a

       definition of this, but imagine it refers to a risk management approach), audit

       reports, the activities of the Group Audit Committee, anti-money laundering

       measures, and crime and fraud.


118.   My primary role as Network Director was to support the RCC in its objectives

       to achieve the required level of branch conformance to the various regulatory

       and governance processes, to be delivered through the branch network.


119.   As this was the responsibility of Lynn Hobbs as the General Manager of

       Network Operations, I requested her ongoing attendance at the RCC. This was

       approved: I can see from the minutes of the RCC meeting on 26 March 2008

       (POL00021422) that Lynn was to attend future meetings and be copied into

       the RCC's arrangements and meeting papers. My other areas of responsibility

       which came to the RCC from time to time were reporting on Network closures

       and branch responsiveness to financial services rules and regulations (as POL

       increased the number of BOI financial services products that it sold).

                                    Page 44 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




        Additionally, the network was sometimes impacted by reports and issues

        raised by other attendees. Lynn or I was asked to respond and or assist with

        these issues.


21. Please consider POL00021421 (the minutes of the Risk and Compliance

Committee dated 6 September 2006).


21.1. Please describe the role and responsibilities and David Pardoe. Why did

he attend meetings of the Risk & Compliance Committee?


21.2. Please explain what the Committee discussed regarding "Fraud and

control". Did this relate to alleged fraud by SPMs or POL staff when balancing?


21.3. What were the "Investigation Activity" and "Branch Audit Activity"

reports. Please explain the nature and frequency of these updates.


21.4. In respect of the Branch Audit Activity Period 4 Report, please expand on

"The key factor appeared to be the targeting of audit resource on branches that

had not responded to a request to return surplus cash". What, if anything, was

discussed about either (a) the extent of the surplus cash not returned or (b)

whether the surplus was disputed.


21.5.   Please set out the discussion on             "Arrange a presentation     re:

IMPACT/POLFS to Risk & Compliance Committee - what went well and what

could have gone better".


21.6. Please describe the discussion on "Confirm with Head of Security that

appropriate links exists with specialist Police Units on relevant matters".




                                    Page 45 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




120.   I did not attend the RCC meeting on 6 September 2006 because I only joined

       POL in 2007. I recognise the name David Pardoe but cannot recall his roles or

       responsibilities. The minutes of the RCC meeting on 26 March 2008, which I

       did attend, record that David Pardoe provided the RCC secretariat function.


22. Please consider POl00021422 (the minutes of the Risk and Compliance

meeting on 26 March 2006).


22.1. Please describe the role and responsibilities of John Scott. Why did he

attend meetings of the Risk & Compliance Committee?


22.2. Please describe the discussion on "Scope the possibility of splitting the

types of former Sub-postmaster losses to provide greater clarity between fraud

losses and other". What was the purpose and outcome of this?


121.   I believe that this URN (POl00021422) refers to a meeting of the RCC on 26

       March 2008, rather than 2006.


122.   John Scott was Head of Security in 2008. His responsibilities in that role are

       set out in paragraphs 9 to 13 of his first witness statement (WITN08390100). I

       was not the Chair of the RCC, but I assume he attended because of the breadth

       of his role and responsibilities.


123.   I do not now remember the discussion at the RCC meeting on 26 March 2008

       about splitting different types of SPM losses. The summary of action points at

       the start of the minutes indicates that the analysis would be used by the

       Finance function to create a more detailed loss report for greater clarity in

       POL's profit and loss accounts.



                                      Page 46 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




23. Please set out your understanding. at the time you joined POL. of what risks

and/ or compliance issues could arise from POL (a) prosecuting SPMs for theft

and false accounting and (b) pursuing civil litigation against SPMs to recover

alleged shortfalls in branch accounts. Please describe any material changes to

your understanding during the relevant period at the appropriate point of your

witness statement.


24. Please describe what steps you took as a member of the Risk and

Compliance Committee to satisfy yourself that POL acted in compliance with

its legal obligations in bringing prosecutions and civil proceedings against

SPMs.


25. Do you think these steps were adequate and/ or effective? Please provide

reasons for your answer.


124.    When I joined POL, I was not aware of any risk or compliance issues relating

        to prosecutions or civil litigation against SPMs. As Network Director, I had no

        responsibility for prosecutions or litigation, and I have no memory of being

        briefed about them when I took up my role.


125.    I do not remember the RCC reviewing or considering the manner in which POL

        conducted prosecutions and civil litigation against sub-postmasters. It was not

        part of the mandate of the RCC to review legal issues and legal policies. I note

        in paragraph 117 above that in 2004 the RCC amongst other topics considered

        "legal issues" and "crime". This was three years before I joined POL. The type

        of legal issues and crime issues I recall being discussed during my time related

        to, for example: mails security, the Dangerous Goods Act, or armed robberies

        of Post Offices.
                                     Page 47 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




126.   I have recently seen prosecution policies that were in force when I was Network

       Director (POL00030800; POL00030580; POL00030578). They appear to be

       RMG and POL policies. The POL Fraud Investigation and Prosecution Policy

       in force from 4 April 2010 (POL00030580) provides in section 3.15 that criminal

       investigations will be conducted in accordance with the legal powers,

       restrictions and guidelines provided by the government or governed by RMG

       policies. Section 4 provides that decisions to prosecute will be taken by

       nominated representatives of the business, with consideration being given to

       the advice provided by the RMG Criminal Law Team. I was not aware at the

       time that these policies existed.


Computer Weekly


26. Please consider POL00114930 (Email chain ending on 8 May 2009) and

POL00027890 (Letter from Robert Porteus to Alan Cook dated 29 April 2009).


26.1. Please describe how POL handled the information within Ms Thomson and

Brian Binley MP's correspondence, both internally and externally. Please

provide the following details:


26.1.1. Which members of the POL Board and executive management team were

briefed on this correspondence. If not all members, please explain why.


26.1.2. Any views on the correspondence shared by members of the POL Board

or the executive management team.


26.1.3. Who was involved in preparing and signing off the response to this

correspondence. In particular, please address the extent to which, if at all, you

were involved.
                                     Page 48 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




26.1.4. The factors that were considered to be important to POL when

responding to the issues raised.


127.   As far as I can see from the documents, the emails and the letter were not sent

       to me or my personal assistant ("PA") and I have no memory of seeing them,

       or being briefed about them, or discussing them at the time.


27. Please consider POL00041564 (Copy of article in Computer Weekly dated 11

May 2009).


27.1. When did you first become aware of the Computer Weekly Article

published on 11 May 2009?


27.2. What was your initial reaction to the article? Please set out the basis upon

which you agreed or disagreed with the contents of the article.


27.3. Was the article discussed by the POL Board and I or the executive

management team? Please explain what was discussed and with whom.


27.4. What actions did the POL Board or the executive management team take

in response to the article? In particular, please set out the following:


27.4.1. Whether there were any discussions concerning POL's external and I or

internal communication strategy in relation to allegations concerning the

Horizon IT System and, if so, the detail of them.


27.4.2. Whether the nature or extent of the discussions you referred to in

addressing paragraphs O and 19 above changed following the publication of the

Computer Weekly article in 2009.



                                    Page 49 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




128.   Please see my evidence in response to Question 17.


28. Please consider the following BEDs identified by Fraser J in the Horizon

Issues judgment (POL00112816): BED2, Callendar Square / Falkirk Bug, and

please also consider POL00030241,           the    evidence of Gary Blackburn

(WITN04650100) and Shaun Turner (WITN04640100): BED6, Remming Out Bug,

and please also consider FUJ00121071 and the evidence of Gary Blackburn;

BED9, Reversals: BED10, Data Tree Build Failure Discrepancies; BED15,

Phantom Transactions: BED18, Concurrent logins: BED23, Bureau de Change:

BED24, Wrong branch customer change displayed: BED26, TSPC 250 Report:

and BED27: TPS.


28.1. Were you, the Board and/ or senior management aware of some or all of

these BEDs when the Computer Weekly article was published and / or after any

investigatory work that was carried out in order to respond to the same?


28.2. If not, why not?


28.3. If POL carried out any investigation in relation to the integrity of Horizon

in order to respond to the Computer Weekly article, why do you think that it did

not identify all or some of the BEDs?


129.   I did not know about any of these BEDs, because no-one told me about them.

       As I have mentioned, IT was the responsibility of Mike Young, who was

       Operations Director at this time. As Network Director and a member of the

       Executive Team, it is difficult to see how I would have come to know about a

       BED unless it was communicated to me via the IT function. I do not know




                                  Page 50 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




       whether anyone on the POL Board or within senior management knew about

       some of or all of the BEDs in 2009. If they did, they did not tell me about them.


29. Please describe what role you had, if any, in facilitating the move from

Legacy Horizon to Horizon Online.


30. What assurances and checks did the Board and/ or executive management

team conduct to satisfy itself as to the quality of the Horizon Online product?


31. Were you aware of any bugs, errors and defects in Legacy Horizon and/or

Horizon Online during the transition to the new software?


32. Did you consider the transition to Horizon Online to be successful? Please

explain your answer


130.   My role in relation to the migration was to ensure that the Network function

       supported branches in the transition to Horizon Online.


131.   I can see from the Network Function Report for May 2010 that there was a

       focus on migrating cash from the old to the new system, conformance, and

       compliance (POL00039463). The document shows that Network had recruited

       a team of over 300, including volunteer agents to support migration activity. By

       the time of the May 2010 report, the migration team had made over 500 visits

       to branches for pre-migration support. There had been some very positive

       feedback from SPMs. Cash checks had been completed at around 750

       branches and conformance checks at 940 branches. The migration support

       team were going to revisit migrating branches to go through recovery

       information in case of any further issues during the migration process. I would



                                    Page 51 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




       add to the document, that throughout the migration process the Agents'

       Development Team liaised with the NFSP.


132.   I was not personally involved in any management or oversight process of

       checking the new system but although I do not recall, I am sure it will have

       been discussed at the Executive. The Royal Mail Board and the POL Board

       were in effect in May 2010. However, I did not sit on the Board of either at the

       time and therefore I was unaware of any Board level discussions. I was aware

       that there was a bespoke governance framework led by Mike Young and Lesley

       Sewell, to monitor the project and ensure that the product conformed to the

       standards required by the contract. However, I was not involved and did not

       know the details.


133.   I was not made aware of any BEDs in Legacy Horizon or in Horizon Online

       during the transition to Horizon Online. I now know that the BED known as the

       "Payments & Receipts Mismatch" problem was identified in September-

       October 2010. I have been shown (POL00028838) which appears to be a note

       of or for a meeting between POL and Fujitsu in around October 2010 to discuss

       the problem and how it would be rectified. Attendees from POL appear to have

       been Julia Marwood from Network and Rod Ismay from P&BA. I was not told

       about this problem at the time, nor about this meeting. As set out below, I

       believe I was first made aware of the "Payments & Receipts Mismatch" problem

       in May 2013.


134.   I can see from the documents that I knew that branches had encountered

       issues during the migration, principally system outages and migration failures,

       and the migrations were suspended while these issues were resolved. The

                                    Page 52 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




       Network Functional Report refers to the additional support we were providing

       to branches in relation to recovery information. Although I do not now

       remember it, the extract from the Executive Management Team action log at

       (POL00001573) records that Mike Young had briefed the Executive

       Management Team about the current issues with Horizon. The Executive

       Management Team was concerned that success criteria must be in place

       for both the Medium and High-Volume rollouts (e.g. how many clear days

       there should be with no errors occurring before further rollouts). It goes

       on to state that "Mike and Paula                   will discuss further ... with   the

       understanding that the Horizon rolfout is priority and that we must not

       move to high volume roll-out unless we are sure that the system will be

       operational and stable in the network".


135.   The messaging from POL's internal IT function and the team that managed the

       project was that the migration was ultimately a success. It may have taken

       longer than hoped, and clearly there had been problems during the migration,

       but the positives far outweighed the negatives.


136.   (POL00033200) is the POL end of programme report for HNG-X Release 1,

       dated 4 November 2010, which was signed off by Mark Burley and Lesley

       Sewell. I was not a recipient, but some of the themes in the document are

       familiar. I note the following:


       a.   On page 8, it states that Horizon Online will provide significant costs

            savings and that "this is crucial to POL IT achieving the 50% reduction in

            IT costs needed as part of the transformation of the Business".



                                         Page 53 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




b.   On page 9, it states that the programme is projected to be delivered below

     the Business Case baseline costs, and that POL is receiving in excess of

     the Business Case benefits, amounting to 56.1 million in 2009 / 2010 and

     58.6 million in 2010 / 2011 (both figures in excess of targets).


c.   On page 12, the section on "plan slippage" states that, although the

     programme had been delayed, POL had not been financially penalised due

     to the contract protecting the business case benefits regardless of the date

     of delivery. The reasons given for the slippage were: delays in solution

     testing and development; branch router delays impacting the start of

     migration; data centre migration delays; data centre outages leading to the

     suspension of the roll-out.


d.   On Page 24, section 6.2 states that: " ... Programme Management has

     consistently emphasised the importance of delivering a quality product.

     Early indications are that the new system is working well and proving to be

     popular with the Network users. This justifies the delays to product delivery

     encountered."


e.   On page 28, Section 10 states that the design, development, and testing

     of the HNG-X User Interface involved 400 users. Feedback was obtained

     from SPMs and staff. A questionnaire managed by Kendata (an external

     firm) had elicited positive feedback. Further, from the start of the

     programme in 2005, POL conducted monthly interviews with up to 30

     stakeholders (presumably SPMs) to gauge their satisfaction. While the

     number of participants varied from month to month, the overall level of

     satisfaction for the duration of the programme was high.

                              Page 54 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




137.   I cannot say whether I saw this specific document but the overall positive

       message from POL's IT people is one that I recognise from the time.


33. Please describe the process by which you were appointed to the role of

Managing Director of POL.


138.   Although I cannot recall the precise timings, I was considered for the role of

       MD of POL in early 2010 through a process which included competitive

       benchmarking by an external search firm, separate interviews with the RMG

       chairman, the RMG CEO, RMG NEDs, and a day of psychometric testing.


139.   David Smith (then the MD of Parcelforce) and I were the final two candidates

       in the process. On 1 April 2010, David was appointed MD of POL, and I was

       appointed COO. This role was second in the management hierarchy behind

       the MD, but in practice my day-to-day role remained unchanged from my

       previous role of Network Director.


140.   In October 2010, David was appointed RMG Group Commercial Director, a

       role which involved continued oversight of POL. I was promoted to MD of POL

       with effect from 18 October 2010. I continued to report to David until he left the

       Group in approximately June 2011, when I began reporting to the RMG Chief

       Executive, Moya Greene. I reported to Alice Perkins, the POL Chair, from

       approximately November 2011, keeping a line to Moya Greene until RMG and

       POL separated following the privatisation of RMG.


34. What did you consider to be the biggest issues facing POL were when you

were appointed Managing Director?


141.   I considered the biggest issues to be funding, separation and Network
                                     Page 55 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




       transformation.


142.   Funding: POL had been heavily loss-making in recent years and required a

       substantial investment from the UK government in the future of Post Offices.

       This required negotiation with the government and clearance through the EU

       state aid processes.


143.   Separation: This was possibly the biggest issue facing POL when I took over

       as MD. The separation of POL from RMG and its establishment as a fully

       independent business was an enormous and complex exercise. The POL

       Board minutes dated 4 June 2011 (POL00021500), "POLB/1131" refer to a

       document setting out the timeline and milestones for separation.


144.   Network Transformation: The NTP was announced in 2010. The core purpose

       of the NTP was to maintain the size of the POL branch network, to stop branch

       closures, and to improve financial sustainability. The NTP involved a complex

       re-organisation of the Network which continued throughout my time at POL.

       Key elements included the following:


       a.   The conversion of the majority of the Network into two new model Post

            Offices: Post Office Mains and Post Offices Locals. Prior to 2010, most

            sub-Post Offices (i.e. those run by SPMs) provided services from behind

            dedicated screen counters and often on a standalone basis without any

            other retail. Under the two new models, sub-Post Offices would be

            integrated into retail premises such as newsagents, convenience shops,

            and petrol stations. The intention was to increase footfall, increase opening

            hours, and enable costs to be shared between the sub-Post Office and the

            associated retail business. The main difference between the two models
                                     Page 56 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     was that Post Office Mains were busier branches and had separate

     dedicated Post Office counters. At Post Office Locals, Post Office

     transactions were processed by the general retail business staff at a

     combined Post Office-retail counter. Sub-Post Offices which did not

     convert to one of the new models were known as "Community Branches".

     These branches tended to be in more sparsely populated areas, where a

     Main or Local branch would not be commercially viable.


b.   Through the NTP, funding was made available to SPMs to convert to the

     new models. Some SPMs converted their existing premises into the new

     models, others were established in new premises and some chose to take

     a termination payment.


c.   Consumer Focus, which later merged with Citizens Advice, as the statutory

     consumer body, was given the role of reviewing each Post Office change

     under the NTP and recommending steps to mitigate any identified

     consumer detriment.


d.   Another key thread of the NTP was to safeguard the availability of the Post

     Office's services to the community. The government set targets for the

     minimum total number of branches in the Network and distance access

     criteria. In addition, POL sought to extend opening hours and improve

     access for disabled customers.


e.   SPM remuneration was changed so that operators of the new models

     would be moved from a combination of fixed remuneration topped up with

     commission on transactions to a purely commission-based structure.

     Some branches remained on the old contracts for some time - either by
                              Page 57 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           choice or until a replacement branch / SPM was identified.


145.   Market changes: Post Office had to react to the increasing diversity and

       digitalisation of retail and government services, both to meet the needs of

       consumers and to ensure sustainability. Some government services provided

       by POL became available to the public directly online, which eroded sales

       income for SPMs and for POL. POL therefore sought to increase its range of

       services and enhance its own digital offering. One major part of this was a

       partnership with the BOI to locate ATMs in Post Offices and to extend banking

       and financial services products over Post Office counters. This again was a

       complex project, as all branches needed to comply with applicable financial

       services regulations.


146.   IT: A new front and back-end IT strategy to underpin all of the above and which

       replaced or opened up Horizon to enable digital integration for branches and

       customers. The contract with Fujitsu for Horizon was due to expire in 2015 and,

       although I do not recall completely, POL faced a procurement challenge if it

       renewed HNG-X without open tender. From memory, the CIO, backed by the

       GE and Board, was keen to reduce dependency on Fujitsu. Whilst the core

       HNG-X software could (if won in open tender) be kept, it was felt that other

       services provided by Fujitsu should be spread across other suppliers. These

       included engineering, hardware provision, communications network, and

       service integration / service desk. Developing an IT strategy, reviewing

       alternative options and considering migration issues (including ownership and

       transfer of Horizon Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)) were major issues.


147.   Culture change: Whilst culture change was not necessarily one of the biggest

                                    Page 58 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




       issues facing POL when I took over as MD, it was very high up on my personal

       agenda.


148.   Mutualisation: This was a significant additional issue that I dealt with as MD. It

       was agreed as a policy by the coalition government, and POL undertook major

       preparation work on how a mutualised POL would function. This was very

       complex and involved wide consultation with various stakeholder bodies

       involving the creation of a new Stakeholder Forum, and subsequently Post

       Office Advisory Council.


35. What changes, if any, did you make to the corporate governance of POL

upon your appointment as Managing Director?


149.   There will be documentation relating to very significant governance changes

       when I became MD. I had to "stand up" POL as a stand-alone company in

       preparation for separation from RMG. This was in addition to continuing to

       report to the RMH Board until the flotation of RMG. A Chair and four NEDs

       were recruited and appointed - bringing the experience of private and public

       sector companies, Finance & IT, Pensions, FS, Retail & Commercial, PLC

       governance experience and, additionally with NEDs from RMG. A full suite of

       board committees was established (Remuneration Committee, Nominations

       Committee, ARC Committee with additional committees for Pensions and

       Financial Services); each with specific NED and Executive membership and

       ToRs.


36 In respect of your time as Managing Director and Chief Executive of POL,

please address the following at the appropriate point of your witness statement.


                                     Page 59 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




36.1 Whether you thought that there was sufficient IT experience on the Board

and within the wider executive team to enable POL to monitor Horizon

effectively.


       150. I have addressed this question in the appropriate section of my witness

               statement.


36.2 Whether you thought that there was sufficient experience of criminal

investigation and prosecution on the Board and within the wider executive team

to enable them to provide effective oversight of POl's prosecutorial function.


       151. I have addressed this question in the appropriate section of my witness

               statement.


36.3 Whether you felt the various Chairs and NEDs of the Board effectively

understood and challenged you on issues relating to Horizon and POl's

prosecutorial function.


       152. I have addressed these questions in paragraphs 116 to 126 (in respect

               of POL's prosecutorial function) and paragraph 104 to 115 (in respect of

               Horizon) of my statement.


36.4 On reflection, whether you still agree with above


       153. I have addressed this question in the appropriate section of my witness

               statement.


37. Please consider the BEDs set out in paragraph 28 above and those identified

by Fraser J in Horizon Issues (POl00112816): BED1, the Receipts and

Payments Mismatch Bug, and please consider POl00117863; BEDS, the
                                     Page 60 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




Remming In Bug: BED7. the local Suspense Account Issue: BEDS. Recovery

Issues; BED13, Withdrawn Stock Discrepancies; and BED25, lyca top up.


37 .1. Were you, the Board and / or senior management aware of some or all of

these BEDs when you became Managing Director?


      154. I was not aware of any of these BEDs when I became Managing Director.

            I do not know if anyone else in POL's senior management knew about

            some or all of these BEDs. If so, they did not inform me.


37.2. If not, why not?


      155. I was not aware of the BEDs because no-one told me about them. As I

            have previously stated, IT was the responsibility of Mike Young at this

            time. I would not have become aware of any issues with Horizon unless

            they were escalated to me or to POL's senior management level by

            POL's IT function.


37.3. If POL carried out any investigation in relation to the integrity of Horizon

in order to respond to the Computer Weekly article, why do you think that it did

not identify all or some of the BEDs?


      156. I have seen no indication that POL carried out any investigation into the

            integrity of Horizon to respond to the Computer Weekly article.


38. Please consider POL00030217 (Management letter for the year ended 27

March 2011), FUJ00086923 (email from Don Burgess to Bill Membery dated 28

April 2011), FUJ00086922 (Briefing note on Audit findings for Senior

Management), RMG00000005 (minutes of Royal Mail pie Board meeting on 20

                                   Page 61 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




May 2011). POL00021500 (minutes of POL Board on 4 July 2011). POL00095550

(Status Report for Board), POL00030365 (minutes of POL Board on 22

September 2011), POL00021502 (minutes of POL Board on 10 November 2011)

and POL00021431 (minutes of POL Audit. Risk and Compliance Sub-Committee

meeting on 23 May 2012).


38.1. Please describe the background to the Ernst and Young ("EY") 2009/10

audit and your involvement in the same.


38.2. Did you use this briefing note? If so, in what circumstances?


38.3. Did POL employees work with Fujitsu employees to prepare this brief?


38.4. What were your views on EY's findings in relation to the Horizon IT

System, Fujitsu's audit controls and POL's contractual relationship with

Fujitsu. Please describe your understanding of the importance of the audit

controls described and EY's recommendation for SAS70 audit.


38.5. What steps did POL take in response to EY's findings?


38.6. To what extent did cost factor into POL's decision making on this issue?


38.7. Please describe the background and function of the IT Audit & Control

Board. Why was the POL Board not aware of this initiative as at 20 May 2011?


38.8. Please set out what you told the POL Board on 4 July 2011 in respect of

the nature and function of the POL IT Audit and Control Board.


38.9. Please describe your meeting with Duncan Tait and Mike Young on 18

August regarding IT Audit and Control. What was the "Good progress"?


                                 Page 62 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




38.10. Was there any discussion of the "Fujitsu - Viability of introducing a

SAS70 or Equivalent audit report" (POLB(11)55) at the 10 November 2011 Board

meeting? If not, why not?


      157. EY's 2009/2010 audit of the Horizon control environment was performed

           as part of its audit of Royal Mail Group Holdings Pie. An extract from the

           EY Audit Results Report for the year ended 28 March 2010 dealing with

           Horizon is at (POL00030261 ). EY noted that they would normally seek

           to rely on SAS70 audits, which are independent audit reports over the

           control environments of IT suppliers. Because Fujitsu's controls around

           Horizon were bespoke to POL (as the only customer of the system) the

           cost of a SAS70 would have fallen on POL and the costs of Fujitsu

           obtaining a SAS70 audit were prohibitive. Therefore, EY had carried out

           their own independent audit procedures to obtain assurance over the

           control environment at Fujitsu.


      158. EY reported that they had encountered difficulties in performing their

           audit with Fujitsu in 2009 and that the completion of their work in 2010

           was once again delayed by challenges in obtaining audit evidence in a

           complete and timely manner from Fujitsu. EY were unable to identify an

           individual within POL who owned the relationships with outsourced

           providers, and they had required the intervention of senior POL and

           Fujitsu finance staff to obtain the evidence they needed. A new contact

           at Fujitsu had been identified to EY and they hoped to develop this

           relationship so that the 2010/2011 audit could be conducted more

           efficiently.


                                  Page 63 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




159. During the audit, they had observed one issue in relation to the

       revocation of user access. This was quickly remedied by Fujitsu.


160. I am not clear whether I saw the 2008/2009 or 2009/2010 audit results to

       which this document refers. They were the responsibility of the Finance

       and Operations Directors. The audit results were presented to the RMG

       Audit and Risk Committee, which I did not sit on.


161. EY's management letter for the year ended 27 March 2011 is at

       (POL00030217). As the section dealing with IT was long and technical,

       a briefing note on EY's findings was prepared for POL senior

       management (FUJ00086922). I can see from (FUJ00086923) that the

       briefing was emailed by Don Burgess to Bill Membery and Mark Arnold

       on 28 April 2011. Bill Burgess stated that, "following revision with Lesley,

       this has been expanded to provide Paula Venne/ls with enough

       information to handle questions that may arise from RMG regarding the

       audit. to support this more non-technical description and examples have

       been included".


162. The briefing summarised the key EY audit findings as follows:


a.   EY had identified ten issues connected to three main areas: Change

     Management processes and controls; User Access and appropriate

     authorisations; and the extent to which POL required proof of management

     activities from Fujitsu.


b.   EY's key findings were set out in Appendix A. There were four high priority

     issues, three medium priority issues, and three low priority issues.

                                Page 64 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




c.   The summary of EY's recommendations stated that following changes

     during the past year to a shared services environment with other customers

     including Government, actions should be taken to resolve three key areas

     of audit findings.


d.   First, the contract between POL and Fujitsu should clearly state

     expectations and ensure the monitoring of control activities was in place.


e.   Second, Fujitsu was to resolve issues in relation to access around financial

     systems. In particular, they should resolve user or system accounts that

     were inconsistent with the need to segregate duties, and ensure processes

     were in place for regular reviews of access controls and the clean-up of

     access rights due to personnel changes.


f.   Third, Fujitsu should continue to improve the change management process

     by (a) ensuring that process controls were visible to POL; and (b) ensuring

     that approvals were traceable.


163. I am confident that I read the briefing, and it is possible that I asked for it

       to be produced. EY's management letter was a technical document, and

       I would have welcomed and wanted a shorter document to help me

       understand the scope of the issues and the key points. I do not now recall

       if I used it to do anything other than to familiarise myself with the key

       issues arising from the audit. It is unlikely that I would have used it to

       present to RMG, as the RMG Audit and Risk Committee were going to

       be presented with the results. I do not know who produced the briefing,

       but I can see from (FUJ00086923) that Lesley Sewell was involved and

       that it was being discussed between POL and Fujitsu employees. I can
                              Page 65 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




       see from (FUJ00086924) that Fujitsu put in place a formal response

       dated 18 May 2011, with actions and owners to respond to the EY

      findings.


164. The letter to management was discussed at a meeting of RMG's Audit

       and Risk Committee on 20 May 2011 (RMG00000005). Lesley Sewell

       and Mike Young attended for the discussion about the IT audit. The

       minutes of the meeting record that:


a.   Alison Duncan from EY reported that the audit process identified significant

     control weaknesses, which reflected a need for improvement by Fujitsu,

     but also a change in approach by POL to the management of the Fujitsu

     contract. Fujitsu's approach to the audit had resulted in an unduly lengthy,

     unpredictable and inefficient audit.


b.   Mike Young stated that the recent re-negotiation of the contract had offered

     POL significant costs savings, but he accepted that POL had not

     demanded SAS70 audit evidence.


c.   POL had now established an IT Audit and Control Board to manage

     contract governance going forward.


d.   Les Owen noted that the POL Board were not aware of this project and

     asked that in future the POL Board be kept fully up to date on all such

     projects. It was actioned that the POL Board would be updated at its next

     meeting. Les Owen was a NED of RMG, and also sat on the POL Board.


165. There was a meeting of the POL Board on 27 May 2011, which I attended

       (POL00021499). The minutes record that EY had raised concerns about
                               Page 66 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     access controls and POL's oversight and assurance of key activities.

     Lesley Sewell was to advise the Board on steps taken to improve the

     controls. There were two items for noting in relation to this:


   "The board noted that the auditors had raised concerns about the IT

   change management processes, access controls, the Fujitsu managed

   se,vice and POL 's oversight and assurance of key activities. Lesley Sewell

   had been invited to advise the Board on the steps taken to improve the

   controls ...


   ".. .the Board noted that activity had already commenced to remedy the

   issues identified by Ernst & Young, including establishing a POL IT Board.

   The Board agreed that the end result should be that either SAS70 applies,

   or a set of controls be established that E & Y are happy with."


166. In the briefing note to me dated 28 April 2011 (FUJ00086922), there is

     an explanation for why the audit was inefficient and overbudget.

     According to the note, POL and Fujitsu had undertaken significant

     changes to the financial systems environment over the past year. This

     involved the entire counter and branch support environment being

     converted from Legacy Horizon to HNGX along with the consolidation of

     the SAP back-office environment to POLSAP and the provision of

     supporting change management processes and systems within Fujitsu

     to support POL's customer requirements. The note went on to explain

     that the complexity of the POL / Fujitsu environments had required a

     more technical understanding from EY as compared to previous years

     and the utilisation of the shared service approach (i.e. the use of a shared

                             Page 67 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     data centre with other Fujitsu customers) had introduced further

     complexity and difficulty in obtaining audit evidence. The briefing note

     went on to mention that EY had used a new team for the 2011 audit,

     which had no experience of the POL estate.


167. The information I have summarised from the briefing note was also given

     to me, I believe, by Mike Young and Lesley Sewell. It is possible that the

     briefing note was produced because I asked either Mike or Lesley for a

     note because I was not sure I would be able to keep it in my head.


168. Mike Young told me that a number of changes had been made to the

     system and Fujitsu had not got all of the control documentation right, and

     that those matters needed to be improved. He felt that this was not a

     major crisis.


169. I understood that the 2011 EY management letter reported deficiencies

     in controls at Fujitsu which required action by POL and Fujitsu.


170. The POL Board discussed the audit again at its meeting on 4 July 2011,

     which I attended (POl00021500). The minutes of the meeting record the

     following discussions around IT:


   "(h) Technology: Paula Venne/ls confirmed that the new POL IT Audit &

   Control Board would pick up all the issues and actions from the SAS70

   audit and that Ernst & Young were not sitting on the Board. Matthew Lester

   asked if the Audit picked up other systems as well as Horizon. Paula

   Vennefls explained that when the issue came to the last POL Board and

   the RM ARC it referenced other Group systems as well as Horizon ...

                            Page 68 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   (i) Matthew Lester asked that they also pick up the Separation issues for

   technology. Les Owen emphasised that the advantage of asking Fujitsu to

   comply with SA 70 audits meant that we could rely on those reports. The

   Board discussed the best way to engage with Fujitsu. Paula Venne/ls

   explained that she was meeting them and would raise the issue;


   (j) a detailed technology paper to cover these issues to be presented at the

   next POL Board meeting."


171. A POL Board status report dated 4 July 2011 (POl00095550) states that

     I was to engage with Fujitsu regarding compliance with SAS70 audit

     standards. It records that Mike Young and I met Duncan Tait (Fujitsu's

     CEO Europe) on 18 August 2011, and that good progress was made and

     Fujitsu were investigating moving to SAS70. I do not now recall that

     meeting.


172. It also states that a detailed technology paper to cover SAS70 would be

     presented at the next POL Board meeting, which was the September

     2011 meeting. The status update indicates that Mike Young was to

     produce the paper, but I believe that the work was reallocated to Lesley

     Sewell, who was now co-ordinating POL's audit response, although she

     still reported to Mike at this stage. I believe it was Lesley who had the

     idea of setting up what I described at the July POL Board meeting as the

     POL IT Audit & Control Board. I think "steering group" would be a better

     description, as it was not a formal committee or board of the company. I

     can see that it is described in this way at paragraph 3.1               of



                            Page 69 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     (POL00029438), which I believe is the technology paper for the

     September 2011 POL Board meeting referred to in the status update.


173. The technology paper states that the "Audit Steering Group" had now

     met on three occasions. It provided the appropriate level of governance

     and oversight to ensure that audit actions were completed as agreed and

     that there would be alignment of all of POL's compliance audit

     requirements. I do not recall what I told the POL Board about the Steering

     Group at its meeting on 4 July 2011, but I am sure that Lesley would have

     briefed me about it to enable me to describe the purpose and the

     functions of the Steering Group as set out in the technology paper. I

     cannot say why the POL Board was unaware of the existence of the

     Steering Group at the time of the RMG's Audit and Risk Committee

     meeting on 20 May 2011. It is possible, though this is speculation, that

     the establishment of a Steering Group was more of an action point within

     POL IT at that time than something that was already up and running.


174. The technology paper reported, in summary, that:


a. A project team had been established at Fujitsu to manage the

   implementation of EY's recommendations.


b. All of EY's recommendations were being actioned and in some cases were

   already completed. All remaining actions were on track to be completed by

   October 2011. In addition, POL had learned lessons from the audit, and

   were working closely with EY and Fujitsu to put these improvements in

   place ahead of the current year's audit.


                            Page 70 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




c. Group Risk & Audit and Fujitsu were to undertake an independent review

     of the completed actions during October and November to provide

     assurance that all actions had been satisfactorily completed. The key

     review findings would be shared with EY.


d. The Steering Group was continuing to consider adopting SAS70 for future

     audits and had discussed the benefits of adopting this approach with EY

     and Deloitte.


e. There were already commercial discussions taking place with Fujitsu,

     relating to the future of their service contract with POL, when HNGX was

     due for renewal in 2015. The intention was to make clear to Fujitsu that the

     SAS70 audit standards would be necessary for the longer term (i.e. part of

     any tender document and supplier framework model that POL would move

     to).


f.   Furthermore, it would be made clear to Fujitsu that POL had an expectation

     that Fujitsu would move to the standard for the 2012/2013 audit.


g. The summary in paragraph 8 stated: "In summary, we will have enhanced

     controls, governance and a reporting mechanism in place with Fujitsu,

     covering the recommendations made by Fujitsu, by the end of October, with

     an intention to move to SAS70 by the end of 2012 for use as part of the

     12113 audit."


175. The POL Board September 2011 meeting was held on 22 September

        2011 (POL00030365), which I can see was the same day as a meeting

        of the Audit Steering Group (FUJ00086948). The agenda sets out a

                              Page 71 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     Status Update on the 2011 audit findings in the form of a table setting out

     each EY recommendation, the steps that POL and Fujitsu were taking in

     response, and the current status of the workstreams. I do not know who

     created this document. It is unlikely that I saw it at the time as it was

     prepared for the IT Steering Group, of which I was not a member.


176. I can see from the POL Board minutes for the September meeting that

     the IT Audit paper was noted, but Les Owen clarified that the original

     question from RMG Audit and Risk Committee was why Fujitsu had not

     used SAS70 audit standards: it had not suggested that POL should push

     Fujitsu to perform SAS70 audit checks if POL had to pick up the cost.

     Chris Day explained that Fujitsu do not undertake a SAS70 audit, but

     they recognised that customers, including POL, would expect it and that

     POL would be looking to pass the costs on to Fujitsu before going down

     this route. The Chairman (Donald Brydon) suggested that POL should

     align itself with other customers to ensure that Fujitsu appreciated that

     the SAS70 standard was a requirement. Alice Perkins (who had begun

     to attend POL Board meetings as a NED) stressed that the business

     needed to be influenced by the cost in deciding whether to adopt SAS70.

     Further clarification was required, and a noting paper would be submitted

     for the next POL Board meeting. I see the minutes do not list Mike Young,

     Kevin Gilliland and Nick Kennett (all GE Directors) as present or

     attendees of the meeting, however they are all noted in the minutes as

     making comments. It is possible therefore that Mike Young was in the

     room for the IT audit discussion. This must have been a secretariat

     protocol at the time, as the same applies to the minutes of the November

                            Page 72 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




       2011 POL Board meeting, where Nick Kennett and Susan Crichton are

       quoted but not listed as attendees (POL00021502).


177. I can see from the minutes of the POL Board meeting on 10 November

       2011 (POL00021502) that the POL Board received a noting paper on the

       viability of introducing a SAS70 or equivalent audit report. However, there

       is no discussion recorded in the minutes and I do not know whether there

      was any discussion.


178. The audit issues were discussed at the next RMG ARC meeting on 8

       December 2011 (RMG00000003). There were four attendees from POL

       at that meeting: Chris Day (CFO), Lesley Sewell (Head of IT), Rod Ismay

       (Head of P&BA) and Paul Meadows (Head of Risk & Compliance). The

       minutes of the RMG ARC December 2011 meeting record that:


a.   Unlike other RMG suppliers, Fujitsu did not carry out SAS70 audits with the

     consequence that EY were required to perform full testing of all systems

     which were integral to the financial results of the group.


b.   A number of IT control issues were identified during the 2010-2011 audit,

     which were largely centred on Fujitsu. Overall, EY were satisfied that the

     control environment was reliable, but additional work had been required to

     reach this conclusion.


c.   EY's recommendations in their management letter had been implemented.


d.   The control issues identified during the audit did not relate to the integrity

     of the accounting data in the system. Rather, the recommendations



                               Page 73 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




           concerned the documentation and authorisation of changes to systems

           and opportunities for more streamlined assurance processes.


      e.   Fujitsu had now committed to covering the cost of implementing a SAS70

           approach for the 2012-2013 audit. EY would carry out the work. The

           activities completed during the 2011-2012 audit would provide the

           foundation for moving to SAS70 in 2012-2013. EY had ratified the

           approach POL was taking to the current audit year, and planning was

           underway for the 2012-2013 audit.


      179. The minutes do not record who made these statements, but as

            mentioned above, I can see that Lesley Sewell attended the December

            2011 RMG ARC meeting, along with three attendees from EY: Richard

            Wilson, Kath Barlow, and Ben Marie. I am confident that the part of the

            minutes I have outlined above was a summary of a briefing by Lesley

            and EY.


POL Suspense Accounts


39. Please explain the suspense accounts POL operated during your time as

Network Director, Managing Director and Chief Executive.


40. Please explain whether there were ever unexplained or unattributed

surpluses held in that/those suspense account(s) or otherwise. If so, please

explain the nature and frequency of such surpluses.


41. Please explain how you, or POL, satisfied yourself that any such surpluses

were not derived from the recovery of false shortfalls generated by the

Horizon IT System.
                                  Page 74 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




180. I had no understanding of how POL's suspense accounts operated

     during my time as Network Director and MD. If there were any issues or

     questions about the suspense accounts during these periods, I was not

     made aware of them.


181. As far as I can recall, questions about suspense accounts were brought

     to my attention for the first time, certainly at any level of detail, in January

     2015, when I was preparing to give evidence about Horizon and the

     Mediation Scheme to the House of Commons BEIS Select Committee.

     The evidence session was scheduled for 3 February 2015, and the other

     witnesses included the JFSA and Second Sight.


182. The first email to me on this issue that I have seen is an email from

     Belinda Crowe on 20 January 2015 (POL00109892). Belinda stated that

     Second Sight had been pressing for a meeting to discuss "suspense

     accounts" and that "there is something of a history to this matter''. She

     had met Chris Aujard and POL's new CFO, Alisdair Cameron ("Al

     Cameron") and they had agreed that POL would provide written

     information in the next week. This would be followed by a meeting

     between Second Sight and Al Cameron and his team on 2 February

     2015. Belinda asked me to confirm that I was content with this approach.

     She added that this was one of Second Sight's "pet issues" and they

     might raise it with the Select Committee. On the same day, Avene

     O'Farrell replied to Belinda that I was happy with the proposal and

     content with timings if they suited our needs.




                              Page 75 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




183. As I set out in more detail below, by this point in time, relations between

      POL and Second Sight had become strained. I therefore emailed Ron

     Warmington of Second Sight on 28 January 2015 to let him know that

     lines of communication to me were open if Second Sight felt the need to

     speak (POL00109933).


184. Ron replied on 29 January 2015 (POL00109933). He wanted to meet me

     so that Second Sight could provide comments and thoughts on the work

     they had done to date. He set out in his email a list of possible points for

     discussion. These included a "concern about the operation of Post

      Office's Suspense Account and the possibility that Post Office may have

     benefitted from amounts charged to Subpostmasters". At the end of the

     email, Ron stated that he and his colleague Ian Henderson were due to

     meet Al Cameron , on 2 February 2015 to discuss POL's suspense

     account.


185. I can see from (POL00109933) that at 18:09 on 29 January 2015, my

     executive assistant, Avene O'Farrell, forwarded Ron's email to a group

     with in POL, with a message that I had not yet seen and inviting views on

     how to respond. I cannot see from the version of the email which the

      Inquiry has disclosed who Avene sent the message to, but I assume it

     was the same group I emailed in the same thread later that day at 19:44.


186. Al responded at 18:18 on 29 January 2015 (POL00109933). He thought

     that POL must listen to what Second Sight had to say, but also

     emphasise to Second Sight that POL was keen to see any evidence they

     had to support their concerns. He felt that if I did meet Second Sight on

                             Page 76 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     2 February 2015, it might make them feel they could be more explicit

     during the Select Committee hearing the following day. In his view,

     although either route could backfire, he was inclined to offer them dates

     for a meeting with me later that week.


187. At 19:44 on 29 January 2015, I emailed Al and cc'd several POL

     managers (POL00109933). Since I was to be out of the office for two

     days on leave with a longstanding personal engagement, it was

     impossible for me to meet Second Sight on 2 February 2015. However,

     I was happy to meet them at a convenient time, with an agenda and

     topics for discussion. I asked Al to let me know how his meeting with

     Second Sight went.


188. Al replied to me at 11 :28 on 30 January 2015, stating that he would drop

     Angela    Van    Den   Bogerd   and     me a note    after the   meeting

     (POL00109933). My lawyers have been unable to find this note if Al

     produced it. He added that his "general policy is to be helpfully non-

     committal, as the new boy, so I don't make things any harder for you on

     Tuesday either by inadvertently setting hares running or by appearing to

     stall". I do not remember speaking to Al about his meeting with Second

     Sight at the time. It is possible that what Al meant by his email was that

     he would tell Second Sight that he would look into whatever their

     concerns were.


189. On 30 January 2015 at 12:09, I emailed Al alone. As I say above, I told

     him that we needed to speak about the suspense account question

     before Tuesday, as it was likely to come up in the Select Committee

                            Page 77 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




       hearing if questions were planted (POL00109933). One of Second

       Sight's concerns was about suspense accounts, so it would have been

       unprofessional, in my view, not to have at least enquired as to the issues

       involved. At 15:01 on the same day, Avene informed me by email that Al

       was available to speak by telephone after 18:30 on 2 February 2015 or

       from the early morning onwards on 3 February 2015.


190. At around the same time as my emails with Al and Avene on 30 January

       2015, I was involved in a separate email chain with Mark Davies and

       others about the briefing materials for the Select Committee evidence

       session (POL00117080). On 30 January 2015 at 12:35, Mark updated

       me that he and his team were finalising my briefing. He aimed to finish

       by 3pm that day and offered to get the train to deliver a copy in person. I

       replied at 12:39 stating that I had briefed Gavin Lambert on a couple of

       areas where I felt "unsighted''. Gavin set these out in an email to Mark at

       13:06 on 30 January 2015 (POL00117080). They included:


   "Suspense accounts-


   -    what's the issue


   -    what to say/not to say


   - if we've found something - flag ongoing work


   - if not, let's rule it out"


191.   On 2 February 2015 at 17:54pm, Jane Hill (POL Head of Public Affairs)

       sent   me   an      email     attaching      "two   final   briefing   documents"


                                   Page 78 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     (POL00117096). She described one of the documents (POL00117097)

     as an addendum to the briefing pack, and stated that it included POL's

     position on claims, suspense accounts, Second Sight's information

     requests, and remote access. It stated in relation to suspense accounts:


    "A suspense account is part of standard accounting practice. It is a place

   in the books of an organization in which items are entered temporarily

   before allocation to the correct or final account.


    If money is not attributed after three years, it is taken to P&L.


    We do not put anything in the suspense account until we have

   thoroughly investigated and ascertained that it does not belong to a

   subpostmaster.


    The funds in a suspense account represent a tiny fraction of the

   transactions that take place in Post Office branch.


    SS have requested information about our suspense account. We have

   agreed a process for sharing information in a way relevant to individual

   cases, and manageable - given the complexity and volume of information."


192. I spoke to Al about the suspense account issue more than once, but I

     cannot recall when this happened. The first conversation must have

     occurred after my email to Mark Davies at 12:39 on 30 January 2015

     (POL00117080) because I indicated in that email that I felt "unsighted''

     on the suspense account issue. It is possible that I spoke to Al around

     this time. I remember needing a second conversation with Al at, I believe,

     a later point. For reasons which I do not recall, neither Al nor his team
                             Page 79 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




     had finished looking into Second Sight's queries. He apologised and said

     he would do so. There was a further conversation, which I remember

     reassured me that he had resolved the issue. It is possible that the

     second conversation related to a meeting between Second Sight and

     POL on 4 March 2015. The note of the meeting (POL00063428) records

     that "It was agreed that the suspense accounts item had been dealt with

     at the proceeding meeting with Alisdair Cameron which Jane McLeod

     had also attended."


193. At some stage, I remember Al explaining to me that Second Sight had

     misunderstood the nature of the POL suspense account. It held client

     money (e.g. DWP, DVLA, NS&I, and Santander) where reconciliations

     were outstanding, and the account was reviewed as part of the annual

     ARA audit. I can see from (POL00102388) that, on 10 April 2015, Mark

     emailed Al (cc Jane Macleod and Neil Hayward) about Second Sight's

     Part 2 Report. Mark stated that the report claimed that POL was

     potentially profiting through money in suspense accounts that could be

     due to postmasters. Al copied me into his reply to Mark:


   "Thanks, hugely frustrating that they have misunderstood (wilfully?) what

   we have told them. I gave Mark and the team some rebuttal words

   yesterday, being the balances of 96m and 66m were routine trading

   balances yet to be settled with the organisation at that particular month

   end. In other words, they represent amounts due not amounts that are

   unreconciled. This description is therefore misleading. As previously

   reported to SS, the statistic that gives genuine comfort is that neither


                           Page 80 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




         account had any unreconciled balances which were over six months old. If

         the client accounts were being operated as an alternative suspense

         account, this would not be the case. Taking this with the work previously

         shared on the suspense account, we can see no evidence for any ongoing

         concern."


      194. Whilst I do not remember the full details today, I remember that I

           accepted Al's explanation.


Shoosmiths litigation


42. Please consider POL00107689 (letter of claim dated 23 August 2011 ),

POL00107695 (note of conference with Richard Morgan KC on 26 October 2011 ),

POL00021503    (minutes    of POL       Board   meeting   of 21   January 2012),

UKGI00016088 (minutes of POL Board meeting of 15 March 2012), POL00096033

(POLB(12)42) and POL00058211 (a briefing note on the current status of claims

involving Horizon):


42.1 When was the first time you became aware of Shoosmiths intimating civil

proceedings against POL concerning deficiencies in the Horizon IT System?


      195. I do not know when I first became aware that Shoosmiths were intimating

           civil proceedings against POL in connection with Horizon. On 4 February

           2011, Mike Granville emailed me a letter from POL's solicitors, CMS

           Cameron McKenna, to the BBC in connection with a proposed broadcast

           in the BBC Inside Out (South) series about Horizon, which was

           scheduled for 7 February 2011 (POL00120458). The letter states that the

           BBC had mentioned in an email on 31 January 2011 that it had

                                 Page 81 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




     interviewed a lawyer at Shoosmiths, who was seeking to launch a civil

     action against POL on behalf of 55 former SPMs. I do not remember Mike

     Granville's email or the attached letter.


196. Based on the documents disclosed by the Inquiry, it appears that I was

     first given details of the letters before action sent by Shoosmiths in

     December 2011. The minutes of the Board meeting on 13 December

     2011 record on page 7 under the heading "Noting Papers" that the

     Significant Litigation Report (POLB(11 )65) was noted and that Susan

     Crichton was asked to give an oral update at the January Board meeting

     (POL00027270). I have not seen this Significant Litigation Report in the

     Inquiry's disclosure to date.


197. The Inquiry has disclosed a Significant Litigation Report (POLB(12)13)

     (POL00095595) which appears to have been prepared by Susan

     Crichton for the POL Board meeting on 12 January 2012. The minutes of

     that meeting (POL00021503) refer to POLB(12)13 in the section on page

     6 under the heading "Significant Litigation Reporf'. I will discuss

     POLB(12)13 in more detail in my answer to Question 42.2, but I note that

     it deals only with the Shoosmiths claims. Although I cannot recall, it

     seems likely, based on these documents, that the Shoosmiths claims

     were mentioned in the Significant Litigation Report for the December

     2011 meeting, and that the POL Board asked for further details of the

     claims to be provided at its January 2012 meeting.


198. The Shoosmiths claims were mentioned in my letter to Mike Weir MP

     (POL00001976) in December 2011, which I discuss further in my answer

                             Page 82 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           to Questions 43 to 44. The letter is dated "December 2011", but I can see

           from (POL00120490) that it was in the final stages of preparation on 9

           December 2011.


      199. The letter deals with the letters before action from Shoosmiths on page

           4 under the heading "Legal Action". This section states that a tiny number

           of former SPMs appeared to be making distinct allegations with respect

           to the operation of Horizon. In all of these cases, significant shortages

           were found at the former SPMs' branches for which they could not

           account. Shoosmiths had been claiming for around a year that they

           represented a number of these former SPMs. To date, Shoosmiths had

           sent four letters before action, making allegations about Horizon (among

           other issues) and seeking information. In two of the cases, the individuals

           had pleaded guilty to false accounting and the cases stretched back over

           five years. POL did not accept any of the allegations made and would

           robustly defend its position if any civil claim was brought against it.


42.2 Please describe your involvement in responding to the Shoosmiths' claim.

What did you understand about these pre-action claims? Did you consider them

to have any merit?


      200. I do not remember having any involvement in responding to the

           Shoosmiths claims. As I set out below, the POL Board was informed

           about the claims, but it was not asked to take or authorise any action in

           respect of the claims.




                                    Page 83 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




201. As I have mentioned above, the Shoosmiths claims were the only piece

       of litigation addressed in the Significant Litigation Report for the January

      2012 POL Board meeting (POL00095595).


202. The first section of the report, entitled "Significant Litigation Cases"

       stated, in summary:


a.   POL had received letters before action from four former SPMS who had

     been dismissed when discrepancies were discovered in their branch

     accounts.


b.   Two of the claimants had previously pleaded guilty to false accounting.


c.   Each claimant alleged (based on alleged failings in POL's processes and

     computer system) that POL had wrongfully terminated their contract and

     each claimed c. 150,000 in damages.


d.   A further claim had been issued but not served. POL was seeking to

     challenge a stay in respect of this claim and would, if necessary, assert

     that it was time-barred.


e.   It was possible that POL would receive a large number of similar claims -

     possibly between 55 and 150 according to press reports.


f.   POL's strategy was to defend each claim robustly to deter future claims. It

     would be responding to each claim in full. At present, POL considered the

     legal claims to be weak and the damages claim to be inflated.


203. The second section, entitled "Summary" began with the statement that

      "The considered legal view is that the claimants are unlikely to succeed".
                                Page 84 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




    Nonetheless, given the potentially high volume of claims that would be

    issued in the county courts, POL had been advised by its QC, Richard

    Morgan, that "the quality of the judges would be unpredictable making it

    more likely that one or two cases might be lost." In light of this litigation

    risk, and the fact that a large volume of claims may be received (that

    collectively may pose a material financial risk), it was prudent to flag the

    cases at this stage.


204. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 12 January 2012

    (POL00021503) record on page 6 that Les Owen (a NED) asked Susan

    Crichton for assurance that there was no substance to the claims brought

    by SPMs which had featured in Private Eye. Susan's response was to

    explain that the SPMs were challenging the integrity of the Horizon

    system. However, the system had been audited by RMG Internal Audit

    with the reports reviewed by Deloitte. The audit report was very positive.

    The business had also won every criminal prosecution in which it had

    used evidence based on the Horizon system's integrity. Susan

    suggested that she would clear the audit report with external lawyers and

    would circulate it to the POL Board if was possible to give the report

    privileged status.


205. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 9 February 2012

    (POL00027579) contain no record of any discussion of the Shoosmiths

    claims. On page 5 under the heading "Noting Papers", a Significant

    Litigation Report (POLB(12)23) was noted. This appears to be a

    reference to (POL00095835). The document is a POL Dispute


                            Page 85 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




      Resolution Paper dated January 2012, with details of claims over

      500,000 or those of a sensitive nature. The document records that POL

      had engaged Bond Pearce in relation to Shoosmiths claims and gave

      brief details of each of the claims. In summary:


a.   POL had rejected three claims (those of Scott Darlington, Julian Wilson,

     and Terence Walters) on the grounds that they had each admitted to false

     accounting and that Mr Darlington and Mr Wilson had been convicted.


b.   POL had responded to the claim by Thakshila Somaskandarajah on the

     grounds that the claim was time-barred.


c.   Lynne Prosser had commenced, but not served, proceedings in June 2011.

     POL only became aware of the proceedings in October 2011. In the

     meantime, Shoosmiths made an application to extend time for service of

     the Claim Form and Particulars of Claim, and an order was made by the

     Court to extend time. POL had now applied to have that order set aside. If

     POL was successful, the claim would be struck out.


206. The    minutes of the     POL Board       meeting    on   15 March 2012

      (UKGI00016088) contain no record of any discussion of the Shoosmiths'

      claims. However, they refer on page 9 to a Significant Litigation Report,

      POLB(12)42, which can be found at (POl00096033). This is a version of

      the Dispute Resolution paper for the February 2012 POL Board meeting,

      which had been updated to include recent developments. In summary:




                             Page 86 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




a.   POL had sent its last correspondence to Shoosmiths in relation to Mr

     Darlington, Mr Wilson and Mr Walters on 14 December 2012. Shoosmiths

     had taken no further action in relation to these claims to date.


b.   Nothing had been heard from Shoosmiths in relation to the Thakshila

     Somaskandarajah case since POL had asserted that the claim was time-

     barred.


c.   Ms Prosser's claim had been struck out and the Court of Appeal had

     rejected her request for permission to appeal on 22 February 2012. Ms

     Prosser still had an option to apply to the Court of Appeal at an oral hearing.

     If Ms Prosser applied for an oral hearing and her appeal ultimately

     succeeded, POL would face evidential difficulties in responding to the

     claim, as the branch papers had been destroyed in accordance with POL's

     document destruction policy.


207. My answer to the Inquiry's question about my understanding of the claims

      is that, while I do not now remember reading the documents, I have

      summarised above, my understanding at the time would have been

      derived from the information I received from Susan Crichton, the GC. So

      far as I can tell from the Inquiry's disclosure, the only information I

      received about the claims in documentary form was the information in the

      Significant Litigation Reports, and I cannot recall being given any other

      information.


208. The Inquiry has also asked me whether I considered the claims to have

      merit. The Significant Litigation Report for the January POL Board

      meeting (POL00095595) stated that the considered legal view was the
                               Page 87 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     claims were unlikely to succeed. At the time, I believe I would have

     accepted that view as the professional view of a lawyer, which I was not

     in a position to challenge. The details in the Significant Litigation Reports

     suggested that the claims were being appropriately handled by POL's

     external lawyers and appeared to have stalled. Ms Presser's claim had

     been struck out for a procedural reason, and none of the claimants in the

     other claims appeared to be pursuing their allegations with any vigour.


209. In the course of preparing this witness statement, I have been shown

     documents connected to the Shoosmiths' claims which do not appear to

     have been sent to me or to the POL Board.


210. (POl00073165) is an email dated 16 December 2011 from Alison

     Bolsover (POL P&BA) to Emily Springford and Sabrina Jethwa. I

     understand from other documents that Ms Springford was a RMG in-

     house lawyer, and that Ms Jethwa was an in-house lawyer at POL. Ms

     Bolsover had identified 23 known live cases (out of 533) where the SPM

     had challenged Horizon. Of the 23, Ms Bolsover recommended pursuing

     10 prosecutions/civil claims as first and second priority. Six further

     prosecutions should be put on hold until POL had proved the first batch.

     "I have reviewed all the cases myself but believe that a sensible way

     forward would be to hold a meeting with Emily, Sabrina, Rod and myself

     just to confirm we are happy with the recommendation and if we have

     any concerns with evidence, we also need to consider cost and which

     Solicitors to use then a paper will need to be written for Susan to gain

     authority to proceed".


                              Page 88 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




 211. (POL00085749) is a note of advice dated 20 December 2011 by Ms

              Springford. The advice summarises the pros and cons of starting (or re-

              starting) civil actions against SPMs "which had been put on hold because

              of concerns about the allegations made about Horizon by the relevant

              spmr."


 a.          The benefits were:


        i.        Pursuing the claims would demonstrate confidence in Horizon and its

                  other systems and processes and send a strong message to SPMRs.


       ii.        Where the SPM has sent a letter before action via Shoosmiths,

                  actively pursuing claims against them would put POL on the front foot,

                  rather than waiting for the SPMR to start court proceedings.


      iii.        POL would have some control over the court in which the claims were

                  issued.


b.           The risks included:


        i.        If POL pursued claims in several County Courts, there was a risk that

                  POL could lose some of the cases, as the quality of judges is variable.

                  POL could mitigate this risk by seeking to have all of the claims heard

                  in one of the better County Courts, but this was not guaranteed to

                  succeed.


       ii.        POL could be accused of acting prematurely if it were to start claims

                  against Mr Darlington and Mr Walter while POL was still in pre-action

                  dialogue with Shoosmiths.


                                      Page 89 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




 iii.      Arguably, bringing more claims increases the risk of systemic

           problems coming to light (such as training or support failures). There

           was little that could be done to mitigate this risk, apart from analysing

           the claims carefully at the outset, and bringing them in batches, with

           the strongest first.


 iv.       There would be much work to do to prepare each case, which could

           place strain on resources.


212. These documents appear to contemplate that POL would go on the

        offensive, by starting proceedings against SPMs who had challenged

        Horizon. I have no memory of these proposals and I understand that

        there is no indication in disclosure that they were communicated to me

        or to the POL Board. I also have no recollection of being told, as stated

        in (POL00085749), that any civil claims by POL had been put on hold

        because of concerns that the relevant SPMs had made allegations about

        Horizon.


213. I also do not fully understand why RMG lawyers became involved in

        claims against POL. A possible explanation is that since POL was a

        subsidiary of RMH at this time, a claim of significant value against POL

        would need to be considered for the purposes of the group accounts. In

        that context, (RMG00000084) is the Fines, Compensation and Material

        Litigation Report half year update to the RMH Audit and Risk Committee.

        There is a section on the Shoosmiths' claims between paragraphs 27

        and 30. The author of the section, which is dated November 2011, is Jeff



                                  Page 90 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            Triggs. He was an external lawyer, who I believe at one stage was Acting

            General Counsel for RMG.


      214. There are two points that stand out about this document. The first is that

            the text of the section on the Shoosmiths' claims is virtually identical to

            the text of Susan Crichton's Significant Litigation Report for the January

            2012 POL Board meeting (POL00095595). The second is that the RMG

            Audit and Risk Committee appears to have been briefed on claims

            against POL before any detailed briefing was given to the POL Board.

            The Inquiry has disclosed letters from Alan Cook and David Smith who

            expressed similar views at the time: (POL00094288), (POL00090575),

            and (POL00094820).


42.3 Did POL action Mr Morgan's suggestion in conference on 26 October 2011

that it request an expert to inspect and report on the Horizon IT System? If not.

why not?


      215. I have considered (POL00107695). I understand from my lawyers that

            this document appears to be a solicitors' attendance note by Bond

            Dickinson of a conference on 26 October 2011 with Richard Morgan QC.

            The attendees of the conference were two lawyers from RMG Legal

            Services (Rebekah Mantle and Emily Springford), Sabrina Jethwa, and

            two lawyers from Bond Dickinson (Anna Maxwell and Helen Watson). I

            have no memory of seeing this document before I began preparing this

            witness statement or ever being briefed about the advice.


      216. I would have been aware from the Significant Litigation Report for the

            January 2012 POL Board meeting (POL00095595) that POL had
                                   Page 91 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




            consulted Richard Morgan QC. However, the only piece of his advice

            mentioned in the Significant Litigation Report was his comment that the

            quality of county court judges was unpredictable, making it more likely

            that one or two claims might be lost.


      217. I have no recollection of being made aware that Richard Morgan QC

            recommended that POL should invite the SPMs to appoint an expert to

            investigate and report on Horizon. On my reading of the relevant section

            of the note of the conference, Richard Morgan QC was not suggesting

            that POL should instruct an expert, but that the SPMs should be asked

            to engage an expert. I understand from my lawyers that there is no

            indication in disclosure that there was any such investigation or report.


42.4 To what extent did POL rely on Mr Morgan's advice in responding to claims

brought by SPMs? In particular, please address the following aspects of the

recorded advice:


42.4.1 "a hard line in respect of those SPMs who had been convicted of false

accounting":


      218. I do not recall being informed about this advice, but I can see from the

            Significant Litigation Reports that the claims by Scott Darlington and

            Julian Wilson were rejected by POL on the grounds that they had

            admitted to, and had been convicted, of false accounting.


42.4.2 for the non-convicted claimant, "wait until her claim becomes statute-

barred at the end of November 2011, and then write to Shoosmiths explaining

that she is out of time": and

                                   Page 92 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      219. I do not recall being informed about this advice. I do not know whether

            POL relied on the advice, although I can see from the Significant

            Litigation Reports that POL raised a time-bar argument in the Thakshila

            Somaskandarajah case.


42.4.3 for any further claimant without conviction or limitation issues, "an

aggressive stance would be adopted ... and demand any debt owed to POL".


      220. I do not recall being informed of this advice, and I do not know whether

            POL relied on it.


42.5 Did the Board discuss the Shoosmiths claim during the meeting? If so,

what was said and why was the discussion not recorded in the minutes? If not,

why not?


      221. I do not recall any discussion of the Shoosmiths' claims at the POL Board

            meeting on 15 March 2012.


Correspondence with Members of Parliament (2010-2011)


43. Please consider UKGI00013994 (Nicholas Brown MP question to Edward

Davey MP on 22 November 2010) and RLIT0000040 (your letter to the House of

Commons dated 30 December 2010).


43.1. Please describe how your response was prepared.


43.2. Please describe how you assured yourself as to the accuracy of its

contents.


43.3. Please explain the sentence "the system has proved to be very robust


                                  Page 93 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




since its introduction". On what evidence did you base this comment?


44. Please consider UKGI00014000 (Mike Weir MP's question to Edward Davey

MP on 27 October 2011), POL00001976 (your letter to Mike Weir MP dated

December 2011) and POL00114516 (Mike Weir MP's letter to you dated 21

December 2011 ): 44.1. In respect of your letter of your December 2011, please

explain:


44.1.1. How this letter was prepared and how you assured yourself as to the

accuracy of its contents.


44.1.2. Whether you, or your team, consulted with members of POL's or

Fujitsu's IT services or problem management teams. If not, why not?


44.1.3. The basis on which POL was "fully confident that the Horizon computer

system ... enabled sub postmasters to account accurately for the transactions

they undertake in their branch".


44.1.4. The basis on which you wrote that "there is no evidence at all that the

Horizon system has in some way been at fault with respect to any financial

irregularities discovered in a sub postmasters account". Please confirm

whether or not you believed this statement at the time.


44.2. On reflection, do you consider that the investigations and/ or preparation

that went into writing this letter were adequate?


      222. POL took letters to MPs very seriously. They often involved branch

            closures, which could be an emotive issue (both for MPs and the

            communities they represented) or problems encountered by individual


                                   Page 94 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     constituents when using POL services. In my experience, POL always

     attempted to respond to MPs' concerns promptly, courteously, and in

     detail.


223. When the issue raised by an MP involved one or more of the specialist

     functions within POL, managers from the relevant functions would be

     asked to respond internally to the MP's concerns and have input into

     POL's letter to the MP. A single piece of correspondence could therefore,

     depending on its subject matter, involve multiple POL managers and

     generate a substantial amount of internal discussion and email traffic.


224. I can see from the email from Martin Humphreys of POL Government

     Affairs   to     my   assistant   Theresa   lies   on   9   December    2011

     (POL00120490) that the content of my December 2011 letter to Mike

     Weir MP was the product of collaboration between managers from

     several arms of the business.


225. Martin sent Theresa what appears to have been the final draft of a letter

     from me in response to the four parliamentary questions asked by Mike

     Weir MP. Martin asked Theresa to arrange for the letter to be signed. He

     went on to say that, due to the nature of the issues raised, the letter had

     been pulled together by Mike Granville and had been through several

     iterations with input and clearance from a number of people. Martin then

     set out what appears to be a non-exhaustive list of the individuals who

     had provided input and assistance during the preparation of the letter.


226. These included Rebekah Mantle and Emily Springford (who I understand

     were      both    RMG     in-house    lawyers)     individuals   from   RMG
                               Page 95 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




      communications, and Rod Ismay (the head of P&BA). Three very senior

       POL managers were also involved: Mike Young (POL's most senior IT

      manager), Chris Day (the CFO) and Susan Crichton (the GC).


227. I am sure that the drafting process for my letter to Mike Weir MP

      generated many more emails than have been disclosed. I am also

      confident that my letter dated 30 December 2010 to the House of

      Commons in response to Nicholas Brown MP's questions to the minister,

       Edward Davey MP (RUT0000040), was the product of a similar process

      of collaboration.


228. Mr Brown MP's questions to Edward Davey MP, to which my letter dated

      30 December 2010 was a response, concerned any recent assessment

      of the performance of the Horizon system, and (a) whether any errors

      relating to the reconciliation of accounts were reported; and (b) whether

      any remedial action was taken in the latest period for which figures were

      available.


229. Mike Weir MP asked parliamentary questions about four topics, to which

      my December 2011 letter was a response:


a.   The number of (a) prosecutions and (b) investigations of SPMs instigated

     by POL as a result of apparent financial irregularities on the Horizon

     computer system, which had subsequently been abandoned.


b.   The number of complaints POL had received from SPMs concerning

     difficulties with the Horizon computer system in each of the previous five

     years.

                             Page 96 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




 c.   Whether any operational faults had been identified with the Horizon

      computer system used by POL since its introduction, and what remedial

      action had been taken.


 d.   The monetary value in current prices of (a) the original estimate and (b) the

      final cost of the Horizon computer system, and what additional costs at

      current prices had been incurred since its completion.


 230. I have no recollection of the letters in relation to Nicholas Brown MP's

        and Mike Weir MP's questions. I can say with confidence, however, that

        the answers and the background to those answers were not within my

        knowledge. I knew from POL's approach to correspondence such as

        these letters, that their content was sourced from senior specialist

        managers, and often reviewed by internal communications and, where

        necessary, the internal legal team. At the time, I relied on the team who

        worked on the letter to provide accurate information and to ensure that

        the letter was accurate. I would never knowingly have put my name to a

        letter to an MP which contained inaccuracies.


 231. The Inquiry has asked me specifically about three passages in the letters:


a.    My statement in my letter in response to Nicholas Brown MP's questions

      that "the system has proved to be very robust since its introduction".


b.    My statement in my letter to Mike Weir MP that POL was "fully confident

      that the Horizon computer system ... enabled sub postmasters to account

      accurately for the transactions they undertake in their branch".




                                Page 97 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




    c.   My statement in my letter to Mike Weir MP that "there is no evidence at all

         that the Horizon system has in some way been at fault with respect to any

         financial irregularities discovered in a sub postmasters account".


      232. I believed these statements to be true, and justified by specialist

           knowledge, because I understood that these statements came from, or

           were approved by, senior specialist managers with detailed knowledge

           of the Horizon system and the operation of SPM accounts. In particular,

            I can see from Martin's email that Mike Young (POL's most senior IT

           manager) had input into the letter to Mike Weir MP. I should add that I

           would not have been surprised by the statements at the time. As I have

           mentioned above, I had never been told about any BEDs in Horizon and

           the consistent message from POL's IT function since the Computer

           Weekly article in May 2009 was that it was confident that Horizon was

           not the cause of branch shortfalls.


      233. I accept that these statements were wrong. In relation to Question 44.2 I

           do not know precisely what investigations or preparations went into the

           two letters. As I have stated above, I believe there would have been

           emails between the individuals involved in the production of the letters. I

           do not feel able to say what an adequate investigation of the MPs'

           questions would have involved.


Separation of POL from the Royal Mail Group


45. Please summarise how the corporate structure and governance of POL

changed upon its separation with Royal Mail.


                                  Page 98 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




234. I cannot recall every aspect of how the structure and governance of POL

     changed upon its separation from RMG. It appears from the minutes of

     the POL Board meeting dated 12 January 2012 that the changes in the

     governance of POL were documented in a governance paper which was

     presented to the Board at this meeting (at page 9 of (POL00021503)). I

     understand from my lawyers that they have been unable to find a copy

     of this document in disclosure. However, some details to the changes of

     the structure and governance of POL are set out in (UKGI00018222).


235. First and foremost, POL ceased to be a subsidiary of RMG and became

     operationally independent upon separation. From my perspective, the

     key governance change was that POL had a completely independent

     Board, chaired by Alice Perkins, a former senior Cabinet Office and HM

     Treasury civil servant with considerable public sector experience. The

     purpose of appointing Alice, together with NEDs with experience in key

     areas (such as retail and IT) was to ensure that the directors had the

     experience and expertise to offer improved challenge and oversight. Neil

     Mccausland, for example, was appointed for his strong background in

     retail. From 1 April 2012, a ShEx representative, Susannah Storey sat on

     the POL Board to directly represent the Shareholder. POL's new status

     as an independent company owned by the Government required it to

     adopt new Articles of Association.


236. Other key changes included the establishment of committees (e.g.

     Remuneration and ARC); Alice and I, and the POL Board, underwent

     governance training; there was an annual POL Board effectiveness


                            Page 99 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            review; the NEDs would hold regular meetings without executives; Alice

            held regular one-to-one meetings with the NEDs; there were feedback

            sessions from the Chairman to the CEO, CFO and Company Secretary

            after each POL Board meeting; and the senior management had training

            to produce best practice board papers.


46. Please consider POL00021431:


46.1. Please describe what work was undertaken to assess the risks and

compliance issues to POL following the separation from Royal Mail Group. In

particular, what thought was given to POL's involvement in prosecutions.


46.2. Please expand on "The auditors found that the IT systems were

insufficiently effective to be fully relied upon for audit control purposes".


      237. I recall discussions at the POL Board and the ARC about risks around

            new contracts, the novation of contracts between POL and RMG, IT

            services, and the transfer of corporate skills. I do not recall any work or

            any discussion about the risks and compliance issues arising from POL's

            involvement in prosecutions. The separation of POL and RMG was a long

            and complex project, which was managed by Mike Young with external

            support. The project would have generated a huge amount of

            documentation. If the issue of prosecutions had been considered from a

            risk and compliance perspective, I would have expected it to be

            documented.


      238. The Inquiry has asked about the Audit Results Report by Angus Grant

            from EY. The minutes record that Mr Grant anticipated that EY would

                                   Page 100 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




            issue an unqualified audit report. On the IT component, EY recognised

            that IT controls in the business had improved and that there had been a

            change in the governance and management of POL's control with

            Fujitsu. The auditors had found that the IT systems were insufficiently

            effective to be fully relied on for audit control purposes. However, by

            adopting mitigating procedures, EY had been able to rely on the IT

            systems supporting the POL financial statements. It was noted that POL

            and EY IT teams were working closely on an agreed plan of further

            improvements in the 2013 financial year.


      239. My understanding of the phrase in the minutes "the auditors found that

            the IT systems were insufficiently effective to be fully relied upon for audit

            control purposes" is that, as had happened during the 2011 audit (at page

            5 of (RMG00000003)), EY had to carry out additional work to satisfy itself

            that the controls were reliable. In other words, I believe that "IT systems"

            in the quotation from the minutes means "controls". Consistently with this,

            the recommendations in the draft management letter for the 2012 audit

            (POL00029485) are all concerned with controls. I certainly have no

            recollection that EY reported that the Horizon IT system itself was

            ineffective and I do not think that that is the meaning of the minute.


47. Please describe your interactions with Members of Parliament in so far as

they related to the Horizon IT System or POL's treatment of SPMs, managers

and counter assistants in connection with the same. In particular, please

provide the following details:


47.1. Your communications strategy and how you prepared for any meetings.

                                   Page 101 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




47.2. What your objectives were and whether you thought you achieved those

outcomes.


47.3. Whether you became aware of (a) any BEDs or (b) other actual or potential

problems with the integrity of the Horizon IT System prior to any meeting with

these parliamentarians.


48. Please consider POL00095973 (email chain on 23/4 February 2012),

POl00107702 (email chain between you and Alice Perkins on 13 March 2012)

and UKGI00000050 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 15 March 2012).


48.1. Please describe the detail of the interactions you had with Alice Perkins

in early 2012 concerning her meeting with lord Arbuthnot and the suggestion

for an independent study into the Horizon IT System.


48.2. Please expand on the entry in the minutes at POLB12/41(c} in

UKGI00000050. Was POL's strategy to seek to persuade MPs that their

constituents' concerns were wrong or to listen to and investigate them?


48.3. Please explain what action you took to "look ... at a further independent

study of the issues" following the 15 March 2012 POL Board meeting. What was

the strategy and purpose to commissioning an independent study?


48.4. Why did the intervention of Lord Arbuthnot lead to a discussion on

engaging an independent study into the Horizon IT System? In answering this

question, please explain why such a study was not implemented following (a)

numerous complaints that had been made by SPMs and MPs (b) the May 2009

Computer Weekly article and (c) the identification of significant BEDs, such as

the Receipts and Payments mismatch bug.
                                Page 102 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




49. Please consider POL00105597 (email chain on 3 April 2012 regarding Oliver

letwin MP) and POL00107710 (letter from you to Oliver letwin MP dated 4 April

2012).


49.1. Please describe the conversation you had with Alice Perkins, referred to

in POL00105597.


49.2. To what were you referring when you wrote "We are both of the view that

this is inappropriate" in your email of 4 April 2012? Why did you consider this

to be inappropriate?


49.3. In respect of your letter to Oliver letwin MP, on what basis did you write

"The Horizon system has been rigorously tested using independent assessors

and robust procedures ... Very often the 'missing' funds are a keying or

balancing error that can be put right, and training given to ensure it doesn't

happen again. These checks and procedures resolve virtually all discrepancies

satisfactorily".


50. Please consider POL00112984 (pack for meeting with lord Arbuthnot and

Oliver letwin MP on 17 May 2012) and POL00021507 (minutes of POL Board

meeting on 23 May 2012).


50.1. How were you briefed for this meeting? Please state who was responsible

for preparing your brief and the meeting pack.


50.2. Please explain to what extent POL's IT and problem management teams

were involved in preparing your briefing.


50.3. Please provide a full account of this meeting, addressing what, if anything,

                                 Page 103 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




you said about (a) BEDs (b) the integrity of Horizon or (c) Ernst & Young's audit.


50.4. Please describe what you informed the Board about this meeting on 23

May 2012.


51. Please consider POL00096640 (meeting pack for meeting with Lord

Arbuthnot and other MPs on 18 June 2012) and POL00096660 (email chain with

you, Lord Arbuthnot and Alice Perkins on 18/19 June 2012).


51.1. How were you briefed for this meeting? Please state who was responsible

for preparing your brief and the meeting pack.


51.2. On what basis were you "confident about the integrity of Horizon"?


51.3. Please comment on your statement that "Each transaction is protected

with a digital signature to prevent change or tampering. Which means if

someone was able to penetrate the many layers of security - they wouldn't be

able to unlock the seal that protects the transaction - this prevents any

malicious manipulation". To what type of manipulation were you referring: by

SPMs: by Fujitsu: by POL: and/or by third parties.


51.4. Please explain what you meant when referred to the "opportunity to

resolve transparently and robustly the outstanding queries". How did you

envisage POL carrying out that opportunity.


      240. On 23 February 2012, Alice Perkins forwarded to me an email she had

            received from      Lord Arbuthnot earlier that day (at page 2 of

            POL00095973)). In the email, Lord Arbuthnot had asked to meet Alice to

            discuss Horizon:


                                   Page 104 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




   "I know it is the position of the Post Office ... that there is nothing wrong with

   Horizon. I am deeply sceptical about this, and hope I can persuade you to

   look afresh at the matter, rather than accepting that there should be a

   closing of ranks round the computer."


241.   Alice stated in her forwarding message to me that she would reply

       stating that she would meet Lord Arbuthnot. She also asked whether I

       thought she should take someone along, and whether there was anything

       else she should know at this stage.


242. Alice also forwarded Lord Arbuthnot's email to Susan Crichton, who

       replied on 24 February 2012. Susan said that she had spoken to Mike

       Granville, who had told her that Lord Arbuthnot had links to the JFSA,

       who were believed to be behind the current legal activities of SPMs

       against POL. It was Susan's view that:


   " .. .any meeting with him would need to be carefully handled. Obviously, it

   would be a good opportunity to put our views forward but there are risks

   associated with that approach, maybe we can have a word next time you

   are in the office."


243. I have not seen an email response from me to Alice. Although I am sure

       that Alice and I discussed the forthcoming meeting with Lord Arbuthnot

       - almost certainly more than once - I have limited memory of what we

       spoke about. I recall that Alice was approached by Lord Arbuthnot, and

       Mike Young saying that we should not bother with it (or words to that

       effect). Alice and I both decided that she should meet Lord Arbuthnot on

       the basis that if there was nothing in the challenge, then we had nothing
                             Page 105 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     to worry about; and if there were issues, it was better to review what they

     were. I have a reasonable recollection that I recommended that Alwen

     Lyons should also attend the meeting with Alice. This was because it was

     not good practice for a NED, even the Chairman, to represent POL at a

     formal business meeting without an executive present. Otherwise, the

     boundaries between the executive and non-executive management

     would become blurred.


244. On 13 March 2012, Alice sent an email to Susan, Alwen and me setting

     out   her   thoughts    following   the   meeting    with   Lord    Arbuthnot

     (POL00096052). Alice stated:


   "I think JA genuinely wants to seek a resolution of the difficulties concerned

   and is willing to believe that we will do the right things. There is a real prize

   for us in finding an effective way of convincing him and his fellow MPs that

   things are as they should be. He believes that this would quieten down

   Private Eye and would prevent proposed escalation eg. adjournment

   debate etc. To do this, we might commission a new independent review of

   the Horizon related questions (my thought) or invite him accompanied by

   someone from Computer Weekly to visit the Model Office and be shown

   how Horizon works (his suggestion) or something else altogether.


   I promised to get back to him once I had had the chance to consider all

   this. I would like to do so by Easter, or at least have fixed a further meeting

   by then. I am asking Glenda to set up a meeting to discuss this amongst

   ourselves in the next couple of weeks."



                             Page 106 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




245. I do not believe that Alice and I had discussed the idea of commissioning

       an independent review of Horizon before she went to the meeting.

       However, I stated when I replied to Alice on 13 March 2012 that her email

       sounded like a good way forward (POL00107702). I was grateful that

       Alice had responded openly to a difficult challenge and I thanked her and

       Alwen for their time.


246. I see that (POL00105481) shows notes of a meeting with Lord Arbuthnot

       on 13 March with action points plus, at the bottom, what appears to be a

       document that he handed to Alice. I have no recollection of discussions

       about the detailed points made by Lord Arbuthnot (adequacy of training

       / settling centrally) or the action points.


247. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 15 March 2012, at page 9 of

       (POL00021505) record that:


   "The Chairman explained that she and the Company Secretary had met

    James Arbuthnot MP, at his request to discuss the Subpostmaster cases

    questioning the integrity of the Horizon system. The Chairman hoped that

    she could find a way to convince him and other MPs that the system was

    not at fault. This might mean looking at a further independent study of the

    issues."


248.   I do not now recall Alice's specific comments. However as far as I was

       concerned, they did not describe or reflect a strategy of seeking to

       persuade MPs that their constituents were wrong, as opposed to listening

       to and investigating their concerns. POL believed at that time that the

       Horizon system was working properly. We hoped that by taking the two
                               Page 107 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




       MPs through the details of their constituents' cases and if necessary,

      commissioning an independent review of the system, the MPs would

      come to share POL's viewpoint. I do not, and did not, consider that to be

      a strategy. We believed that the MPs could be persuaded that the system

      was not at fault, because that is what we ourselves believed, and we

       believed that the facts supported that conclusion.


249. I can see from (POL00105591) that on 21 March 2012 Alwen sent an

      email to Susan Crichton, Kevin Gilliland, Mike Granville and Lesley

      Sewell. She refers to notes (which she says are not for circulation) which

      appear to contain action points before a meeting on 28 March "so she

       can get back to James Arbuthnot before Easter". These may well be the

      same action points as in (POL00105481).


250. I can also see from an email exchange between me, Alwen and Lesley

      on 26 March 2012 that Alice asked me to meet her on Wednesday 28

       March in relation to Lord Arbuthnot (POL00107707). I have no specific

       memory of this discussion.


251. I have seen documents which show that POL's intention in April to May

      2012 was to instruct Deloitte to conduct a review of Horizon. These

       include:


a.   (POL00057623) - a memo dated 20 April 2012 from POL legal services on

     a proposal to instruct Deloitte to prepare a report in respect of allegations

     by sub-postmasters regarding (a) the integrity of Horizon; (b) the adequacy

     of training and support provided to SPMs.


                              Page 108 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




b.   (POL00002000 / POL00028066) - a proposal from Deloitte entitled

     "Project Spire", dated May 2012 to carry out a review of Horizon. This

     document is familiar, but I am not sure from when. I recognise the signpost

     on the cover but that is possibly as I had reviewed it at some later stage. I

     do not recall seeing the supplementary paper, with the Deloitte team

     biographies before now.


c.   (POL00057656) - a list of action points drawn up by Alwen following a

     meeting I attended on 3 May 2012 to prepare for the meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP in May 2012. These action points included

     explaining that POL intended to use Deloitte as IT specialists to examine

     the new system.


252. I have no memory now of the proposal to instruct Deloitte or of being

       involved in any discussions or actions for their appointment. At some

      stage, it was decided to appoint Second Sight as forensic accountants to

      carry out a review. I do recall that I was keen that POL should engage a

      company, which would understand the nature of SPMs' post office/ small

       retail businesses and with which SPMs could engage easily. I was

      concerned that one of the 'big corporates' such as Deloitte might not have

      that approach.


253. Whether or not POL should commission an independent study of Horizon

      was not an issue that I had been asked or advised to consider during my

      time at POL since 2007. I wish to make a number of observations:


a.   During my time as Network Director and Chief Operating Officer between

     2007 and October 2010, allegations that there was a problem with Horizon
                               Page 109 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     were rarely brought to my attention. On the occasions when they were

     brought to my attention, the message I received from POL's senior IT

     specialists was that the allegations were wrong, and that the IT system was

     not at fault.


b.   As I have mentioned previously, in 2009 Mike Young was adamant that the

     Computer Weekly article was misconceived and should not be treated as

     a red flag that there might be faults in the system. I believe that it was

     because Mike (who was head of IT) took such a firm view, that the

     Computer Weekly article was not escalated further or, it appears, taken

     any further by Mike or by the MD, to whom Mike reported. As a non-IT

     specialist, I accepted that Mike, with his knowledge of IT and the Horizon

     system, had considered the article fairly and that it was no cause for

     concern. This message was reinforced during my time as MD of POL

     between 2010 and 2012.


c.   In August 2010, Rod Ismay produced a report entitled "Horizon - Response

     to    Challenges   Regarding     Systems     integrity''   (POL0009057 4    /

     POL00088935). Section 4 (c) of the report contains a discussion by Rod

     about whether POL should commission an independent expert to examine

     Horizon to respond to SPMs' complaints: his conclusion was that it would

     not be in POL's interests to do so. I have no recollection of being consulted

     by Rod about any of the matters covered in his report. I was not on the

     distribution list for the report and have no memory of being given a copy of

     it.




                              Page 110 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




d.   There was a view among POL's management, which I shared, that ifthere

     was a serious problem or potential problem with Horizon we would already

     know about it - because POL's internal IT function would report any

     specific faults which had caused SPM losses or other errors in the

     accounts, or alert us that large numbers of Post Offices were encountering

     problems which might be caused by the IT system.


e.   However, we were never given any such report. On the contrary, we were

     told consistently that, relative to the scale of the transactions processed by

     the Network, the number of transactions that required investigation or

     correction was small, that the cause of the vast majority of these

     transactions was user error, and that in a far smaller number of cases POL

     had established fraud on the part of SPMs in the criminal courts.


f.   In that context, I was not made aware between joining POL in 2007 and

     early 2012 that any BEDs had been identified in Legacy Horizon or Horizon

     Online. The first that I knew that any BEDs had been discovered was in

     mid-2013, when I was made aware for the first time of the BED known as

     the Callendar Square problem in Legacy Horizon, and two BEDs in Horizon

     Online known as the Payments and Receipts Mismatch problem and the

     Local Suspense Account problem.


254. The reason why POL proposed an independent study of the system in

      2012 was because Alice had come to the issue with a fresh pair of eyes

       and decided that it might be necessary to reassure Lord Arbuthnot and

       other MPs that the system was not at fault. I supported that decision. The

       intervention of the MPs was important - I was especially aware of this

                              Page 111 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




     having spent many hours in meetings with MPs over Network Change,

     where POL closed thousands of Post Offices. We had reversed some

     decisions as a result of MP input and in other cases we had had to uphold

     the Government policy; so I knew POL had to approach their issues fairly

     and be ready to listen. Unless POL dealt with MPs' concerns and did so

     appropriately, there was a risk that they would increase the publicity

     around the JFSA's allegations that there was something seriously wrong

     with Horizon. Alice and I (based on what Mike and Lesley had told us)

     believed that those allegations were wrong, and that if we presented the

      MPs with the facts as we believed them to be, we should be able to

     persuade them that the IT system was not the problem.


255. I felt strongly that this issue engaged an important public interest. POL

     was a critical national institution which was used by millions of individuals

     every day to process transactions that, while they were often small in

     value, were significant to them personally - I refer not only to processing

     letters and parcels, but also pensions and social security benefits, paying

     bills, savings and insurance etc. In my view, POL was obliged to take

     active steps to ensure that public confidence in Post Offices was not

     undermined by allegations which POL believed to be incorrect. If that

     occurred, a Post Office's ability to deliver its critical services to the public

     wou Id be compromised.


256. On 3 April 2012, I received an email from Emily Pang, the Chief of Staff

     to the RMG CEO, Moya Greene (POL00105597). Emily stated:


   "Moya just got off the phone with MP Letwin. He feels there is a systemic

                             Page 112 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




   issue. He knows of a postmistress (in) Axminster who noted there was

   issues with horizon ("bizarre occurrences") and asked POL IT to come and

   fix. She thought there were discrepancies between the receipts in Horizon

   and her own of 2000. The PO then said no the discrepancy is 4000 and

   she was suspended from using the system. Many people have come

   forward to say she is honest and he personally vouches for her.


    On top of this there was the subpostmistress of James Arbuthnot who is

   the head of security for the houses of parliament. He said the exact same

   thing happened with the same amounts (2000 and 4000) with his

   postmistress and he (James) also vouches for her).


   Moya has committed that you and her will go brief Mr Letwin together in a

   couple weeks. Mr Letwin has been a big supporter of RM Group including

   PO so Moya would greatly appreciate if you can please initiate an

   investigation of these issues in a fully challenging way as soon as possible

   so that you two may discuss this in the next week or so and then go to Mr

   Letwin together."


257. On the same day, I forwarded Emily's email to Susan Crichton and Alwen

     Lyons, referring to a conversation I had with Alice: "Below a note I have

     discussed with Alice. We are both of the view that this is inappropriate

     and I shall contact OL directly". Although I have no direct recollection of

     the discussion, I believe that Alice and I discussed two matters.


258. The first was that we should take Oliver Letwin MP's concerns seriously

     and look into his constituent's case. I mentioned in a letter I sent to Oliver

     Letwin MP on 4 April 2012 (POL00107710) that Alice had invited Lord
                             Page 113 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     Arbuthnot to POL's head office to see how the Horizon system worked,

     and I extended the same invitation to Oliver Letwin MP, either with Lord

     Arbuthnot or independently. I also asked Oliver Letwin MP to provide

     details of the Post Office in his constituency that was encountering

     problems, so that we could look into the matter.


259. The second is that it was inappropriate post-separation for the CEO of

     the RMG to have committed POL to a meeting with Oliver Letwin MP.

     POL and RMG were now entirely separate organisations and were run

     separately. I had no objections at all to a meeting with Oliver Letwin MP.

     If Moya had asked me whether I was prepared to meet him, I would have

     agreed. However, Alice and I both felt that RMG should not be committing

     POL to any course of action without prior consultation, (i.e. as though

     POL was still its subsidiary). I did not consider this to be a significant

     incident: it reflected the need for two companies which had been in the

     same group for hundreds of years to learn how to operate independently

     of each other. I got on very well with Moya. I see from (POL00114518)

     that I emailed Moya to thank her for passing on the details. I said there

     was no need for the joint meeting and I was in touch with Oliver Letwin

     MP. I also confirmed that there was "no issue with Horizon - it has been

     tested; and in fact upheld as robust by the courts". I realise now that was

     an incorrect statement but it was what I believed and what I was told by

     the senior IT and legal people advising Alice and me at the time, which

     was consistent with the views shared when I was Network Director, and

     by previous MDs. The Inquiry has disclosed letters from Alan Cook and



                            Page 114 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           David Smith who expressed similar views at the time: (POL00094288;

           POL00090575; POL00094820).


     260. Like virtually all letters to stakeholders such as MPs, my letter to Oliver

           Letwin MP on 4 April 2012 (POL00107710) was written for me. I have

           not been able to establish precisely how this letter was put together from

           the documents disclosed by the Inquiry. However, I can see from an

           email I sent to Martin Moran, Susan, Alwen and Lesley on 5 April 2012

           that Susan had seen and amended a draft of the letter (POL00114518).


     261. I have been asked on what basis I made the following statement in the

           letter (POL00107710) that: "The Horizon system has been rigorously

           tested using independent assessors and robust procedures ... Very often

           the 'missing' funds are a keying or balancing error that can be put right,

           and training given to ensure it doesn't happen again. These checks and

           procedures resolve virtually all discrepancies satisfactorily". While the

           letter was drafted for me, I generally read, and when I could, signed all

           letters. There is nothing in this statement which would have surprised me

           at the time - the first line is one I had heard from Lesley Sewell and the

           "keying or balancing error" comment is one I believed to be true and was

           at the root of many thousands of TCs over the years. However, as I said

           further down the letter - ".. .if you could provide me with details of the

           Post Office in your constituency that is encountering problems, I will

           ensure we look into it as soon as possible."


The meeting with James Arbuthnot and letwin on 17 May 2012



                                 Page 115 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




262. The preparation for the meeting was led by Susan and Alwen, working

     with Lesley (POL00105494). Angela Van Den Bogerd from Network and

     Rod Ismay from P&BA were also involved. I understand from the

     documents that Simon Baker from IT acted as the project manager: his

     role appears to have included collating information, liaising with the

     various functions of POL whose input was needed, and drafting the

     briefing materials. I can see from a meeting invitation on 10 May 2012

     that, in addition to this team, Jarnail Singh from POL legal and Chris

     Darvill were invited to a preparation meeting (POL00057711 ). I do not

     recall meeting Jarnail Singh and I am not certain that I knew of his

     involvement at the time. I do not recall Chris Darvill, but I now understand

     that he was a solicitor at Bond Dickinson.


263. On 3 May 2012, I attended a meeting with Alice, Alwen and Susan to

     discuss the meeting with the MPs. (POL00057656) are Alwen's notes

     and actions from the meeting. They begin by stating that:


   "The best outcome of this meeting would be a position where they believe

   our evidence in their individual constituent's cases and support how we are

   handling the situation.


   "Longer term, once they are assured by the review of Horizon they could

    'help' to win others round."


264. This reflects what I have already said above about POL's objectives: we

     hoped that if we gave the MPs a clear presentation of the facts as we

     believed them to be, we should be able to persuade them that their initial

     stance towards Horizon was wrong.
                             Page 116 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




265. The next section of the note sets out an outline agenda for the meeting.

       In summary:


a.   We would begin by acknowledging the importance of the issues to Lord

     Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP and stress that we wanted to be open and

     give them confidence that we were taking this very seriously.


b.   We would then give factual context about the size of the POL branch

     Network, the amount of money and transactions it deals with, the relatively

     small number of issues with losses compared to the scale of the network

     and its business, and the need to protect public money.


c.   We would explain how SPMs were appointed and trained, the support

     systems in place for the first few weeks of their appointment, and the

     ongoing support provided through the helpline. This included support if

     money went missing, which SPMs were given time to pay.


d.   We would state that only a small number of cases led to prosecutions and

     explain the process for bringing prosecutions and how seriously we took

     this.


e.   We should explain the old and new Horizon systems and that any live

     system review would have to be on the new system, although POL has an

     audit trail of every key stroke in the old system going back seven years.


f.   We would possibly talk about the JFSA cases and explain that most of

     these cases concerned the old system, and how each one was dealt with,

     with prosecution as a last resort.



                              Page 117 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




g.   We would take Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP through their

     constituents' cases.


h.   We would then suggest that the way forward was for POL to use Deloitte,

     as a technical IT expert, to review the system. The note records that we

     hoped that if the review gave Horizon a clean bill of health, this would

     persuade them that the system was not at fault.


266. The final section of Alwen's notes sets out the key action points. These

      were:


a.   To understand and be able to show the chronology and chapter and verse

     on the two constituency cases.


b.   To set out clear evidence on no more than four or five key pieces of paper.


c.   To set out what POL had done on training, support for balancing and cash

     holding monitoring, including any lessons learned.


d.   Answers to the questions that Lord Arbuthnot had set out in the note which

     he handed to Alice in March.


e.   Feedback from Lesley on why we were proposing to use Deloitte, her views

     on the Computer Weekly article, and what we were doing about them.


267. I believe this document is a fair summary of what we were aiming to

      achieve by meeting and how we proposed to do that in terms of the

      presentation and the information we needed.




                             Page 118 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




268. Alwen's notes state that a team (i.e. the team that I have described

      above) was collating the information set out in the action points. I was

      not involved in that process. I was confident that the team, collectively,

      had the necessary knowledge and experience, and the support within

      their own specialist functions, to deal with the issues raised by the MPs.

      Lesley was able to deal with the IT issues, Angela would address issues

      of training and support, Rod would assist on accounting issues and

      Susan on the legal issues. I understood that the briefing and the meeting

      pack would be the work of many hands, even if each person would not

      personally draft the sections dealing with their area of expertise, they

      would sign it off. It was obviously important that Lesley was involved in

      the process to provide information and her views on the Horizon IT

      system.


269. I was confident that the team would produce what POL required for this

      meeting, namely a full and clear account of the facts. The document was

      produced by a team of senior managers, including the GC, for the

      Chairman and the CEO to present to two important MPs. In my view, this

      document had been subject to a high level of scrutiny by a senior team.

      That was really the source of my confidence that I could rely on the

      document.


270. As far as I can tell, I was sent a draft of the briefing document for the first

      time on 11 May 2012, when Alwen sent what she described as "the initial

      papers" to Alice, Susan and me (POL00105601 ). Alice replied on 13 May

      2012 setting out her view that while the document was thorough, she


                              Page 119 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




 thought that the structure and tone of the document were wrong. Alice

 felt, in light of Lord Arbuthnot's comment in his initial letter, that POL

  should not 'close ranks', and her wish not to be seen to be doing that,

 that the document should not create the impression that POL believed

 that everything was perfect. Alice stated:


"We are now planning to do things which ought to command their

confidence not just re-iterating that everything is fine and always has been,

which is unconvincing.


I think I have to open the meeting with references to what we're thinking of

doing in answer to what we've heard rather than leave that to the end.


So I would start by saying that we take this very seriously both for the

individuals, public money and our reputation. I would say that we want to

find a way of convincing them and others who are sceptical about these

issues that we are handling this properly and fairly ... We do believe that our

IT system is and has been sound and that our support for Sub-Ps is much

better than has been claimed. We would like to take them through some of

this and would also like to take them each through the details of their

individual constituency cases. But we are always open to improving and

for that reason we are doing 2 things - looking at how we can improve the

training and support which we give to Sub-Ps ... and commissioning a study

of our current Horizon system (referring to the fact that this is a different

system from the one in operation when the cases which are pending legal

action occurred). I would then ask for their patience as we explain what the

situation is and at the end ask them for their reactions, including to the

                         Page 120 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




   Deloittes [sic] idea."


271. I do not remember the email sent by Alice Perkins and do not recall the

     original draft briefing to know how much it changed over time. I had no

     issues with being open and transparent. Alice knew both MPs well and I

     trusted her judgment - I would have supported her comments.


272. The final version of the meeting pack is at (POL00033825). The

     proposed structure of the presentation to the MPs was that Alice would

     make introductory remarks (which I can see reflected the changes she

     proposed in her email on 13 May 2012), I would provide background on

     the scale and infrastructure of the branch network, and Lesley would

     speak about the Horizon IT system. I would then pick up with an outline

     of the recruitment and training processes. Susan would introduce the two

     case studies of Lord Arbuthnot's and Oliver Letwin MP's constituency

     cases, which Susan and Angela would then discuss in detail. The

     meeting would be closed by Alice.


273. I prepared for the meeting by reading the brief and the meeting pack and

     by having pre-meetings with the other POL participants. (POL00107719)

     is an email from Alice's PA, Glenda Hansen, to Rod, Susan, Angela,

     Lesley and me referring to a pre-meeting on 16 May 2012. It is possible,

     but I have been unable to confirm this from the documents, that there

     were other briefing sessions. In addition, although I cannot remember all

     the details,     had one-on-one discussions with some of the other

     participants.    have a recollection of speaking to Lesley about the

     technical issues at least once before the meeting, and that she talked me

                            Page 121 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




       through the reasons why she would tell the MPs that POL was confident

       in the integrity of the system.


274. Although I cannot be sure, I think I asked Angela to talk me through the

       graph which showed inflated cash figures at the South Warnborough

       branch, so that I could understand it better.


275. I have some recollections of the meeting:


a.   I am confident that the team followed the brief and spoke on their allocated

     topics. While I cannot be certain, it is unlikely that I strayed from the brief

     into discussing BEDs or the integrity of Horizon.


b.   I do not recall mentioning the EY audit at this meeting. It is unlikely that I

     did so. It was not included in the topics allocated to me and I do not believe

     I would have raised it of my own initiative. It would not have crossed my

     mind at the time to refer to it in the context of the discussion with the MPs.


c.   Angela gave an impressive presentation on the two case studies.

     (POL00096748) are the notes of the Post Office Communications Action

     Group meeting on 29 May 2012. Page five of the document records an

     update from me which refers to the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver

     Letwin MP:


          "PV shared with the GAG her recent experience of meeting with two

          prominent MPs on their concerns over the accuracy and validity of

          the Horizon system, following lobbying from Subpostmasters at

          branches where financial discrepancies have been discovered. PV

          praised the work of Angela Van Den Bogerd, Head of Network
                               Page 122 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




          Services, in meticulously unpicking the MPs claims step by step and

          turning an openly initial hostile stance into one of understanding and

          acknowledgement of our position on the cases concerned."


d.   I am not certain that I would have used the phrase "meticulously unpicking"

     but the note captures the impression. I can still recall that POL had

     demonstrated from the facts presented step by step by Angela in the two

     constituency cases that the SPMs in question had been at fault, which can

     be seen at page 5 of (POL00096748).


e.   Lesley gave a presentation focussing on the integrity of Horizon, in line with

     the notes in her sections of the briefing.


f.   The proposal that POL should engage a forensic accountant came from

     Lord Arbuthnot. Looking at the documents has triggered a recollection that

     he seemed to accept what Lesley had said about the integrity of the

     system. What he therefore wanted was for a forensic expert to establish

     precisely what had happened in the individual cases referred to MPs where

     SPMs denied responsibility for losses.


276. The outcome of the meeting was recorded in an email to me from Alwen

       on 21 May 2012, in which Alwen set out Alice's recollection of what had

       been agreed with Lord Arbuthnot (POL00105491 ). It was agreed that

       POL would find a forensic accountant with good people skills and ask

       them to look at each case, talk to the SPM, review the records and files,

       and look at how the Horizon software was validated. At the same time,

       Lord Arbuthnot would speak to the other MPs with similar concerns and

       offer them a similar meeting to the one we had just had. At that meeting,
                              Page 123 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     POL would put to the MPs the proposal of a forensic accountant and a

     review by Deloitte. Alwen had also agreed with Michele Graves, Head of

     Executive Correspondence, that any new MPs' cases would be brought

     to Alwen. The email accords with my recollection of how the meeting

     concluded. I must have printed the email out because the version

     disclosed by the Inquiry contains my manuscript notes. These state: "i)

     Forensic accountant; ii) brief, milestones, timing ... iii) phone call to speak

     to JA; iv) Susan I Alwen re briefing notes."


277. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 23 May 2012 (POl00021507)

     record that Alice and I reported these developments to the POL Board

     as follows:


      "The Chief Executive and the Chairman updated the Board on the

      meeting with James Arbuthnot MP and Oliver Letwin MP, taking them

      through their constituency cases which, they believed, had challenged

      the integrity of the Horizon system. The meeting had been a success

      and JA had now agreed to facilitate another meeting with the other MPs

      who also had cases in their constituencies. The business had also

      agreed to use a forensic accountant to investigate the system and give

      further comfort to those concerned about these cases."


278. I have no memory of what was said to the POL Board beyond what is set

     out in the minutes. I believe that the meeting was judged a success

     because Lord Arbuthnot had agreed to collaborate with POL in what we

     hoped would be a structured, evidence-driven review of his and

     potentially other MPs' cases.

                             Page 124 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




Meeting with MPs on 18 June 2012


     279. On 22 May 2012, my PA, Mia Porter, sent an email on my behalf to

          Alwen, Lesley, Susan and Angela, following a discussion I had had with

          Alwen (P0l00096545). Alwen and I had agreed that the agenda for the

          meeting would follow "the well worn path" from the meeting with Lord

          Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin MP and that we would attempt to replicate

          the conversation we had had with the two MPs with the larger group. I

          asked Alwen to update or reshape the briefing note and that the rough

          outline of the Lord Arbuthnot / Oliver Letwin MP meeting had been as

          follows:


                    "JA - Overall introduction.


                    Alice intro - take the issues seriously etc


                    Paula follow on - confirm this and outline the challenges we face

                     in addressing these issues and how we plan to explain to them

                     the integrity of the system and the improvements that have been

                     made in our training/support/escalation processes.


                    Angela - talk through two or three anonymous examples.


                    JA - explain how he was persuaded/reassured and to present

                     his recommendations of a forensic accountant.


                    Paula - explain/offer to investigate MP's individual cases and

                     have the process validated by the FA.


                    Alice/JA - gain agreement/finish meeting".
                                   Page 125 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




280. My email could have been clearer. What I was setting out in the section

     above was not in fact an account of how the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot

     and Oliver Letwin MP unfolded, rather I was suggesting it as guidance. I

     said "update I reshape the briefing note" i.e. to set out how the agenda

     from that meeting could be adapted for the meeting with the larger group

     of MPs. I believe that the "challenges" in addressing these cases that I

     referred to were that, even where POL believed the SPM was at fault,

     and in some cases had proved in the criminal courts that the SPM had

     acted fraudulently, the situation was still upsetting and very personally

     distressing to those individuals, and the information about these

     individuals needed to be handled sensitively. Throughout the years

     during which POL was reviewing SPM Horizon / legal cases, POL

     colleagues - myself included - were frequently reminded about the

     importance of confidentiality concerning the sensitive nature of the

     personal SPM data.


281. On 24 May 2012, Mia Porter arranged a conference call for 25 May 2012

     to discuss preparation for the meeting with the larger group of MPs

     (POl00096544). The attendees were to include Angela, Susan, Alwen

     and Lesley. I do not recall if I was able to make the call. It was chaired

     by Lesley. and I do not recall whether I participated or not. On 25 May

     2012 Simon Baker sent an email (POl00096557) to Susan, Alwen,

     Lesley, Angela and me containing a list of action points from the

     conference call. The action points include that Simon and Lesley would

     agree and document our preferred option on the forensic accountancy

     proposal, that I would call Lord Arbuthnot's office to obtain a list of the

                            Page 126 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     MPs, and that Simon would arrange update meetings and a pre-meeting

     for me. In terms of the agenda for the meeting, the plan was as

     suggested, to re-use the key messages from the meeting on 17 May

     2012 with additional points on the forensic accountancy proposal and a

     proposal that we would meet with each MP individually to take them

     through their constituent's case.


282. Simon circulated the draft briefing pack to the usual team and me on 29

     May 2012 (POl00096558). The final version of the document is at

     (POl00096640). I understood at the time that the briefing pack was put

     together in the same way as the briefing for the meeting in May, i.e. that

     it reflected the views of the team who were working on this project

     (Lesley, Angela, Alwen and Susan), using information sourced from their

     specialist functions. I note that one difference from the May briefing is

     that Lesley was not going to attend the meeting with the group of MPs. I

     do not know why this was. I presume this is the reason why the briefing

     allocated a speaking segment about Horizon to me. I would have

     prepared for the meeting in the same way as the May meeting, namely

     by having one or more pre-meetings with the other participants together

     with one-on-one meetings.


283. The Inquiry has asked me to consider two statements in the sections of

     the briefing which I was to present to the MPs.


284. The first is the comment in the fifth bullet point in the section on

     "Background" that"/ am confident about the integrity of Horizon". I have

     been asked about the basis on which I made this statement. I believed

                            Page 127 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           that Lesley had reviewed these notes, and in any case, they are

           essentially a re-working of the notes that Lesley herself had used at the

           meeting in May, with some phrases lifted verbatim. In addition, Lesley

           had explained the basis on which POL could be confident in the integrity

           of system to me personally prior to the May meeting. I felt able to say that

           I (as a non-IT expert) felt confidence in Horizon because that was the

           view of POL's most senior IT manager. I did not have the expertise myself

           and did not have any reason not to trust Lesley's explanation.


     285. I have also been asked to consider the second indented bullet point in

           the same section: "Each transaction is protected with a digital signature

           to prevent change or tampering. Which means if someone was able to

           penetrate the many layers of security - they wouldn't be able to unlock

           the seal that protects the transaction - this prevents any malicious

           manipulation". The Inquiry has asked whether I was referring here to

           manipulation by SPMs, by Fujitsu or by third parties. I cannot recall what

           I had in mind - it is possible that I was briefed at the time on what this

           comment was directed at. As I read it today, I think it is likely I understood

           the comment to relate to those working on audit data in Fujitsu.


     286. The Inquiry has also asked me to explain what I meant in an email to

           Lord Arbuthnot in an email on 18 June 2012 (POl00096660), when I

           referred to the "opportunity to resolve transparently and robustly the

           outstanding queries". What I was referring to was that we would get to

           the bottom of the MPs' cases by using a forensic accountant.


52. Please consider POl00096574 (proposal for an independent review of past

                                   Page 128 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




fraud and theft cases). POL00096575 (email from Susan Crichton to Alice

Perkins and you dated 6 June 2012), POL00096576 (draft terms of reference),

POL00113792 (email from Alice Perkins to you and Susan Crichton dated 8 June

2012), POL00096604 (email chain between you and Alice Perkins on 9 June

2012), POL00096606 (email chain between you and Alwen Lyons on 9 June

2012).


52.1. Please explain the background to the appointment of Second Sight

Support Services Limited ("Second Sight"). In particular, please address the

following issues: how was Second Sight identified to lead the review: who at

POL was responsible for the decision to appoint Second Sight: and did POL

receive or rely upon legal advice in appointing Second Sight?


52.2. Please provide a full description of all conversations you had with

members of POL concerning the Second Sight's terms of reference. What were

your objectives in drafting the terms of reference?


52.3. Please describe what you understood Second Sight's role to be.


52.4. Please explain what preparatory steps POL took to prepare information to

provide to Second Sight.


52.5. Please set out the reasons for the position on 11 June 2012 that "Sub

postmasters who have been prosecuted will not be involved although their

cases will still be reviewed". Was this position consistent with POL seeking to

investigate past action taken on the basis of Horizon data fairly and

transparently?


52.6. Please describe the conversation you had with Ron Warmington on or
                                Page 129 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




around 21 June 2012. What did you consider to be "exactly the right quality

level of engagement".


Questions 53 and 54 omitted as general questions


55. Please consider POl00105487 (letter from lord Arbuthnot to you dated 4

October 2012), POl00097030 (email from Martin Edwards on 4 October 2012),

POl00097115 (email from Simon Baker to you on 7 November 2012),

POl00097116 (draft agreement), POl00097309 (email from Joria Preston to you

and others on 19 December 2012) and POL00097310 (attachment to prior email).


55.1. Please describe the negotiations you had with JFSA and / or lord

Arbuthnot concerning the inclusion of JFSA cases in the Second Sight review.

If POL objected to JFSA cases, please explain why.


55.2. Please explain to what extent, if at all, POL considered volunteering cases

for Second Sight to consider based on known instances of BEDs materialising

in the Horizon IT System.


55.3. Please consider the following from the briefing: "The JFSA have requested

that we inform the sub-postmaster community about the investigation, to

encourage them to come forward. Post Office has not yet done this due to the

concern of creating a high volume of low value cases". Please explain (a) what

was considered to be a low value case (b) what was considered to be "a high

volume" and (c) why it would not be important to consider a high volume of low

value cases in circumstances where POL relied on Horizon's ability to handle

large numbers of transactions accurately to justify its integrity.




                                 Page 130 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




287. The appointment of forensic accountants to conduct a review was

     unusual and outside my previous experience of engaging third party

     consultants. While POL was to engage and pay for the forensic

     accountants, we would be appointing them to implement the agreement

     with Lord Arbuthnot and the other MPs that we would engage forensic

     investigators to look at each of their cases. Because of these unusual

     circumstances, any accountant would need to be acceptable not only to

     POL, but also to Lord Arbuthnot and the MPs, and (as matters

     developed) to the JFSA.


288. Although the precise terms of reference and the scope of the review were

     debated and refined during June and July 2012, I understood from the

     beginning of the process of Second Sight's appointment that their

     fundamental role would be to carry out the review as independent

     investigators. This meant that Second Sight's work product was to be

     objective and independent.


289. Second Sight were recommended by Susan Crichton. She knew Ron

     Warmington from earlier in her career and socially at a local tennis club,

     although I understood that he was not a close acquaintance. She

     suggested that Second Sight had the right combination of skills and

     experience to carry out the review. Second Sight had worked on a

     number of fraud matters involving IT and had worked with MPs in the

     past. As a smaller firm, they would also satisfy Lord Arbuthnot's

     requirement (and something I felt strongly about too, having worked as

     Network Director) that the forensic accountants should have good people


                           Page 131 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     skills and be able to understand the operations of a small business,

     probably much better than an organisation like Deloitte.


290. I do not remember the process for the decision to seek to appoint Second

     Sight, but I am sure that Alice Perkins and I ultimately approved the

     recommendation that they be engaged. I cannot be sure, but I have a

     recollection that Alice met them before I did.


291. My email to Susan, Alice, and Alwen on 21 June 2012 (POl00105477)

     indicates that I met Ron Warmington for the first time on that date. This

     was after POL had recommended their appointment to Lord Arbuthnot. I

     commented in my email that I thought that Ron would do "an excellent

     job for us: exactly the right quality level of engagement etc., we're looking

     for. I made it very clear to Ron that our primary objective of this exercise

     is to be transparent and to deal with whatever outcomes and conclusions

     he comes to." I do not recall the conversation, but what I believe I meant

     was that my impression from meeting him was that Second Sight was a

     good fit for the task.


292. Second Sight still needed to be approved by Lord Arbuthnot. As Alice

     reported to the POL Board at its meeting on 4 July 2012, POL had

     arranged for Second Sight to meet Lord Arbuthnot (at page 6 of

     (POl00021508)). He emailed Alice and me after the meeting, stating that

     he would be happy for Second Sight to proceed, subject to the points he

     set out in his email. One of the points was that the MPs were keen for

     SPMs to support this process and that Alan Bates of the JFSA was

     important to this. Lord Arbuthnot had therefore offered Alan a meeting

                              Page 132 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     with Second Sight. Although Lord Arbuthnot was clear that the JFSA

     should not have the power of veto over the appointment of Second Sight,

     he would like as far as possible to have Alan's support. For this reason,

     Lord Arbuthnot cautioned against proceeding with Second Sight until he

     had heard from the JFSA.


293. The meeting between Second Sight, Lord Arbuthnot, and the JFSA took

     place on 12 July 2012. Lord Arbuthnot wrote to me immediately after the

     meeting       (POL0009681 O;         POL00096811;          POL00096823;

     POL00107750). He said that it had been a very good meeting and that

     Ron Warmington and Ian Henderson had answered the questions of Alan

     Bates and Kay Linnell (a forensic accountant who had accompanied

     Alan) to their satisfaction. He added:


   "However, the other MPs and I take the view - which I think you share -

   that so far as we can we should ensure that as the investigation goes on it

   retains the buy-in of the sub-Postmasters. To this end I should be grateful

   if you would agree to setting aside a small amount of money (capped at

   5,000) for a forensic accountant nominated by the Alliance (likely to be

   Miss Linnell) to carry out sporadic review of SS's findings. We discussed

   this at the meeting and felt it would be the key to the entire process working

   for everyone - my constituents and those of other MPs, the spms, and of

   course the PO and its reputation."


294. On the same day, Mia Porter replied on my behalf: "Absolutely no

     problem with this suggestion. Alwen will ensure the process is put into

     place".

                            Page 133 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




295. It was only at this point that the appointment of Second Sight was agreed

        in principle between the three stakeholders in the review: POL, the MPs,

        and the JFSA. However, the discussions around the scope of the review

        continued. I will deal with these discussions in the next section of my

        witness statement.


296. The earliest version of a terms of reference that I have seen in the

        documents is (POL00096576). This is a proposal dated 1 June 2012 from

        Second Sight to POL to carry out an independent review of past fraud

        and theft cases to determine whether the facts supported POL's findings

        and the charges brought against individuals. I have no recollection of

        seeing this document at the time. Second Sight proposed that they would

        consider, by reference to a sample of cases, whether:


          "the Post Office has thoroughly investigated the facts, including the

           alleged perpetrator's claims about Post Office systems and other

           inadequacies

          there is any indication that assertions that "Horizon is the real culprit"

           have any basis in truth

          the courts have been presented with all relevant investigative findings

           and that any evidence that might support any defendant's case has

           also been properly considered by the company's investigators and

           then disclosed to the Court

          there is any indication, or pattern, and to where the missing funds

           really went (the point here being to review defendants' claims that the




                               Page 134 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




          false accounting - that most of them have admitted - was their only

          way out when those 'mysterious shortfalls' hit them)

         there exists any evidence of systemic flaws or control weaknesses

          within the old or new Horizon systems and POL 's related operational

          procedures

         the Post Office has failed to do anything that it should have done ... or

          done anything that it should not have done .. .in regard to the

          investigations and prosecutions"

297. The next version of the terms of reference was prepared by Susan on 6

       June 2012 (POL00029815). Susan sent this version to Alice, Lesley

       Sewell, Alwen Lyons, Angela Van Den Bogerd, Simon Baker and me

       during the evening of 6 June 2012. In this version, the scope of the review

       was as follows:


   "The Post Office has instructed an independent third-party organisation,

   2nd Sight Limited provide a proposal to conduct a review which would

   include the following tasks:


   Select a representative sample of cases that have led to prosecutions/court

   appointed restitution. The sample needs to cover cases:


    where defendants claim they didn't take any cash


    where assertions have been made that 'The System' (i.e. Horizon)

   caused the shortage (include old and new versions of Horizon if possible).


    which have been taken up by MPs.


   Carefully review all company-held documentation focussing heavily on
                              Page 135 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




   probable reasons why shortfalls occurred or built up.


   Interview company investigators to gain insights and to verify fairness of

   findings.


   Review defence submissions focussing on evidence of innocence

   (consider separately False Accounting and Theft).


   Try to establish why the shortages arose (assign each case to a Probability

   Category such as: Skill shortfall;          Diversion     to Failing Business;

   Straightforward Theft (by whom?); Mysterious Disappearance; etc).


   Review all materials from the viewpoint of the Defence (seek Proof of

   Innocence and test evidence indicative of guilt)


   Study and selectively test the "Horizon" system in order to find any 'Black

   Hole', Program Bug etc that might have caused mysterious shortages.


   Reach       conclusions   on   each   case     and      identify   any   systemic

   issues/concerns."


298. On 7 June 2012, Susan sent Alice, Alwen, Lesley, Simon and me a

     redraft of the terms of reference she had sent on 6 June (POl00105472).

     The proposed terms of reference were now as follows:


   "This review would include the following:


   A review of all company-held documentation focussing heavily on probable

   reasons why shortfalls occurred or built up,


   Interview company investigators to gain insights and to verify fairness of

                             Page 136 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




   findings,


   Review defence submissions focussing on evidence of innocence.


   Try to establish why the shortages arose.


   Review all materials from the viewpoint of the Defence,


   Study and selectively test the 'Horizon' system, to the extent possible given

   the change in systems,


   Reach       conclusions   on   each   case   and   identify any systematic

   issues/concerns


   Meet with any MP, subpostmaster I mistresses plus legal representatives

   if required."


299. Susan's covering email for the revised draft indicates that she had

     revised the wording to take account of a discussion involving Alice and

     me that morning: "Alice and Paula ... hopefully this picks up the issues

     raised this morning" (seen at page 1 of (POL00105472)). Susan then

     raised the following additional point, which does not appear to have been

     one of the issues discussed earlier:


   "In addition, and following a review of the cases listed, which I had not seen

   this before, I have been giving some further thought to our position

   particularly in respect of the cases where we have criminally prosecuted

   the sub postmaster I mistress. In those cases I do not think that we want

   to be seen as re-opening the cases but rather position this as a review of

   the existing evidence to enable an understanding of the outstanding
                              Page 137 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




    concerns and the facts in so far as they concern the Horizon system. For

    those who have not been prosecuted we can offer a full independent

    investigation.


    The overall outcome would be a general conclusion which critically reviews

    the evidence already in existence and new evidence from the work done

    by the independent forensic auditor.


    If you agree with the above then the TOR would need to be slightly

    amended to take this into account."


300. On 8 June 2012, Alice circulated a further revised version of the terms of

      reference (POl00113792). Her three substantive issues were as follows.

      First, she was unclear why the earlier version of the terms of reference

      stated that Second Sight would review all materials from the perspective

      of the defence. She stated "won't the investigators want to look at all the

      relevant material whether defence or prosecution? If we focus too much

      on the defence in the TOR, does this suggest that we think there is

      something we've overlooked in the past?". Second, to avoid POL being

      accused of being selective in the material it provided to Second Sight,

     Alice suggested they be given access to all relevant material held by

      POL. Third, she thought that POL should make a commitment to

      publishing the findings in full. Alice's re-drafted terms of reference stated:


   "The Post Office has instructed 2nd Sight Limited to conduct an

    independent review of existing cases where concerns have been raised by

    MPs, and/or Shoesmiths [sic] have issued proceedings.


                              Page 138 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




This will include the following:


Reviewing all company-held documentation focussing on why shortfalls

occurred.


Interviewing company investigators to gain insights and to verify their

findings.


Reviewing defence submissions.


(Reviewing all materials from the viewpoint of the Defence - ON Don't

understand this; do we need it? And if so, why do we need the previous

bullet, and do we want only to focus on the viewpoint of the defence?).


Studying and selectively testing, the 'Horizon' system (to the extent

possible given the change in systems in 20 .. .).


The reviewers will meet any MP or any of the SubPostmasters I

SubPostmistresses affected at their request.


The review will reach conclusions on each case and identify any systemic

issues/concerns.


Timescales and Costs


It is anticipated that the review will commence in late June or early July.

Post Office Limited hope to be in a position to publish its findings in the

autumn."




                          Page 139 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




301. Alice's email did not, however, engage with Susan's view that former

     SPMs who had been convicted should not be offered an independent

     review by Second Sight in case this re-opened past convictions.


302. On 9 June 2012, Alice sent an email to Susan, cc'd Alwen and me,

     following a conversation with Alwen on 8 June (POL00096603). I was not

     involved in that discussion, as my email in the same URN shows. Alice's

     email appears to refer to a disagreement between her and Alwen about

     whether the review should include cases where the SPM had been

     convicted or had brought proceedings against POL via Shoosmiths. Alice

     stated:


   "I am clear that we should include ALL the MPs cases, irrespective of

   whether they have been decided in Court. If we try to draw a distinction

   here we will be accused of picking cases to suit ourselves and being

   vulnerable on the ones we omit. We'll have a row about that instead of

   moving the issue on. On reflection, I don't buy the argument that we would

   somehow undermine the Court process by doing this. There are plenty of

   ways in which people go over ground which has been settled in Court and

   if there weren't, no-one would ever be able to get a conviction overturned.

   And if (which we don't believe) there were new evidence in a case which

   had been decided, we would want to do, and be seen to do, the right thing

   by that.


   So I stick by the TOR as drafted yesterday on this important point.


   Where I think there may be more of an issue is the line between

   Shoesmith's [sic] cases which have been declared to us and those (many
                           Page 140 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




   more) which they have merely hinted at. I suggest the way to deaf with

   those may be by time, ie we'll include those we know about as of Monday

   week but not those which come after. As we said at our meeting, it would

   be open to the independent reviewers to say in their findings that they think

   we should extend the review.


   I am sorry to be bothering you with this on a Saturday but time is against

   us, especially as Paula is seeing James Arbuthnot on Monday afternoon

   and I feel very strongly about this."


303. On the same day, Alwen emailed me on the same topic (POL00096606;

     POL00096603 ):


   "Paula in case Susan doesn't pick this up as she is in Berlin and before you

   speak to Alice. The issue that came to light with the list of MP cases was

   that they included the Mishra [sic] you will remember the case and the

   publicity she went to prison and had (redacted). The husband got publicity

   through radio and press. (Redacted) and she raised this at the meeting

   with Alice before you joined was whether now contacting her to tell her we

   review the case would be a red rag to a bull. Alice feels this is the business

   pushing back unnecessarily and she feels this has happened throughout

   the process and she is having to keep pushing us! Susan is getting external

   advice on the effect this would have on cases which have been through

   the courts. If you want a call before you call Alice my phone is on."


304. I replied "Thx - don't worry. We spoke and it's OK. We'll pick up

     tomorrow".


                            Page 141 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




305. On 11 June 2012, Alwen sent me an email stating that "following is as

       we discussed'' (POL00096608). The email stated that, at the meeting the

       following Monday with Lord Arbuthnot and other MPs, POL would offer:


         "Each MP a review of their individual case carried out by 2nd Sight an

          independent forensic accountant

         This will be private and confidential

         2nd Sight may involve the sub postmaster in their review if they deem

          it to be necessary

         Sub postmasters who have been prosecuted will not be involved

          although their cases will still be reviewed. "



306. An email from Alwen on 12 June 2012 to Angela, Simon, Mike Granville

       and Susan shows that the attached version of the terms of reference

       (which I understand to be POL00096615) had been sent to Lord

       Arbuthnot by 12 June at the latest (POL00027713; POL00117119). This

       version states:


   "The Post Office has instructed 2nd Sight Limited to conduct an

   independent review of existing cases where concerns have been raised by

   MPs and/or Shoesmiths [sic].


   This will include the following:


   Reviewing all company-held documentation focussing on why shortfalls

   occurred.


   Interviewing company investigators to gain insights and to verify their

                               Page 142 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   findings.


   Reviewing defence submissions.


    Studying relevant evidence with regard to the 'Horizon' system.


    The reviewers will meet any affected MP at their request on a private and

    confidential basis.


    The review will reach conclusions on each case and identify any systemic

    issues/concerns, including training and support processes."


307. There are differences between the version of the terms of reference sent

      by Alice on 8 June 2012 and the version sent to Lord Arbuthnot. While

     Alice's version stated that Second Sight would meet any affected MP or

     SPM at their request, the later version states that Second Sight would

      only meet MPs on a private and confidential basis. The later version also

      made no mention of the publication of Second Sight's findings.


308. I have no recollection of any discussions which led to the changes to the

     terms of reference set out above, though it is evident from the documents

     that Alice's wish to include criminal cases in the review was of concern

     to Susan and Alwen.


309. In that context, in the course of preparing this witness statement I have

      seen a file note of a conference on 12 July 2012 with two barristers,

      Richard Morgan QC and Daniel Margolin. The attendees were Gavin

      Matthews, Susan Crichton and Hugh Flemington (POL00006484). The

      note appears to record advice from the barristers that instructing an


                            Page 143 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




       expert to prepare an expert report on the Horizon system was the highest

       risk response to SPM complaints. It states: "What will it achieve? It will

       not be able to address any of the civil/criminal cases dealt with under 'Old

       Horizon'." This is described in the note as a no-win situation for POL: "If

       the findings are that there are no issues with Horizon people will see that

       as a 'whitewash' whereas if the findings are negative that will open the

       floodgates to damages claims by SPMs who were imprisoned for false

       accounting and Access Legal will start to pursue all the civil claims they

       are currently sitting on." A less risky approach would be to take the MPs

       through the cases in which they were interested. I have no recollection

       of ever seeing the file note or being briefed about the advice.


310.   As I have mentioned above, Lord Arbuthnot was sent a copy of the last

       version of the draft terms of reference by 12 June 2012. He emailed Alice

       and me on 13 June 2012 to raise some issues with the terms of reference

       and asked for our thoughts (POl00096622). The first was that POL was

       proposing that the forensic accountants should meet with MPs, but not

       necessarily with the relevant SPM to allow them to put their side of the

       story:


        "And MPs will not know as much as the sub-Postmasters will, and so

the issue will not be resolved unless the MPs are also given the chance to have

their constituents at the meeting. What about their advisers? Surely they ought

to be included as well? Since we are trying to clear the matter up in .. .a robust

and transparent manner, it does seem to me that this needs further thought."




                              Page 144 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




311. I responded to Lord Arbuthnot on the same day. I assured him that Alice

     and I intended total transparency, and that the queries he raised were

     valid. I made the point that each case was different. We were dealing

     with particularly sensitive and personal situations, combinations of fact

     and misunderstandings, and in some cases (as we believed at the time),

     fiction and/ or fraud, as we had explained at the meeting in May. I went

     on:


   "Rather than a blanket approach, we would take each case separately -

    we are dealing with individuals' lives and livelihoods. But, the guarantee for

    each one is complete transparency and handled in the most appropriate

    and sensitive way. Therefore in some, we may need to go further than the

    draft TOR suggests, with SPMRs in joint meetings; in others, that might be

    difficult and/or embarrassing for them and their MPs. We would however

    start with each MP in order to explain/explore the background."


312. The email sets out my understanding and position at that time in relation

     to whether the forensic accountants would meet the SPMs. My view was

     that this issue should be approached with flexibility on a case-by-case

     basis, and that in some cases a meeting would be appropriate.


313. I met Lord Arbuthnot on 14 June 2012. I wanted to see him in advance

     of the meeting with the group of MPs on 18 June 2012 to explore whether

     we could present them with an agreed position. I reported to Neil

      Mccausland (one of the POL NEDs) in an email on 14 June 2012 that

     the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot had gone to plan: he had agreed POL's

     draft terms of reference and to an individual rather than "blankef'

                             Page 145 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     approach (POL00096642; POL00096638). I am not able to recall

     whether my reference to a "blankef' approach referred to the discussion

     about whether there would          be meetings between the forensic

     investigators and the SPMs, or whether this referred to a broader view

     that the investigation should aim to identify what had happened in each

     of the individual cases, as opposed to investigating the system as a

     whole. In that context, it was certainly my view at the time that if Horizon

     had caused these SPMs' losses, this would be identified by an

     investigation of their cases. However, the small number of cases being

     presented by MPs did not justify a system-wide investigation as the

     starting point.


314. POL and Lord Arbuthnot had now agreed on a way forward, as he set

     out in an email to parliamentary colleagues on 18 July 2012, the day of

     the   meeting     between   POL   managers and        the   group of MPs

     (POL00096937):


   "I believe we are approaching a consensus. The consultants from 2nd Sight

   offered that their investigations should be checked by a forensic

   accountant to be nominated by the Alliance; the Post Office has agreed not

   just to this, but to funding it. I believe this tends to confirm that the Post

   Office is genuinely keen to resolve this matter in an open and transparent

   way.


   ''The process is therefore that 2nd Sight will conduct an initial investigation

   of a selected number of cases, from which they will see if conclusions can

   be drawn that lead to further work being required.

                            Page 146 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




   "But it is important that we do not get ahead of ourselves at this stage. It is

   already clear that some individuals are expecting that a very wide-ranging

   and expensive investigation into the computer code behind the Horizon

   system will take place. This is not at the moment what is envisaged. It may

   turn out to be necessary, but the initial investigations will show whether this

   is so."


315. Lord Arbuthnot also wrote to Shoosmiths, on 19 June 2012, to update

     them on what had been agreed (POL00096665):


   ''As you know, prior to yesterday's meeting, I met privately with the

   Chairman of Post Office Ltd and members of her staff. On each occasion

   the meeting was cordial and productive. From these meetings, we have

   come up with a plan for the Post Office to appoint an individual forensic

   accountant (to be chosen in consultation with me) who will examine each

   case individually in order to establish exactly what has happened. The

   individual SubPostmaster I mistress concerned will be given the

   opportunity to be involved, as will his or her MP. Interviews will be

   conducted, data investigated, and in this way it is hoped that an explanation

   can be arrived at that will put to rest any question over what exactly has

   occurred."


316. After the consensus on the way forward was reached with the MPs, the

     next stage of the discussions was the involvement of the JFSA. There

     were a number of distinct issues.


317. On 13 September 2012, Lord Arbuthnot sent me a copy of a letter he had

     received from Alan Bates (POL00026752). Alan stated that, in his view,
                            Page 147 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     the review should not only consider the historic cases but also complaints

     from serving SPMs about current problems with Horizon. Alan suggested

     (repeating what he had said in a letter to Lord Arbuthnot on 13 July 2012)

     that POL should open the review up to serving SPMs and advertise it in

     Subspace (the Network magazine) and offer serving SPMs immunity if

     they came forward with complaints. In his covering letter, Lord Arbuthnot

     asked me to consider both the immunity point and the possibility of

     advertising the review in Subspace.


318. I had no objection in principle to encouraging current SPMs to submit

     cases of current errors to Second Sight and I offered that POL would

     trawl recent call centre records to see if there were any unresolved issues

     with Horizon which could potentially be submitted to the investigation.

     (POL00097030) is a note of a discussion between Lord Arbuthnot, Alan

     Bates and me on 4 October 2012. The note records that Alan said that

     he wasn't looking for complete immunity from prosecution, rather for POL

     to provide assurance that serving SPMs would not be victimised or

     disadvantaged for raising claims. I assured him that I could absolutely

     guarantee there would be no negative comeback and that all cases would

     be handled appropriately.


319. Simon Baker emailed me on 7 November 2012 with an update on the

     progress made since my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Alan Bates

     (POL00097115). By this point, POL had received a draft "immunity

     agreemenf' from the JFSA and had created a revised version, which

     Simon attached to the email. A brief for a meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on


                            Page 148 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




       19 December 2012 records that the "immunity agreemenf' had been

       approved by the JFSA, Second Sight, and POL (POl00097310). I have

       not seen the final version, but I understand that the agreement took the

       form of a joint paper of the JFSA and POL called "Raising Concerns with

       Horizon", of which (POl00097116) was a draft. As far as I recall, I did

       not see this paper, but I would have supported what was agreed, namely

       that while POL would not waive its legal rights against any participant in

       the review, no-one would suffer any detriment for submitting a concern

       to Second Sight honestly and in good faith.


320. I also had no objection in principle to the JFSA referring cases to Second

       Sight. I can see from (POl00096965) that it had been agreed with the

       JFSA by 18 September 2012 that, although the primary route for cases

       to be referred to Second Sight would be via MPs, the JFSA would submit

       their best five to 10 cases. Indeed, the whole point of the immunity

       agreement was Alan Bates' claim that he knew of current SPMs who

       wou Id come forward if they were given assurances that they would suffer

       no detriment. One of the functions of the immunity agreement was to

       remove this obstacle.


321.   The Inquiry has asked me to consider a comment in the briefing at (at

       page 3 of (POL00097310)) that: "The JFSA have requested that we

       inform the sub-postmaster community about the investigation, to

       encourage them to come forward. Post Office has not yet done this due

       to the concern of creating a high volume of low value cases." It is difficult

       for me to say what the author of the document had in mind. In any case,


                               Page 149 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




              POL did advertise the review to serving SPMs on Subspace and in NFSP

              meetings.


56. Please consider POl00027553 (minutes of POL Board Meeting on 21

November 2012). Please describe what update was given to the Board on

Horizon and / or Second Sight.


57. Please consider POl00021510 (minutes of Board meeting on 23 January

2013).


57.1. Please describe what update was given to the Board on Horizon and/ or

Second Sight.


57.2. Who reported that "To date there was no evidence to suggest fault"? On

what basis was that comment made?


         322. I cannot assist the Inquiry on what update was given to the POL Board

              at its meeting on 21 November 2012 (POl00027553).


         323. As regards the POL Board meeting on 23 January 2013 (POl00021510),

              I have no memory of what Alice Perkins said to the POL Board about

              Horizon and Second Sight. I do not know the source of Alice's comment

              that "To date there was no evidence of fault" (with Horizon).


58. Please consider POl00097589 (briefing on MPs cases review of Horizon),

POl00107889 (email chain between you and Alwen Lyons on 11 March 2013)

and POL00097884 (emails on 26 March 2013 from Ian Henderson, lord

Arbuthnot and others).


58.1. Please describe your view of the problem themes identified by Second
                                    Page 150 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




Sight and recorded at paragraph 4.3 of POL00097589. What steps. if any. did

you or others in senior management take to ascertain what others in (a) Fujitsu

or (b) POL (such as the within the problem management team), knew of these

potential issues with Horizon?


58.2. Please expand on your concerns in your comment in POL00107889 that

"Now my biggest concern - we are taking big decisions on IT currently and

irrespective of the independence of the SS work, which it is critical to protect,

I/we should be aware asap if there are emerging issues with Horizon. Who from

IT is in the loop, do you know? And do you know if we have a view as to how

robust the SS findings are - ie, there may be similarities of accounts from

Spmrs - but are they being born out by analysis of what actually happened with

the system itself". In particular, please explain whether there was anyone (a)

with technical IT experience or (b) with problem management experience,

analysing the work of Second Sight for POL If not, why not?


58.3. Please set out your recollection of the meeting of 24 March 2013.


58.4. Please expand on your comment "I'm a bit disturbed by Ian's. James

seems to be even handed in his comments, which makes Ian's look as though

he had an agenda". What agenda were you concerned Mr Henderson had

formed?


58.5. Please set out your views on Second Sight by this point.


      324. On 7 March 2013, Lord Arbuthnot wrote to Alice Perkins to notify her that

            he was to host a meeting on 25 March 2013 at which the MPs in his

            group, and Alan Bates and Kay Linnell of the JFSA would be given an

                                  Page 151 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     update on the progress of the review from Ron Warmington and Ian

     Henderson (POL00097588). Lord Arbuthnot said that he was initially

     concerned that inviting POL to attend might affect MPs' perception of

     Second Sight's independence from POL, but he had been persuaded by

     Second Sight that POL should be represented.


325. On the second page of the letter, Lord Arbuthnot said that he would like

     to raise two matters. These were:


   "In my discussions with Ron and Ian, I gather that questions have been

   raised over the absolute integrity of Horizon, though without their being so

   fundamental as to say that the system is not fit for purpose. Since it is a

   system that remains in current use, there is the risk that existing

    SubPostmasters and mistresses may find themselves in exactly the same

   position as those whose cases are being investigated. I know that definitive

   results are not yet available, but I hope the Post office would be ready to

   address this issue.


   As I mentioned earlier, I am not inviting media to this meeting.

   Nevertheless, it would be expecting too much of MPs, if they were told that

   there were question marks over Horizon, to demand that they keep their

   constituents in ignorance of a potentially promising outcome. It would

   damage the process we are all committed to if the Post Office were not well

   prepared with a ready solution to this problem, among others, that could

   be offered publicly in this meeting."


326. Alwen Lyons emailed me a copy of this letter on 11 March 2013

     (POL00097587)       together   with   a   second    attached   document
                            Page 152 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




       (POL00097589). This document is a March 2013 update on the progress

       of the review prepared by POL. Paragraph 3.1 stated that rather than

       carrying out a full examination of each case, Second Sight had adopted

       a preliminary step of conducting spot reviews. A spot review would

       examine a specific problem identified in a case. POL had received three

       spot reviews from Second Sight to date and expected to receive up to 30

       in total. A team had been assembled from P&BA, Network, Legal, IT,

       Security, and Fujitsu (for technical assistance and data extraction) to

       respond to the spot reviews. This team was currently working on

       responding to the first three spot reviews.


327. Second Sight had identified eight common problem themes, that

       occurred across multiple cases and which, in their view, warranted

       further investigation. These themes were listed at paragraph 4.3 of the

       document as follows:


         "Transaction anomalies following communications or power failure


         Transactions not entered by SPMR or staff


         Missing or duplicated transactions associated with Postage Labels,

          Phone Cards, GIRO payments, A TMs or Cheques


         Training and Support issues


         POL team at Bracknell


         Loss of Audit Trail


         Accounting issues at end of trading period
                                Page 153 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




          Contract between POL and SPMRs"


328. I responded to Alwen on 11 March 2013 (POl00097592). I can see from

        my email to Alwen that I had read the March update on the review and

        commended its quality.


329. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my views on Second Sight's

        common themes, and to state what steps I or others in senior POL

        management took to ascertain what others in POL or Fujitsu knew of

        these potential issues with Horizon.


330. My answer to the first part of the question is that it was difficult to form

        any view of the common themes. As I understood it, the evidence for the

        common themes would be set out in the spot reviews. Second Sight had

        produced three spot reviews by this point, which were being considered

        by POL's response team. Whether these problems were well-founded

        would depend on what came out of the fuller individual case reviews

        when they were complete. Spot reviews were a preliminary step. Looking

        down the list, I would not have regarded any of them as illegitimate areas

        for inquiry, except possibly, with hindsight, the "contract between POL

        and SPMRs" (POl00097589). However, it is unlikely that I picked up at

        the time that there was a potential issue of competence and expertise in

        a forensic accountant commenting on a legal contract.


331. As regards the second part of the question, I understood that the spot

        reviews would be investigated by a team drawn from specialist teams

        within POL (P&BA, Network, Legal, IT, Security), which would call on

        Fujitsu for data and technical support (see the note sent to me by Alwen
                              Page 154 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     at (POL00097589)). It seemed that the process by which we would learn

     initially whether the common issues were problems or not would be by

     the analysis of the spot reviews.


332. Returning to my email to Alwen on 11 March 2013 (POL00097592) I can

     see that I raised Lord Arbuthnot's letter to Alice:


   "Now to my biggest concern - we are taking big decisions on IT currently

   and irrespective of the independence of the SS work, which it is critical to

   protect, I/we should be aware asap if there are emerging issues with

   Horizon. Who from IT is in the loop, do you know? And do you know if we

   have a view as to how robust the SS findings are - ie., there may be

   similarities of accounts from Spmrs - but are they being born out by

   analysis of what actually happened within the system itself?


   I am surprised that I picked this up only by reading a letter from James to

   Alice. I'd have thought that a loyal supplier would have let us know - it's

   pretty important in terms of POL risk management and it would be good if

   SS had flagged it to us as the work unfolded. That shouldn't compromise

   their independence in anyway. Do you have any insight into this?


   I don't want us being defensive as I'm pleased to find these things out (sort

   of!) - but goodness, this is very very serious if either true and/or leaked.


   Who is now working up the Comms, will you arrange a pre-brief for 2513

   and who do you think should attend?"


333. Alwen replied to me on the same day:



                            Page 155 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




   "My view of the SS findings is mixed. I believe they are doing a good job

   albeit taking longer than we would have hoped but their process means

   that they have collected all the 'evidence' from subpostmasters before

   inviting our comments or explanations. They have therefore found similar

   issues, either because they are real issues or because they are good

   excuses when things go wrong. Until we see the evidence which is

   beginning to come through now it is difficult to say.


   We, Susan, Simon, Angela, Alana, Rod and myself, have regular meetings

   with SS and there is now a working group to look at the evidence.


   Susan, Simon, Mark, Angela and I are having a meeting next week to

   discuss the comms before we have a per meet with SS.


   They have assured me today that they need James and the mps to

   understand the way they are conducting their work, and that issues will be

   live at the moment but they then look to disprove them.


   It is disconcerting but we need to work through each point as they raise it

   without being defensive. At least in James' letter he acknowledges that we

   are working well with SS. It will be hard not to be defensive as we disprove

   subpostmasters' evidence."


334. I have been asked by the Inquiry to expand on my concerns in my email

     to Alwen. I do not recall fully what I had in mind when I wrote this email.

     There are two issues covered. First, POL was reviewing its IT strategy,

     with a view to making changes in 2015, when the HNG-X contract was

     due for renewal. It would have been imperative to know about any

                            Page 156 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     underlying problems with HNG-X / Fujitsu in that light. Second, in respect

     of the current operation of Horizon, I can see that I was troubled that

     Second Sight had apparently told Lord Arbuthnot about potential issues

     with Horizon, but not POL. I felt that that Second Sight could and should

     communicate any issues with the system to POL, and this would not

     compromise their independence. In terms of whether anyone with IT or

     problem management experience was analysing Second Sight's work, it

     can be seen from the March update that the team tasked with analysing

     and responding to the spot reviews included individuals from POL's

     P&BA and IT functions, and Fujitsu was available to provide technical

     support. I have seen many other documents disclosed by the Inquiry

     which show POL IT and Fujitsu involvement in reviewing the Second

     Sight work. Simon Baker, who sat on the Working Group which liaised

     with Second Sight worked in the IT department (POL00097592).


335. On 19 March 2013, Alwen emailed Alice (cc'd to me) to update her on a

     discussion she and Susan Crichton had had with Second Sight earlier

     that day (POL00097704). Alwen reported that Second Sight were

     surprised that Lord Arbuthnot felt there was harder evidence against the

     system. "They used the phrases; no evidence of widespread systemic

     failure; the number of cases we are seeing is small; the pattern aligns

     with themes that are already in the public domain." They had assured

     Alwen and Susan that they intended to make clear at the meeting on 25

     March 2013 that they were consolidating and distilling allegations to

     which POL had not had the opportunity to respond. Some of the evidence

     from SPMs was plausible but it had not been tested. They were nervous

                           Page 157 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     about the meeting on 25 March 2013 because Shoosmiths were

     attending, and they knew that loose language may end up in the press.

     Alice responded on the same day (POL00097705). She said that her

     account of the meeting with Second Sight left her mystified as to what

     Lord Arbuthnot had been saying, but on the other hand words like

     "plausible" could easily be misinterpreted.


336. I received a very similar message in an email from Susan the same day

     (POL00097719). Susan reported that she had spoken to Second Sight

     to establish what they had said to Lord Arbuthnot that had led to his letter

     to Alice on 7 March 2013. According to Susan:


        "Their intention for the Monday meeting was that they would explain

        that they were at an early stage of the investigation, that they have

        developed a process which they believe to be efficient and cost

        effective and to explain that process including the fact that they did

        not intend to review most of the MPs' cases - JA has agreed that

        approach.


        That there is no evidence of wide spread systemic failure of the

        Horizon system from the work that they have already completed


        That the themes which are coming out of the work they are doing are

        the eight which Simon included in his update and which we discussed

        yesterday and those are the same issues which we have known about

        for some considerable time here is the list.




                            Page 158 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




         Second Sight were at a loss to know what "glitches" JA was referring

         to, other than those set out above"


337. The position by 19 March 2013 was that it appeared that there had been

     a miscommunication between Second Sight and Lord Arbuthnot. I

     emailed Susan Barton on 20 March 2013, referring to a difficult day

     because of Second Sight leaving Lord Arbuthnot with the impression that

     there was a serious problem with Horizon, which led him to call a meeting

     of MPs (POL00097732).


338. I did not attend the meeting on 25 March 2013. Alice declined Lord

     Arbuthnot's invitation to send a POL representative because she felt that

     it would be better for POL to engage once it had considered the evidence

     and analyses submitted by Second Sight: see the draft letter from Alice

     to Lord Arbuthnot at (POL00097781 ). The draft states " ... we have not

     yet had an opportunity to submit our own evidence on the issues reported

     by sub-postmasters. Clearly this needs to be a facts-based investigation

     that allows all relevant parties to submit information on the matters under

     review."


339. On 26 March 2013, Alwen forwarded me an email which contained Ian

     Henderson's account of the meeting and inline comments from Lord

     Arbuthnot (POL00097879). Having read the two accounts side by side, I

     emailed Alwen and Martin Edwards to say that I was a bit disturbed by

     Ian Henderson's comments. I said that Lord Arbuthnot's comments on

     the other hand seemed to be more even-handed and he had sought to

     correct Ian's note, which made Ian's look as though he had an agenda.

                            Page 159 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      My concern was that Ian was being overly critical of POL at an early stage

      of the process and before Second Sight had completed their

      investigations.


340. Martin Edwards spoke to Second Sight after I sent my email and replied

      to me later that day (POl00097883). He thought, based on the call, that

      Second Sight didn't have an agenda, "but rather have just been a bit

      cack-handed in the way they've handled this read-out. It was clearly one

      of those messy meetings which could be interpreted in a number of ways.

      Their unvarnished account picks up some of the strands of discussion,

      whereas James is aiming for the more diplomatic "official" account (which

      is generally more helpful to us)."


341. I do not want to overstate the episode. I think I was struck on first reading

      by Lord Arbuthnot's more measured language, and the fact that Ian

      Henderson's version included criticisms of POL that Lord Arbuthnot could

      not recall. I would have deferred to Martin Edward's view that this was

      just a messy meeting from which different people could take different

      messages.


342. I have been asked to set out my view of Second Sight at this point. Most

      of my personal dealings with Second Sight took place in 2013 when we

      were setting up the review. I seem to recall that I had dealt mostly with

      Ron Warmington, who I found to be courteous and professional. I was

      not close enough to the details of the review to form an impression of

      how well they were performing their role as independent forensic

      accountants. At that time, I would have deferred to those at POL who had

                             Page 160 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           regular dealings with Second Sight. In that context, in her email to me on

           11 March 2013 (POL00097592) Alwen stated that she thought they were

           doing a good job but were taking longer than anticipated. At the time I

           would have had no reason to disagree.


59. Please consider POL00098158 (email exchange between you and Alice

Perkins on 8 May 2013). Please describe "the challenge" Alice Perkins gave you

on 8 May 2013. What was the "suggestion that could wrap this up for us and

James"?


      343. As I have mentioned above, the way in which the review was progressing

           was that Second Sight were producing issue-based spot reviews rather

           than trying to establish the full facts of each case. Lord Arbuthnot's note

           of the meeting on 25 March 2013 stated that while MPs accepted this

           approach, they would in the end want to know how their individual

           constituent's case concluded and whether they had been wrongly

           accused.


      344. I can see from (POL00097887) that Alwen referred to this in an email to

           Alice, cc'd to me, on 27 March 2013. She said that the main area of

           contention from the meeting seemed to be the MPs' views of how their

           cases would be treated. Investigating each case in full would be costly

           and time consuming. On 5 April 2013, Alwen emailed Janet Walker, Lord

           Arbuthnot's Chief of Staff (POL00097952). Alwen stated that it appeared

           that we were a long way from getting agreement from MPs on Second

           Sight's suggestion of investigating themes rather than all of the cases.

           She asked Janet to consider a call between Lord Arbuthnot and me to

                                  Page 161 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     agree what could be done to avoid it costing the POL Board "a forlune".

     Janet replied that he was away but was considering his response to this

      issue. I was not copied into this email exchange.


345. Although Alwen's email was to the point, it is fair to say that there were

      increasing concerns at POL about the escalating cost of the review and

     the   time   it   was    taking   (see    POL00122393;    POL00098379;

      POL00100200). POL therefore began considering ways of bringing the

      review to a conclusion within a reasonable time and in a cost-effective

      manner. Key to this was securing the agreement of Lord Arbuthnot, as

     the key parliamentary stakeholder.


346. (POL00115881) is a speaking note for a call between Lord Arbuthnot and

      me on 23 May 2013. It sets out a proposal that the future form of the

      review would be that Second Sight would produce a report on three

     cases by the parliamentary recess and submit a final report in October

     2013 on those MP cases where there was sufficient evidence to

      investigate. The germ of this idea was that POL understood that Lord

     Arbuthnot had already suggested that Second Sight should aim to deal

     with three lead cases in an initial report.


347. My email to Alice on 8 May 2013 (POL00098158) stated that the team

      had a suggestion "that could wrap this up for us and James. (Based on

     something he wrote to Alan Bates of the JFSA, which is helpful.)" I

      believe the "suggestion" was an idea that was subsequently developed

      into the proposal set out in the speaking note. However, I have no

      recollection of the "challenge" that Alice gave earlier that morning. It

                             Page 162 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




           appears she gave a challenge to the team as I go on to say "Alwen, Mark,

           Susan and Simon have just finished briefing me".


60. Please consider FUJ00083375 (Gareth Jenkins' note entitled "local

Suspense Problem").


60.1. Please describe whether you were made aware of the Local Suspense

Problem.


60.2. Did it concern you that Fujitsu had in 2013 identified a BED that arose in

2011, which had caused discrepancies in branch accounts?


60.3. Please explain who you informed of this issue. If you did not inform the

Board, Second Sight, Members of Parliament, the JFSA or SPMs, please explain

why


      348. I was made aware of the Local Suspense problem at some point between

           9 and 16 May 2013. Around the same time, I was also made aware of

           another bug, known as the Receipts & Payments Mismatch problem, that

           had affected Horizon Online in 2010. At the time I would not necessarily

           have known the bugs by these names, as they were also known by other

           names, such as the "14 branch" and "62 branch" issues respectively.


      349. The first indication that my lawyers have found that anyone in POL knew

           about the problem is an out of office reply on 28 February 2013 from

           Laura Darby of POL in response to an email from Anne Chambers of

           Fujitsu. The subject line of the email is "FW: Suspense Data in 14

           branches" (POL00097564).



                                 Page 163 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




350. On 14 March 2013, Anne Chambers sent Andrew Winn at POL (cc. Steve

       Bansal, Steve Parker, and Gareth Jenkins) "As requested, a full

       explanation of the problem", setting out a technical explanation of how

       the problem arose (POL00098151 ).


351. There were a number of email exchanges between Anne Chambers and

      Andrew Winn on 2 and 3 May 2013 (POL00098151):


a.   Andrew Winn wrote to Anne Chambers on 2 May 2013: He was having

     difficulty reconciling some of the figures. One of the affected SPMs appears

     to have settled centrally some of the loss but Andrew Winn thought this

     strange, as a loss of 3.34 should not have qualified for settling centrally.

     Andrew Winn asked Anne Chambers to look at the first draft of his letters

     to the affected branches: " .. .to see if I have simplified and condensed what

     happened without losing meaning or key detail?" (these appear to be:

     POL00002188;        POL00002217;           POL00002226;      POL00002242;

     POL00002260; POL00002265; POL00002275).


b.   Anne Chambers replied to Andrew Winn on 3 May 2013: In discussing the

     figures, Anne Chambers mentioned that "There was a problem at the time,

     not fixed until Jan 2011, where if they chose 'Make Good Cheque' it

     actually Settled Centrally - I think this is probably what happened on

     9/12/2010". Anne Chambers had made amendments to the letters "which

     hopefully make the cause and scope of the problem clearer". She had tried

     to call Andrew Winn "because Gareth Jenkins mentioned that this problem

     is still being discussed at a high level as part of the ongoing

     investigations/checks into Horizon, and I would hate anything I have put

                              Page 164 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     here to compromise that- I don't see why it should but just wanted to flag

     it. I assume anything going out to the branches will be reviewed in fight of

     that."


c.   Andrew Winn replied on the same day: "/ intend this to go through our

     solicitors before it gets sent out".


352. On 9 May 2013, Andrew Winn sent Simon Baker (cc. Gareth Jenkins)

       two summaries of the Suspense Account bug (POL00098186) and a

       short version, (POL00098185):


a.   The two branches with the largest discrepancies in 2011 alerted POL FSC

     in 2011 after they had "settled centrally". According to Andrew Winn "These

     discrepancies were resolved with no inappropriate payments being made".


b.   The same two branches alerted POL again when the same discrepancies

     appeared in 2012.


c.   When the problem first occurred in 2011, "the values relating to the 2

     branches above were associated to equal and opposite values held on the

     branches' Customer Account and cleared. The other values were written

     off to Profit & Loss as no explanation could be found".


d.   The resolution of the issue included: a revised archiving strategy

     introduced in 2011 prevented a reoccurrence of the issue; Fujitsu were

     considering a check to ensure the local suspense account netted off to

     zero; and "FSC will write to all non Crown branches impacted to summarise

     what has happened. The intention is to return any incorrect losses but not



                               Page 165 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




   attempt to recover resultant gains. Letters will go through Legal prior to

   dispatch."


353. On 10 May 2013, Gareth Jenkins created a first version of a document

     entitled "Local Suspense Problem" (FUJ00084744). The stated purpose

     of this document was to provide a "management level summary" of the

     Local Suspense problem. Section 2.2 records that Fujitsu had developed

     alerts to indicate to support staff that the problem had occurred, enabling

     immediate investigation. I have no memory of seeing this document.

     However, I do recall seeing a version of the table at the end of the

     document. This may have been cut and pasted into another document or

     email. I had asked for details of the branches affected, as I wanted to

     know that POL had responded correctly and that none of the affected

     SPMs was disadvantaged.


354. Around the same time as these documents, I can see that senior POL

     managers were considering the Receipts & Payments Mismatch

     problem.


355. (POL00029610) is a note dated 16 May 2013 by Gareth Jenkins on the

     Receipts & Payments Mismatch issue. It begins: "The purpose of this

     note is to document a request that we have had from Post Office in terms

     of presenting details of what happened as a result of a bug in HNG-X in

     September 2010 which caused a Receipts and Payments mismatch and

     also resulted in Discrepancies being lost."


356. (POL00098283) is an email from Gareth Jenkins to Simon Baker (cc.

     James Davidson) on 16 May 2013 attaching version four of the note on
                            Page 166 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      the Receipts & Payments Mismatch issue (POL00029610). The covering

      email refers to "tomorrow's meeting with Lesley."


357. I do not believe that I saw any of the documents I have referred to above

      concerning the Receipts & Payments Mismatch issue at the time they

      were created, nor I believe at any time before I left POL. I do not recall

       being involved in any of the discussions they refer to. I do not recall ever

       having had any dealings with Gareth Jenkins or Anne Chambers of

       Fujitsu.


358. I have seen emails dated 9 May 2013 which show that Alwen Lyons and

      Simon Baker were trying to contact Lesley Sewell and me about an

       urgent matter. (POL00098176) is an email from Alwen to me: "Sorry

      Paula I need to speak to you about this as something has come up." I

       replied saying that I would call within the hour. Alwen also emailed Simon

       Baker twice on the same day saying: "You need to warn Lesley"

       (POL00098179) and" ... / have put out a call to Paula I am going to have

       to tell her what has happened at a high levef' (POL00098180). I do not

       recall the issue that arose on 9 May 2013. I cannot rule out that this was

      about the Local Suspense Problem or Receipts & Payments Mismatch

       problem. If it was about the bugs, I do not know if I was told about them

      on that date.


359. I have seen a series of emails dated 16 May 2013, some or possibly all

      of which may have related to this issue (POL00098276):


a.   At 07:44 I asked Alwen for an update on the "mini-crisis last week" and for

     an update on our normal workplan with Second Sight. I went on: "Also, has
                              Page 167 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     Alice mentioned it and/or have you updated her? I wanted to send her a

     note this am, just to reassure we are still on top of everything." The mini-

     crisis related to having to make short-term diary changes, liaising with Lord

     Arbuthnot's office, agreeing to bring forward a meeting and then agreeing

     to move it back to a few weeks later.


b.   Alwen responded that she, Simon and Lesley were meeting that morning.

     She had given Alice an update yesterday and Alice was calm that the

     meeting with Lord Arbuthnot being delayed. She had updated Alice on the

     spot reviews and would send me a paragraph later so that I could send

     Alice a note.


c.   At 07:48, I emailed Alice saying that "one other issue arose overnight,

     which I may need to brief you on over the next couple of days, so will try to

     get a phone slot" (POL00098278).


d.   Alice replied at 08:17 stating that she was unexpectedly free that afternoon.


360. At 13:05 on 16 May 2013, Alwen sent me a speaking note to use on a

       call with Alice that afternoon (POL00029587). It appears that if I had been

       told about the bugs at a "high level" the previous week (see paragraph

       358), I now had more detail and wanted to brief Alice:


     "I have a call with James on the 23rd May .... when we will discuss how he

     wants the investigation to continue, including the 2 MP cases he has asked

     2nd Sight to focus and the spot reviews.


     However some instances are coming to light where there is evidence that

     there are bugs in Horizon, which I am being told is normal in any large
                              Page 168 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




computer system. But I am still being assured that the system's integrity is

not in doubt.


Lesley is meeting Fujitsu tomorrow morning to go through the technical

assurance that the subpostmaster's trading statement cannot be changed

without their knowledge (sic)


Alwen is meeting with them on Monday to look at with a layman's eyes and

understand what it might have looked like for a subpostmaster using the

system (sic)


The Good News is that where we have found to (sic) bugs since HNGX

(new Horizon) they have been detected and put right with no loss to the

subpostmaster and Fujitsu now monitor the suspense account for any such

problems.


Alwen will specifically ask on Monday if anything else could be happening

we do not know about eg too small to register at the office, and Old Horizon

bugs.


This is not good Alice, but from what we have seen so far our response to

bugs has been effective.


I have asked for some time in our diaries next week to talk through our

approach, and would welcome you (sic) counsel before the James

meeting."




                        Page 169 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




361. Alwen's note refers to "bugs" in the plural. I believe this is because I had

        been made aware of the "Receipts & Payments Mismatch" bug by the

        time of this email.


362. (POL00098777) indicates that I attended a meeting with Lesley to

        discuss the Local Suspense Problem on or around 27 June 2013. In an

        email to me of that date in the chain, Martin Edwards referred to Lesley

        explaining to us "'transient data' and 'archiving processes"'.


363. A speaking note I was given for a meeting that I was going to have with

        Lord Arbuthnot and Alice on 3 July 2013 sets out the following information

        about the "Receipts & Payments Mismatch" problem, referred to as the

        "62 branches exception" (at pages 5 and 6 of (POL00115923)):


          "Affected 62 branches ...


          Sub-postmaster losses ranged from 115. 60 down to Bp


          Identified by Horizon's built in checks and balances which are

           designed to flag up these types of discrepancies. Appropriate action

           taken to rectify.


          17 sub-postmasters were adversely affected i.e. had a loss

           attributable to their branch.


          Sub-postmasters notified in March 2011 and (where appropriate)

           reimbursed.


          Sub-postmasters who had made a gain through the anomaly were

           not asked to refund this."
                               Page 170 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




364.    The Local Suspense problem, referred to as the "14 branch exception"

        was described as follows:


          "Financially impacted 14 branches ...


          Concerns an error where historic accounting entries in the 201012011

           financial year were replicated for 2011112 and 2012/2013 only

           showing up a year later.


          Raised by 2 sub postmasters affected by the exception.


          1 sub postmaster and 4 multiple partners were adversely affected ...


          We suspended attempts to recover known losses from affected sub-

           postmasters.


          Letters to notified sub-postmasters will be sent out immediately.


          The worst loss to a branch would have been 9,799.88. This was one

           of the first cases notified, so no recovery action was progressed.

           Other losses ranged from 113.14 down to a penny.


          Action underway to modify the system to prevent any repeat of this

           exception".


365. The narrative about the "exceptions" (I accept that they should have been

        termed "bugs") stated that, in both cases, our processes had picked up

        these issues, that appropriate remedial action had been taken, and that

        they had not led to any disciplinary action. Neither related to cases under

        investigation with Second Sight.

                               Page 171 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




366. While I have no distinct recollection of my discussions with colleagues

     about the bugs, I have a firm recollection of thinking, from the time I was

     first told about them in May 2013, that the business had managed them

     well. I was told, as set out in speaking notes for the call with Alice and

     the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot, that the bugs had been identified by

      POL's processes, that no SPM had been left out of pocket, and that

     measures either had been or were being taken (the "Local Suspense"

     having been recently identified in May 2013) to eliminate the possibility

     of reoccurrence. I set up a number of meetings with Alwen Lyons, Lesley

     Sewell and others to ensure that I was briefed on progress of the Local

     Suspense bug, until I was content POL that had resolved the issues for

     the SPMs affected. I suspect that this is where I saw the table referred to

      in paragraph 353 above. This was in line with how I worked - making

     sure colleagues understood that problems that affected even one Post

     Office were important to resolve and for POL to care about.


367. I was therefore satisfied that the bugs did not call into question the

     reliability of Horizon. In particular, I understood that the Local Suspense

     problem had affected only 14 branches across the entire Network, that

     the effect of the bug occurred annually, and that it had been picked up in

     the first year that it reoccurred. It was reassuring that a bug which had

     limited effect within the scale of the network had been identified and was

     being rectified.


368. My speaking note for Alice did say that the bugs were "not good''. I think

     this was for two reasons. First, I didn't want any branches to be impacted


                            Page 172 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     by a problem in the system, even one which was corrected. Second,

     though less important to me, there was a timing issue against the

     background of the Second Sight review. If the facts around the bugs, as

     I understood them to be, were not clearly communicated there was a risk

     that people would confuse issues and draw conclusions that were not

     factually justified.


369. I have been asked whom I informed about the bugs and address these

     questions below.


370. The Board: I informed the POL Board at its meeting on 1 July 2013

     (POL00099516) that: "Horizon, like any large computer system, would

     occasionally have anomalies and two were know(n) of over recent years.

     The Business has dealt with these anomalies to ensure no sub

     postmaster was out of pocket and these anomalies had not affected any

     of the cases which Second Sight had reviewed." This was part of a

     broader update to the Board on the Interim Report. In terms of the timing

     of the update, I was advised by Martin Edwards in an email on 20 May

     2013 containing his comments on the agenda for the 21 May 2013 Board

     meeting (POl00098321) that he and Alwen Lyons agreed that it would

     be premature to brief the Board on developments with Second Sight at

     the May meeting but that we would need to update the Board in July 2013

     as part of the CEO report. The reason why an update in May was thought

     premature was because I was due to speak to Lord Arbuthnot on 23 May

     2013 to discuss whether there was a way to bring Second Sight's work

     to a quicker and more cost-effective conclusion (Martin's email refers to


                            Page 173 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     a meeting between me, Alice, and Alwen after the May Board meeting to

     discuss the approach to Lord Arbuthnot). It is very likely that I and / or

     Alwen or Alice informed the Board about this forthcoming meeting. The

     minutes of the May Board meeting (POL00021513) record that the Board

     asked for a note to update on the Horizon position with the Second Sight

     review.


371. A Board call was scheduled for 1 July 2013: see the email from Alwen

     Lyons to the Board on 29 June 2013 setting out my weekly update to the

     Board at the bottom of the email chain at (POL00098816). Having seen

     that email, Alice emailed me, Martin Edwards, Alwen Lyons and Susan

     Crichton on 30 June 2013 (in the same URN) stating,"/ think we will have

     to tell the Board about SS as there is a danger that we could be in a

     difficult situation in the midst of all this about before we have another

     opportunity to tell them. And we do owe them an update". Alice asked if

     we could think about what we should say, and that we should let her

     know how we intended to describe the situation. She said it would be fine

     if Susan Crichton joined a call with the Board.


372. I replied to Alice shortly afterwards (in the same URN) stating that we

     had decided to do exactly that and rather than send the Board a written

     brief at this stage, we thought it would be better to wait to get a steer from

     Alwen Lyons' meeting with Janet Walker (from Lord Arbuthnot's office). I

     added that Susan was due to meet Second Sight the following Monday,

     so it made sense for her to update the Board after that meeting. The

     reference in my email to a meeting between Alwen and Janet Walker is

                             Page 174 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




      likely to refer to a meeting on the morning of 1 July 2013 to discuss POL's

      idea that the publication of the Interim Report should be delayed until

      Second Sight had completed its work on the spot reviews which the

       Interim Report was to address: see the email from Alwen to me on 28

      June 2013 at (POL00098789), which refers to this meeting.


373. Second Sight: Second Sight knew about the two bugs and mentioned

      them in the Interim Report. It appears from the documents that they knew

      from 25 June 2013 at the latest: on that day, they sent Simon Baker a

      draft section of the Interim Report dealing with the two bugs:

      (POL00029618). I did not authorise anyone at POL to provide the

      information to Second Sight, but it was not my role to decide what would

      be provided to Second Sight. That was a matter for the POL team who

      were working on the review. I was repeatedly told and believed at the

      time that POL had informed Second Sight about the bugs. For example:


a.   The speaking note for my meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on 3 July 2013

     stated that "both were voluntary communicated to SS (although not directly

     related to the cases under review.)"


b.   In an email to me on 27 June 2013, Rodric Williams stated that "where we

     have identified "bugs" in Horizon, we have shared these with Second

     Sight." (POL00098774).


c.   In an email to me on 28 June 2013 (POL00098789), Alwen stated: "We

     think SS will present the 4 cases some of which will not be finished, but we




                              Page 175 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     are not sure yet. They will also raise the issue of the 'bugs' which were

     outside the cases but which we disclosed to them."


d.   I have a recollection that Lesley was incensed that POL was accused of a

     cover up, on the grounds that it had not disclosed the bugs to Second Sight

     when, in fact, it was POL that had disclosed the bugs to Second Sight.


374. Since I left POL, I have seen a written legal advice by Simon Clarke of

      Cartwright King dated 15 July 2013 (POL00006798). It records that two

      lawyers from Cartwright King spoke to Gareth Jenkins on 28 June 2013,

      who told them it was he who informed Second Sight about the two bugs.

      As set out above, that was not my understanding at the time.


375. Members of Parliament: Any communication to MPs would have been

      through Lord Arbuthnot. As I set out in my answers to Question 62, I

      decided that it would be appropriate to discuss the bugs with Lord

      Arbuthnot at a face-to-face meeting. This only occurred on 3 July 2013,

      after he had seen a draft of the Interim Report.


376. The JFSA: I did not tell Alan Bates about the two bugs. I cannot recall

      any conscious decision to tell him or not to tell him. Alan was in regular

      contact with Second Sight, whom I knew had been asked to "keep the

      JFSA on board" (POL00098192: "Ron calls Alan and Kay routinely once

      a week to give a full update"). I was not in regular contact with Alan Bates

      and I believe I just did not think to tell him.


377. SPMs: I thought it was important that the SPMs of affected branches

      were informed. I understood that that had been done in relation to the

                              Page 176 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




              "Receipts & Payments Mismatch" problem and was in hand in relation to

              the "Local Suspense" problem. It did not occur to me to suggest the wider

              publication of the bugs. I had been told all affected branches had been

              identified.


61. Please consider FUJ00086811 (draft report by Helen Rose dated 12 June

2013).


61.1. When was the first time you became aware of this report. or a similar one,

by Helen Rose? Please describe your knowledge of the same.


61.2. Please consider "However, my concerns are that we cannot clearly see

what has happened on the data available to use and this in itself may be

misinterpreted      when    giving   evidence    and   suing    the   same    data   for

prosecutions". Please explain what action, if any, POL took in response to this

report.


         378. My answer to Question 61 should be considered together with my answer

              to Question 94. Shortly before the publication of the Interim Report I was

              briefed orally by Angela Van Den Bogerd on the spot review relating to

              Lepton Post Office. I do not recall her mentioning Helen Rose or "the

              Helen Rose Report" at this stage. This oral briefing was followed up with

              a written briefing note on the interim report sent to me by email on 3 July

              2013 (POL00113369). The written briefing note did not mention Helen

              Rose but set out the facts relating to what had happened at Lepton Post

              Office.




                                     Page 177 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      379. I do not recall exactly when I first became aware of the Helen Rose

           Report. The only clear recollection I have of discussing itby name was at

           an ARC meeting when Carla Stent was the chair of the ARC. I do not

           remember the date of that meeting. I believe that this was in connection

           with the issue of whether the change request recommended by Helen

           Rose in her report had been implemented. I see now from emails

           between Rodric Williams and Martin Edwards in October 2013

           (POL00108163) that there was discussion about whether to include

           reference to the Helen Rose Report in the CEO report for the October

           board meeting. I do not remember whether I was briefed on this but I can

           see that the report was not referred to by name in my CEO report. I see

           also from (POL00147248) that Chris Aujard prepared a paper for the

           POL ExCo about expert witnesses, dated 17 January 2014, in which he

           referred to the "Helen Rose, or Lepton P.O. Report". In paragraph 2c, he

           said that "the effect (if not the substance) of this report was to cast a

           further shadow over both HOL and those who had asserted its reliability

           in court documents and in court." I do not recall seeing this paper, but I

           may have been briefed about it at the time. I note that the Helen Rose

           Report was also mentioned by name in the Second Sight Briefing Report

           - Part Two dated 21 August 2015 (at pages 14-15 of (POL00030160)).


62. Please consider POL00098316 (email from Martin Edwards dated 20 May

2013), POL00098317 (briefing attached to the prior email), POL00115880 (email

from Alwen Lyons to you dated 22 May 2013), POL00115881 (briefing attached

to the prior email), POL00105632 (email from Alwen Lyons to you dated 23 May

2013), POL00098378 (email from Alwen Lyons to you dated 24 May 2013) and

                                 Page 178 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




POl00098379 (attachment to prior email).


62.1. Please explain what prompted the "move away from 'there are no bugs in

Horizon' to 'there are known bugs in every computer system this size but they

are found and put right and no subpostmaster is c:lisac:lvantagec:I by them".


In particular, please state:


62.1.1. who was responsible for this decision:


62.1.2. what factors were taken into account:


62.1.3. was this viewed as a significant change: and


62.1.4. on what grounds c:lic:I you previously believe there were "no bugs in

Horizon".


62.2. Please describe if and when you explained this change of position to lord

Arbuthnot.


62.3. Please describe your conversation with lord Arbuthnot on 23 May 2015.

In particular, please ac:lc:lress:


62.3.1. What lord Arbuthnot said that led to the minute "JA said that SS had

certainly not said that they 'had not come across systemic problems"'. Diel you

pass this information onto others?


62.3.2. Your conversation on remote access. Please set out what your

unc:lerstanc:ling of Fujitsu's remote access privileges were at this point.


62.3.3. What c:lic:I you say to lead to the minute "PV explained the E&Y audit at

year encl which gave the IT controls a good report".
                                     Page 179 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




380. I had a call scheduled with Lord Arbuthnot for 23 May 2013. This was

       intended by POL to be a continuation of the discussions we had initiated

      with his office earlier in the month to explore a more cost and time

       effective solution for the review.


381. On 20 May 2013, Martin Edwards emailed me a paper on the Second

       Sight investigation for my call with Lord Arbuthnot (POl00098316;

       POl00098317). The section entitled "Background'' was a summary of

       POL's assessment of the current status of the review. Around 49 cases

       had now been submitted. It appeared unlikely that the review would

       conclude anything definitive or satisfactory to the stakeholders, as the

       remit   had   been     blurred,      different   stakeholders   had   different

       interpretations, and the evidence was open to interpretation. There was

       no defined endpoint to the investigation and the costs would increase

      from the current spend of 180,000 to 750,000 if it continued to July

      2014. Further, after a year of investigation, no evidence of systemic

      failures had been found. POL's proposal to Lord Arbuthnot was that:


a.   He would ask Second Sight to complete their investigations on two or three

     MP cases, selecting those which they felt best indicated systemic

     problems.


b.   The scope of the review would be defined by answering the question: have

     systemic defects in the Horizon system resulted in the wrongful conviction

     of sub-postmasters (in either civil or criminal court)?


c.   There would be a meeting before the Parliamentary summer recess at

     which Second Sight would provide a preliminary report.
                              Page 180 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




 d.   POL would commit to working on the areas for improvement that had come

      to light (e.g. training, help desk, and SPM support).


 382. There was a section at the end of the note entitled "Other things Paula

        needs to know". These included at para. 5.3:


      "Defects/bugs/glitches in Horizon. Post Office is not saying Horizon is free

      from defects. Alf large systems of this nature occasionally encounter

      problems. We are confident though that no sub postmaster has been

      wrongly convicted or suspended due to Horizon defects."


 383. On 22 May 2013, Alwen Lyons emailed me a second briefing note for the

        call: (POl00115880; POl00115881 ). It contained a set of speaking

        notes which made a number of introductory points, including (i) stressing

       that POL wished to get to truth the about the allegations made against

        Horizon; (ii) that we would take steps to address any systemic issues;

        and (iii) we wanted the review to be finished in such a way that we could

        respond quickly to its findings. The review had taken longer than

        anticipated and POL always had to have regard to the best use of public

        money.


 384. The briefing then set out a proposal that was slightly different from that

        set out in the briefing from Martin:


a.    Second Sight should now concentrate on three of the MP cases with a view

      to producing a report on those cases before the summer recess, and we

      understood that Lord Arbuthnot had already suggested this to them.




                               Page 181 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




b.   Second Sight would review the rest of the MPs where there was sufficient

     evidence for them to analyse and produce a final written report by the end

     of October 2013. This would exclude approximately half of the 29 MP

     cases: we understood from Second Sight that in half of the MP cases there

     was insufficient evidence for them to take the review forward.


c.   To enable these timelines, no new cases would be accepted into the

     review.


d.   POL was already conducting a business review process and we would deal

     with any new cases as part of that process. I would assure Lord Arbuthnot

     that there would be a new senior management oversight over the conduct

     of these cases.


e.   We also thought it would be helpful for Lord Arbuthnot to reiterate to

     Second Sight that their review should focus first and foremost on whether

     there were systemic issues with the Horizon system itself. Whilst it might

     be appropriate for Second Sight to identify process improvements, it was

     imperative that a clear distinction was drawn between the IT system and

     the surrounding processes - otherwise, it could lead to confusion and

     misleading media headlines to the detriment of public and sub-postmaster

     confidence.


 385. This second briefing did not contain a section on BEDs.


 386. On the morning of the call, I received an email from Alwen stating that

      the only thing that was not in my brief was our move away from '"there

      are no bugs in Horizon' to 'there are known bugs in every computer

                             Page 182 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     system this size but they are found and put right and no subpostmaster

     is disadvantaged by them' it would be good to go on and say 'or has been

     wrongfully suspended or prosecuted'. I do not think that is a phone call

     conversation but needs to be aired at some time with James, I would

     suggest at your meeting." (POl00105632).


387. I have been asked by the Inquiry to explain what Alwen describes in her

     email as a move away from our former position that there were no bugs

     in Horizon.


388. I do not think I ever turned my mind to whether there were any bugs in

     Horizon   (which    could   include   entirely   harmless    glitches).   My

     understanding until May 2013 was that no bugs had been found in

     Horizon which could affect branch accounts. I believed that because it

     was what I had been told by a series of senior IT managers over many

     years.


389. After the Local Suspense and Receipts & Payments Mismatch problems

     came to light in May 2013, we were simply in a different situation. We no

     longer lived in a world where no bugs had been found in the system. That

     turned my attention to how the business had dealt with the bugs, and it

     was my understanding that the bugs had been well managed - I had

     been assured that they had been detected, rectified, and no SPM was

     left out of pocket. I understood how POL had dealt with the bugs to be a

     positive. I don't recall if POL had ever specifically said 'there are no bugs

     in Horizon'. However, Mark Davies flagged that our communications had



                            Page 183 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




       to be clear about what our position was. I was in complete agreement

       with him.


390. I viewed the bugs as significant, primarily because branches had been

       impacted and that was not something I wanted to happen. There was

       also an obvious timing issue, though this was much less important to me.

       Against the backdrop of the review, if POL did not explain the bugs

       clearly, people might draw conclusions which were not justified by what

       I understood had happened. For that reason, I did not want to discuss

       the bugs on a call with Lord Arbuthnot. I intended (as Alwen advised in

       her email on 23 May 2013) to address this issue with him face-to-face.


391. For this reason, I did not discuss the bugs with Lord Arbuthnot on the call

       on 23 May 2013. I did not tell Alan Bates about the two bugs. See

       paragraph 376 above.


392.   I have no recollection of the call with Lord Arbuthnot on 23 May 2013

       beyond what is set out in the minutes (POl00098379). I do not recall the

       discussions which led to the minutes in relation to remote access or EY.

       In relation to POL's proposals, I can see from the minutes that Lord

       Arbuthnot thought that Second Sight were already progressing in a

       structured way to produce an interim report dealing with two to three

       cases or spot reviews, following a meeting. All of this should occur before

       the parliamentary recess. He stated that Second Sight were reacting to

       the JFSA and they needed to keep the JFSA happy. Although the JFSA

       should not be running the review, it was important to keep them onside,

       as if we did not, they would see the review as a whitewash.

                              Page 184 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




393. He agreed to write to Second Sight and clarify how they should proceed

     with two to three cases and restate the terms of reference and the need

     to draw the review to a close. He also agreed that we needed to stop new

     cases coming in and that future ones could be dealt with via a POL

     internal process.


394. I emailed Alwen, Martin, Susan and Lesley on 24 May 2013 to update

     them on the meeting (POL00098373). I said that Alwen had a full set of

     notes from the meeting, which they were welcome to consult for a full

     debrief (presumably these are (POL00098379)). In short, Lord Arbuthnot

     had agreed to most of what we asked him to do, although he was going

     to speak to Janet Walker before taking any action. I wrote that the most

     important outcome was to secure clarity around the two parts of the terms

     of reference. I wanted to keep up the momentum from the call to secure

     the narrowing of Second Sight's terms of reference via a letter from Lord

     Arbuthnot. I asked Alwen to speak to Janet.


395. Alwen emailed me on 24 May 2013 (POL00029589):


   "Good call with ss but James has definitely caused confusion with his cases

   or themes or topics etc. SS have agreed they will look at 3 cases, they will

   tell JFSA which 3 cases to keep them on board but SS are choosing which

   One of these will be dealing with the issue of remote access to a

   subpostmasters account, which James specifically raised


   I have just spoken to Lesley who has engaged Fujitsu today and is

   confident that within a week they provide evidence about access and audit

   trails etc. Lesley and I will meet Fuj on the 3rd to go through this, and then
                            Page 185 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     if we are comfortable go through with SS and Fuj on the 6th, so let the

     technical people can discuss in detail. That's all the good news. But I have

     heard nothing from Janet ... and she is in NZ until after recess, so that

     conversation will have to be on hold until then, but I think we can use the 2

     weeks in the meantime to make some real progress with SS"


 396. On 5 June 2013, Janet forwarded to Alwen an email which Lord

      Arbuthnot had sent to Second Sight, setting out his proposed way

      forward (POL00098459). Lord Arbuthnot stated "My belief is we should

      be moving to some form of closure" and he made the following points:


a.   Second Sight needed to produce an interim report to be presented to MPs

     before 18 July 2013, when the summer recess began. MPs were aware of

     this deadline and would raise awkward questions if it was not delivered.


b.   The report should concentrate on a few (two or three) of the strongest

     complaints against POL.


c.   The report should consider whether there were (a) flaws in Horizon and /

     or (b) flaws in POL's processes or training.


d.   If such flaws were found, agreement would need to be reached on how this

     was communicated to POL, individuals who have faced or were facing

     prosecution, and to Shoosmiths.


e.   The report must make absolutely clear whether or not there were problems

     with Horizon.


 397. Having set out his proposed approach, Lord Arbuthnot asked Second


                              Page 186 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     Sight to give particular thought to two points relating to stakeholders:


    a.    With respect to POL's position, he explained that he had spoken to

          me and I had requested that any further cases be investigated by

          the POL Company Secretary rather than Second Sight. This was

          due to concerns about costs and the lack of detailed information and

          therefore investigation in some of the cases submitted by Second

          Sight to date. As were set out here, I accepted that the procedures

          currently in place to investigate such cases at POL would not be

          sufficient but felt that the Company Secretary could adequately

          perform this role. Lord Arbuthnot stated that he understood my

          concerns and asked Second Sight to consider this suggestion.


    b.    Lord Arbuthnot noted that the JFSA did not have the power to veto

          his proposed approach and asked Second Sight to bear that in mind.

          Nonetheless, he was very clear that he considered it essential to

          keep them positively involved and confirmed that he would seek

          Alan Bates' views on the proposed way forward.


398. Janet emailed Alwen again on 13 June 2013 with an update from Lord

     Arbuthnot (POL00098534):


   "1. Alan Bates - Interim report. James had an extremely good telephone

   conversation with Alan Bates today. He has asked me to let you know that

   Alan was content with the proposed content of the interim report. Alan was

   more concerned with what happens after this has been delivered .... James

   touched on the point Paula has made about potentially bringing the

   investigation of further cases in-house within the Post Office. Alan has said
                            Page 187 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   he was not entirely comfortable with this, but James persuaded him to put

   this matter into abeyance for the time being, and Alan agreed. We can

   return to this after the interim report when we have all seen what it has to

   say. Media - .. .. Alan said he was not responsible for the article in this

   week's Private Eye, and James believes him. Alan said he was happy not

   to go public on anything while the investigation process was underway.


   "2. Meeting 8 July. Ian and Ron have agreed to present an interim report

   based on 3 cases to MPs, here at Westminster on 8 July. James has said

   to both them and Alan that at the moment, he is not minded to invite

   representatives of the Post Office to attend ...... "


399. Alwen emailed me, Lesley, and Susan on 21 June 2013 with an update

     on Second Sight (POL00098655):


   ''As you will remember JA is hosting a meeting on 8th July where SS are

   going to present their interim findings to MPs and JFSA, on 3 MP cases.


   We had a call with Second Sight today and have now put in place calls

   every day from next Tuesday to take us through to their report being ready.


   There are still risks with what the report will say. Not around the System

   but around the wider issues eg. Training and support (which SS are

   counting as part of the Horizon operating model).


   I am sure there will be enough in the report for JFSA to cause mischief if

   they want to with the Media, and Ruth is involved in updating the comms

   plan.


                             Page 188 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




          SS have a call with James on the 2nd July and you have a call with him on

          the 3rd and we should know in advance what the report will say and

          therefore what they are likely to say to James.


          Things will get clearer next week. But my biggest concern at the moment

          is if the review focuses on training etc how JFSA will respond. I think you

          can make some positive noises to JA on the 3rd including improvements

          in training and supporl and also our idea of a horizon user group made up

          of existing subpostmaster (sic) who use the system."


64. Please consider POL00098774 (email from Rodric Williams to you dated 27

June 2013). Please explain the background and purpose of your conversation

with Rodric Williams on or around 27 June 2013. Please address the following:


64.1. What would constitute a problem "on a widespread basis"?


64.2. In respect of "No cases since at least separation have seen convictions

secured on Horizon-based evidence alone, e.g. there has also been a paper trail,

money in bank account, confession, and/or lies at interview exposed", please

explain why the date of separation was considered relevant.


      400. The situation by the end June 2013 was that a timetable had been fixed

           for Second Sight to present an Interim Report to MPs on 8 July 2013.

           Lord Arbuthnot was going to speak to Second Sight on 2 July 2013 and

            I was going to speak to him on 3 July 2013. The intention was that we

           would know by that point what the Interim Report would say. This was an

           extremely tight timetable. As of 21 June 2013, when Alwen Lyons sent

           me her update at (POL00098655), it was not clear what topics the Interim

                                  Page 189 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     Report would cover. Alwen anticipated that it would not report any

     problems with the IT system but might criticise training and support. I see

     from an update Alwen sent to me on 28 June 2013 that some of Second

     Sight's case studies might not be finished (POL00098789). This was not

     what POL intended when we proposed to Lord Arbuthnot that Second

     Sight should report in advance of recess on two to three cases: we

     wanted them to present a complete and not a partial analysis.


401. By 25 June 2013, POL was aware, though I am not certain when I

     became aware of it, that the Interim Report was likely to contain a section

     on the Suspense Account problem and the Receipts & Payments

     Mismatch problem. We therefore had to prepare a response in a very

     short timescale.


402. On 27 June 2013, Rodric Williams sent me what he described as a

     summary of a discussion with me on the Horizon investigation with some

     additional points on criminal prosecutions (POL00098774). I have no

     memory of our discussion, but one reading of the document is that we

     had not discussed the prosecution points and he added this section for

     completeness, or I had asked questions on this area and wanted him to

     follow up so I was clear. However, I cannot say for certain. It is clear that

     the context of what we discussed was that Second Sight were now going

     to report on the two bugs. I've been asked to comment on the following

     parts of the document:


   "Horizon generally



                            Page 190 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




    "... Transactions and balances accurately recorded; i.e. - if there was a

   systemic problem, we would have seen it replicated on a widespread basis.


   "Criminal prosecutions


    ".. .No cases since at least separation have seen convictions secured on

   Horizon based evidence alone, e.g. there has also been a paper trail,

   money in bank account, confession and I or lies at interview exposed."


403. I have been asked to comment on two aspects of the above. The first is

     to provide my view on what would constitute a problem on a "widespread

     basis". The point I would make is that I would never have attempted to

     assess myself whether a problem was "systemic" or "widespread'. I

     regarded this as a matter of IT expertise, and I relied on POL's internal

     IT function for advice on the implications of any criticisms or any actual

     defects in Horizon. I recognise now that the use of the words widespread

     and systemic was unhelpful. What was at stake was whether any

     individual SPM had been mistreated and / or wrongly convicted or

     suffered in some other way because of a single BED in the Horizon

     system.


404. I have also been asked to consider Rodric's comment that no cases since

     at least separation from the RMG have seen convictions secured on

     Horizon evidence alone. I do not recall any conversation about this with

     Rodric. I do recall, although I'm unclear when, that the Board had asked

     about prosecutions since separation, wanting reassurance that POL's

     approach was appropriate.


                           Page 191 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




65. Please consider POL00098777. Please explain whether you or other

members of the POL senior management team were considering legal action

against Second Sight prior to the release of its interim report. If so, please

explain why.


66. Please consider POL00029625 (internal briefing note to you on 1 July 2013),

POL00098878 (notes for Board update on Second Sight investigation dated 1

July 2013), POL00021515 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 1 July 2013),

POL00021745 (email from Simon Baker to you and other on 5 July 2013),

POL00021746 (draft Interim Report into Alleged Problems with the Horizon

System v24).


66.1. Had you read a draft of the Second Sight interim report before the Board

meeting on 1 July 2013?


66.2. Was the reference to "Other Anomalies - Falkirk" in the briefing new to

you? Did you take any steps to understand better the Callendar Square bug at

this point? Please explain whether you took any steps to ensure that Second

Sight had been informed of what POL knew about the Callendar Square bug.

66.3. Please explain the update you gave to the Board on 1 July 2013. In

particular, please address the following:


66.3.1. On what basis did you say that "The investigation to date had found no

systemic issues with the Horizon computer system but had highlighted areas

for improvement in support areas such as training". What did you understand

a "systemic issue" to be?


66.3.2. Please describe how you explained your concern that "the report from

                                 Page 192 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




the independent forensic accountants was not as factual as expected and could

lead to loose language at the MP meeting". What was your basis for this

concern?


66.4. Please your involvement in POL seeking any amendments to the draft of

Second Sight's interim report.


66.5. Did you read the V24 draft of Second Sight's interim report? Please

consider:


"6. 1 There is still much work to be done on the cases Second Sight has been

   asked to investigate... 7. 1 It has become clear that whereas the Horizon

   system appears to achieve its intended purpose almost all of the time and

   operates smoothly for most SPMRs and their staff, some combinations of

   events can trigger situations where problems occur.... 12.2(a) We have so

   far found no evidence of system wide (systemic) problems with the Horizon

   software"


66.6. What were your views to this aspect of the report?


      405. I can see from the documents that, during 27 to 28 June 2013, POL was

             considering how to manage the situation with the Interim Report. Our

             preferred option was that the report and the meeting with MPs would be

             deferred. There were a number of reasons for this:


     a.     POL was being given very little time to prepare its response to a very

            serious and important report.




                                    Page 193 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




b.   The feedback from the POL team who were liaising with Second Sight was

     that, in their view, Second Sight placed too much reliance on the

     recollection of the Mediation Scheme's applicants and did not place

     sufficient weight on what they considered to be hard evidence.


c.   The message I received was that this approach made it difficult for Second

     Sight to reach any conclusions.


d.   The Interim Report was likely to be incomplete and therefore inconclusive

     because Second Sight had not finished their case reviews. POL was very

     nervous about this, and I believe rightly so. There was a danger that any

     provisional views expressed by Second Sight would be reported in the

     media as established fact. That would be hugely damaging to Post Offices

     across the country, to many customers - from small businesses who relied

     on the Post Office to some very elderly and vulnerable persons. It would

     also be a problem for Government who would share POL's concerns. POL

     was unable to delay the report - I cannot now recall why now, but it is

     possibly because Lord Arbuthnot had been very clear in his requirement

     for a report before the summer recess, to respond to his colleagues.


 406. On 27 June 2013, Rodric Williams sent an email to Andrew Parsons of

       Bond Dickinson (POL00021822). He referred to Second Sight's

      forthcoming presentation of their Interim Report. POL wanted all

      concerned to be aware of the responses POL had given to the issues

       raised in the inquiry. He asked Andrew Parsons to prepare a document

       referring to Second Sight's obligations under the terms of reference to


                             Page 194 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     consider the evidence POL produced,              and    summarising     POL's

     responses on four specific Spot Reviews. I do not recall any conversation

     with Susan Crichton or Rodric before commissioning Bond Dickinson to

     do this work. As I set out below, any suggestion that POL might take legal

     action against Second Sight was very quickly dropped.


407. (POl00098777) indicates that I attended a meeting on 27 June 2013 with

     Lesley Sewell and Martin Edwards and most likely others I cannot

     remember. I can see from emails in this thread that we discussed the

     bugs and POL's overall response to the Interim Report. I can see from

     my email to Martin after the meeting that I asked him whether he had any

     further thoughts on Lord Arbuthnot. He responded:


   "My only other concern at the meeting was around the feasibility of some

   of the options/levers that were raised. As discussed we need to think about

   a Plan B given the likelihood that James won't agree to delay the

   meeting/report. We also need to be very careful not to overplay our hand

   with SS - they could turn out to be quite dangerous if we threaten them

   with legal action or attempt to replace them with another firm. Easy for this

   to be portrayed in the media as heavy handed tactics because we don't

   like their findings (it plays directly into the existing perceptions we're trying

   to counteract). So I think we're stuck with the softer option of explaining to

   JA calmly but firmly why he cannot allow SS to disseminate a misleading

   interim report - it either needs to be delayed or repositioned as a very

   neutral status update (with more detail on the one case that has been

   resolved)."

                             Page 195 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




408. The discussion about how best to handle the Interim Report continued

     on 28 June 2013.


409. On 28 June 2013 at 10:57, I forwarded Martin's email at (POl00098777)

     to Alice Perkins stating in my covering email:


   "Alice, the team are currently reviewing all options and Alwen has a

   meeting ... with Janet on Monday. The note below from Martin is also helpful

   - just to reassure we have the best brains on it. We will get a note from

   Alwen later today on who is doing what/next steps. Susan has cancelled

   the last day of her holiday and is coming in on Monday as soon as she

   lands, to meet SS. All very tricky but I am happy at least that the team are

   working closely and with pace. Ps. Ignore the cryptic comments re transient

   data etc. You don't want to go there (I am)."


410. At 13:12, Alwen sent me an email setting out the next steps, which I

     forwarded to Alice (POl00098789). Alwen's email included the following

     points:


   "Rod Ismay and Lesley working the detail of the 2 bugs, to understand them

   and then get them into language that is clear and can be communicated.


   "Mark is putting in place expert external comms resource to be dedicated

   to this issue from Monday (this will be from an external agency which he

   trusts).




                           Page 196 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




   "We have a call with SS this afternoon and we will run through the individual

   cases to see how far they will have got by next Tuesday's briefing with

   James and the meeting date on the 8th, this will inform my conversation

   with Janet on Monday.


   "I am going to spend time with Janet at 09. 00 on Monday morning, she

   says she can give me as long as it takes. My approach will be to try to get

   to understand the status of the review and the risk to James and us of an

   incomplete interim report. I will share the fact that SS are not using all the

   evidence they are being given and our concern is that there [sic] approach

   to try and keep everyone happy is not how we would expect a forensic

   accountant to behave. I do think this is the right place to share the 'bugs'

   we have found and how we have dealt with them, which is why the report

   from Rod/Lesley checked by legal and Mark is important. My objective is

   to get Janet to a place where she also wants the meeting to be cancelled.

   I am also going to mention the timing of the report aligned with the funding

   and James' unhelpful comment to Jo about 'unfair convictions'. I will have

   to play this meeting a bit by ear!


   "... We think SS will present the 4 cases some of which will not be finished

   but we are not sure yet. They will also raise the issue of the 'bugs' which

   were outside the cases but which we disclosed to them."


411. I wish to comment on two aspects of this email. The first is Alwen's

     statement that Rodric and Lesley were working on the details of the two

     bugs to understand them and put them into language that was clear and


                            Page 197 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     could be communicated. My understanding at the time was that technical

     details of the bugs and their financial impact were fully understood by

     Fujitsu and POL. I would have read this at the time as an exercise in

     putting the details into a form which a non-IT expert would understand.

     What this document also reflects is that it was always my intention to

     share information about the bugs with Lord Arbuthnot - but, as I have

     already mentioned, I wanted to do that in the setting of a face-to-face

     meeting.


412. Alice replied to Alwen, Martin and me at 14:50 (POl00098797):


   "Thanks for the updates. I am glad we have the best people on this .

    . . .Second, I agree with Martin about the risks of getting heavy with SS -

   deeply unattractive. But I haven't heard anything yet which gives me hope

   we can get this properly back on track. Which is worse? (I don't know the

   answer.) (Keep aiming high here! That is for the goal of no interim I no

   meeting. But I recognise that this is not within our control.) Third, a

   constructive suggestion!, shall we ask Oliver Letwin to help us turn this

   around?"


413. This was the end of any suggestion - which I never endorsed - that POL

     should take some form of legal step against Second Sight.


414. Shortly afterwards at 14:57, Lesley Sewell emailed me (copying Alwen

     Lyons, Martin Edwards and Mark Davies) some information on what had

     been done by POL in relation to the Local Suspense problem

     (POl00190016). She stated in the email that the problem had affected
                            Page 198 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     14 branches of which five had losses and seven had gains, and that

     letters to the affected branches were being reviewed by Legal and P&BA.

     The email also contained a summary explanation of the root cause.

     Under the heading in the email "How we know there aren't anymore",

     Lesley stated that Fujitsu had interrogated the local suspense data and

     found only these 14 cases. They had also taken steps to delete the

     temporary data which had caused the problem. Lesley sent a follow up

     email at 16:19 following a call she had had with Rod Ismay. The email

     contained further details of how individual branches had been affected.

     There were two branches with substantial discrepancies. Willen Village

     had a loss of 9,799 however the SPM was not disadvantaged by this.

     The branch at Bowness Road had made a gain of 6,000 over two years.

     In addition, Lesley stated:


   "The problem was identified by P&BA earlier this year due to aged items in

   the Local Suspense, this was further supported by the two larger amounts

   detailed below that had been raised by the SPMR. At this point P&BA

   raised through their usual process to Fujitsu as detailed below for

   investigation".


415. There was a POL Board meeting by telephone conference call at 17:15

     on 1 July 2013. I do not know whether by this point I had read any draft

     of the Interim Report. I do not recall being sent or given a copy and my

     lawyers have so far been unable to find any indication that this had

     occurred by this stage. It is far more likely that my view of how the Interim

     Report was developing was based on feedback from the team who were

                            Page 199 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




       liaising with Second Sight. I would have deferred to their views on its

       quality.


 416. (POL00098878) is a speaking note prepared for the POL Board call on

       1 July 2013. It was emailed by Martin Edwards to Alice, copying me,

      Alwen, Susan Crichton and Mark Davies on 1 July 2013 at 15:58

       (POL00098877). It sets out the timeline for the release of the report and

       outlines POL's communication plans. It also sets out POL's position on

      the Second Sight review:


a.   The key point to emphasise was that we understood that Second Sight had

     not identified any systemic issues with Horizon itself.


b.   However, the report would still present reputational risks. Second Sight

     were nervous about perceptions of a "whitewash" and so may draw

     attention to two points.


c.   The first were issues with POL's wider support training and investigations

     processes. POL's response would be that we accept that there are lessons

     to be learned and have a proposal on how to address them while closing

     down the Second Sight investigation.


d.   The second was that POL had disclosed two previous anomalies with the

     Horizon system. It might be said that POL cannot be confident that there

     are not more widespread problems. POL's response would be that in both

     cases the errors were picked up and addressed; a comprehensive audit

     had been performed to check that there were no further cases we weren't

                                Page 200 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




        aware of; and new procedures were being put in place to ensure that such

        anomalies would be spotted at any early stage in the future.


e.      POL's view of Second Sight was that they hadn't yet reviewed all the

        evidence POL had given them and may not be in a position to set out

        definitive conclusions on the case studies in the Interim Report. It also

        appeared that they were not focussing on empirical evidence, instead

        tending to rely on the recollection of sub-postmasters.


f.      POL believed that the Second Sight review should now conclude.


     417. The minutes for the POL Board meeting (by teleconference) on 1 July

          2013 record the following discussion about Second Sight and the Interim

          Report (POL00021515; POL00099516):


        "The CEO apologised for the shorl notice in keeping the Board updated but

        explained that issues had arisen over the last couple of days. She gave an

        update on the Horizon review which was being underlaken by Second

        Sight and their interim reporl which was to be presented at a meeting of

        MPs on the 8th July. The investigation to date had found no systemic issues

        with the Horizon computer system but had highlighted areas for

        improvement in supporl areas with the Horizon computer system but had

        highlighted areas for improvement in supporl areas such as training.


        "The CEO explained that the Horizon, like any large computer system,

        would occasionally have anomalies and two were know(n) of over recent

        years. The Business has dealt with these anomalies to ensure no sub

                                Page 201 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




   postmaster was out of pocket and these anomalies had not affected any of

   the cases which Second Sight had reviewed. Second Sight had been told

   of these anomalies and they would include them in their report.


   "The CEO was concerned that the report from the independent forensic

   accountants was not as factual as expected and could lead to loose

   language at the MP meeting.


   "The Board asked the Business to challenge Second Sight to ensure

   changes were made to the report where possible and asked the Business

   to prepare their communication to combat any inaccuracies."


418. The Inquiry has asked me to comment on what I meant when I stated

     that the investigation to date had found "no systemic issues with the

     Horizon computer system". As I have already mentioned in this witness

     statement, whether or not an issue with Horizon was "systemic" was not

     something on which I could form my own view. It was a matter of

     professional IT expertise.


419. Second Sight had been engaged by POL to investigate and report on the

     very question of whether there were systemic issues. I understand that

     for the purposes of their report, Second Sight defined "systemic" as

     meaning "system-wide": see paragraph 8.2 of the Interim Report. I do not

     imagine I was focussing on that precise definition when I spoke to the

     POL Board. My understanding at the time of the meeting was that

     Second Sight had not informed POL that there was any issue with

     Horizon that they regarded as "systemic". POL's own technical people
                            Page 202 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     were of the same opinion. All I believe I was conveying to the POL Board

     was the current status of the investigation as I understood it to be, based

     on what I had been told.


420. I am also asked about my statement that "the report from the independent

     forensic accountants was not as factual as expected and could lead to

     loose language at the MP meeting". As I have already indicated, I have

     no memory of having read a draft of the Interim Report by this point. It is

     more likely that I made this comment based on feedback I'd received

     from the POL team who were liaising with Second Sight. I played no role

     myself in attempting to make any changes to the Interim Report. Nor did

     I encourage anyone at POL to challenge or amend any particular aspect

     of the Interim Report. I knew that the POL team working on this matter

     were exchanging drafts with Second Sight and proposing amendments.

     It was for them - who were far closer to the detail than me - to decide

     how they approached that task.


421. At 19:48 on 1 July 2013, Rodric Williams sent an email to Alwen Lyons

     and Susan Crichton copied to Hugh Flemington (POL00029626). He

     attached a draft briefing note on the Interim Report. Alwen Lyons replied

     all noting amongst other things "this is the first I have heard that Falkirk

     is different to the 64 we had assumed it was the same so do we have 3

     anomalies. That's not good, we have told the Board and Janet 2 we knew

     of!". This appears to make clear that we did not know about the Falkirk

     bug before the board call.



                            Page 203 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




422. At 22:07 on I July, after the POL Board meeting, I sent an email update

     to Alice Perkins, having first spoken to Susan Crichton, who had met

     Second Sight earlier that day to get an update on their progress

     (POL00098887):


   "I caught up with Susan this evening after we finished. She had finished

   her meeting with SS and wade [sic] of the view that they do now understand

   the risk of being caught up in something bigger and more sensitive. She is

   hoping their report will be more balanced, should say they have found no

   evidence of systemic Horizon (computer) issues but will confirm

   shortcomings in support processes and systems. And that PO has already

   identified and corrected a number of these. I hope when they speak to

   James tomorrow that they will confirm all this. They will also want to say

   their work is not finished and therefore still not conclusive.


   "Not a final position by any means nor one that controls what they might

   say rather than write but sounding slightly better.


   "Rest assured there will a thorough lessons learnt exercise, which if you're

   comfortable, I'd like to suggest reports to the ARC. As you said tonight, we

   need to get through this first though."


423. The Inquiry has also asked me to comment on (POL00029625). This is

     a draft of an internal briefing note to me dated 1 July 2013 which was for

     my meeting with James Arbuthnot on 3 July 2013. The document is a

     draft containing many gaps and questions. I would not normally be given

     a briefing paper until it reached its final form. I have no memory of seeing
                            Page 204 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     the draft, nor have I have seen any documents to suggest that it was sent

     to me. I can see from (POL00027852) that Martin Edwards emailed Alice

     Perkins and me what appears to be the final version of the document at

     02:06 on 3 July 2013 in preparation for our meeting with James Arbuthnot

     that day. I did become aware of the Falkirk bug, but I do not believe I was

     informed about it before the POL Board meeting on 1 July 2013.


424. I cannot recall whether I took steps at this stage to understand the

     Callendar Square bug better nor can I recall what steps were taken to

     ensure that Second Sight had been informed of what POL knew about

     the bug. I can see now from emails at (POL00144918) that Simon Baker,

     Lesley Sewell and Alwen Lyons were in discussion with Second Sight in

     June 2013 about "The Calendar [sic] Square, Falkirk Problem".


425. At 09:46 on 5 July 2013 Simon Baker sent v24 of the draft Interim Report

     to me and a number of others suggesting that we "regroup at 1pm ... to

     agree our final position" (POL00021745). I assume that I read the report

     at the time. I can see from (POL00167937) that at 15:39, Simon Baker

     sent a copy of the report with POL's comments to Ron Warmington and

     Ian Henderson. I was then sent a marked up copy of the report at 17:39

     by Lesley Sewell (POL00167937). I do have some comments on the

     sections that the Inquiry has referred me to. I was very much aware that

     Second Sight's position was that their investigative work was incomplete

     and the conclusions in the Interim Report were provisional and subject to

     further work. I therefore understood that Second Sight were not saying

     that there were definitely no systemic issues in the software, only that

                            Page 205 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




            they had found no evidence of systemic problems up to this point. I was

            aware of non-systemic issues in the sense that all sorts of things could

            happen at the level of an individual Post Office - from mis-keying, to a

            network failure, to the egg-timer issue, to losing a lottery print out or

            receipt, to not using ATM-fit notes, to miscounting a rem in or out - the

            possibilities were endless and all could have affected the branch Horizon

            data in some way. The whole point of sitting down with Second Sight in

            reviewing each case individually was to try to establish in each case the

            cause of the issue encountered by the SPM.


      426. (POl00099096) is a POL commentary on the Interim Report which I was

            sent on 8 July 2013. I can see from this that the team took a fairly light

            touch to amendments: they were seeking to avoid any suggestion that

            POL   had   attempted    to   rewrite   the   report   or compromise   its

            independence. Therefore, POL focussed on asking Second Sight to

            tighten up the report (such as using hard numbers rather than phrases

            like "in a number of cases") or asking Second Sight to use more neutral

            language to avoid the report being misinterpreted.


67. Please consider POl00115923 (email from Martin Edwards to you and others

on 3 July 2013), POl00115924 (briefing for a meeting with lord Arbuthnot on 3

July 2013), POl00098916 (your email to Alice Perkins on 3 July 2013),

POl00029649 (your letter to lord Arbuthnot on 4 July 2013) and POl00107985

(your email on 4 July 2013). Please describe your meeting with lord Arbuthnot

on 3 July 2013 and you preparation for it. In particular:



                                  Page 206 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




427. I cannot recall exactly what preparation I did for the meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot on 3 July 2013. I can see from Alice Perkins' email to me on 2

     July 2013 (POL00098887) that the two of us set aside two hours on 2

     July 2013. The briefing papers were emailed to us by Martin Edwards at

     02:00 on the day of the meeting, 3 July 2013 (POL00115923). In his

     covering email, Martin thanked Susan Crichton, Alwen Lyons, Mark

     Davies and "everyone else involved'' for the briefing papers. I assume

     this was a reference to the other individuals copied into the covering

     email: Hugh Flemington, Rodric Williams, and Simon Baker. The briefing

     papers consisted of two documents: a briefing for the meeting with Lord

     Arbuthnot containing speaking notes (POL00115924) and a note

     addressed to me on the Interim Report (POL00113369). Both documents

     were attached to Martin's email as PDFs, and he had put the text of the

     briefing into the covering email.


428. I was to meet Alice before 09:00 at Portcullis House, Westminster, and

     Alwen was to meet us there with hard copies of the briefing papers:

     (POL00098912). The electronic versions of the briefing papers were

     readable on a phone or tablet. I can see that I read them early in the

     morning of 3 July 2013: I sent an email to Mark and others at 07:40 on 3

     July 2013 (POL00098915) to ask whether we could share them with Lord

     Arbuthnot, as they were so clear. However, Mark's advice was not to

     share the papers, but to send Lord Arbuthnot a letter after the meeting to

     summarise the key points we discussed. That is what we did.




                            Page 207 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




 429. I cannot remember the meeting, but I can see from (POL00029649) that

       I wrote to Lord Arbuthnot on 4 July 2013 to summarise the key points we

       had discussed:


a.   I reiterated that POL was keen to work collaboratively with the JFSA and

     sub-postmasters to conclude the review process and identify areas for

     continuous improvement.


b.   To help achieve this aim, we intended to create a new body within POL,

     known as the Branch User Forum. The Branch User Forum would be a

     permanent body to give sub-postmasters a voice at the heart of the

     business.


c.   It would be chaired by a senior executive and the JFSA, NFSP and CWU

     would be invited to join.


d.   The first priority of the Branch User Forum would be to work together to

     bring the Second Sight review to a conclusion. It would then continue as

     an outlet to consider future issues and concerns.


e.   We discussed the small number of exceptions or anomalies which POL

     had brought to the attention of Second Sight, which had been dealt with in

     the appropriate way. This meant that they had been identified and

     corrected, and that the sub-postmasters concerned had been contacted

     where it was relevant to do so. Lord Arbuthnot acknowledged during the

     meeting that such exceptions were common in large computer systems -

     the important thing was that they were handled in an appropriate manner.

                                 Page 208 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




f.      We agreed that we would share media statements in advance of the

        publication of the Interim Report.


g.      We discussed the importance of drawing a clear distinction between (i)

        systemic issues with the Horizon system; and (ii) the wider support

        systems. Confusion about this distinction could have a serious impact for

        POL, sub-postmasters and customers. It was essential that the distinction

        was applied and followed in the Interim Report and all associated

        communications.


     430. I emailed Mark, Martin, Susan and Lesley in the morning on 4 July 2013

          with my thoughts on the meeting (POl00098973; POl00107985). I said

          that the meeting went better and at moments worse than hoped but the

          overall balance was positive. Lord Arbuthnot was turning to recognition

          that the Horizon IT system was ok, but that (and this was my summary

          of his position): " ... we have behaved in a heavy handed way with some

          spmrs who panicked, which resulted in them inadvertently getting into a

          muddle and committing fraud. There is no suggestion that it is wide-

          spread and there is recognition that other prosecutions were correct."


     431. I wrote that if it were the case that POL had behaved in a heavy-handed

          manner, I wanted it called out. It did not fit with our current values and

          would undermine trust in the brand. However, we needed to be very

          careful about proportionality, which was a point I made consistently, i.e.

          that the vast majority of transactions were carried out without problems.

          I asked Susan to find out how many prosecutions there had been in the


                                 Page 209 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           last ten years and Angela to find out what flags we have in place at the

           NBSC to make sure we picked up any signs of concern or incompetence

           or inability regarding SPMs balancing etc.


      432. On 4 July 2013, Alice emailed me with her thoughts about the next steps

           in light of what was discussed at the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot

           (POl00098986). Alice's view was that we should not commit ourselves

           too firmly to any future arrangements while everyone was tired and

           dealing with immediate issues. She recalled that Lord Arbuthnot had

           mentioned at the meeting that we should see what ideas came out of the

           meeting with MPs on Monday: her view was that we should leave the

           arrangements open while committing in principle to working with Horizon

           users and the JFSA. She also wanted to change the approach with

           Second Sight: "If we have to continue with SS, my firm belief is that we

           need a totally different approach to managing and rewarding them and

           that the significant over-run in the budget to date should feature in our

           negotiations." Picking up on a suggestion that I had made of an ARC-led

           post-mortem, Alice suggested that Alastair Marnoch could lead this

           project.


67.1. Why did your briefing not refer to the Callendar Square bug? Did you raise

this with lord Arbuthnot: if not. why not?


      433. The note on the Interim Report which Martin Edwards sent me on 3 July

           2013 (POl00113369) contains a section on the Callendar Square I

           Falkirk bug between paragraphs 28 and 33. However, it was not


                                 Page 210 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            mentioned in the speaking notes set out in the body of the email. I do not

            recall whether I noticed this at the time. I do not remember whether I

            mentioned the Falkirk bug to Lord Arbuthnot during the meeting. It is

            possible that I did, because my letter to him on 4 July 2013 refers to "the

            small number of exceptions or anomalies which POL had brought to the

            attention of Second Sighf' (POL00029649).


      434. If I did not mention the Falkirk bug, it was not deliberate. I have a

            recollection of being told that POL had made Second Sight aware of the

            Falkirk problem and I believe this is the bug they refer to in paragraph

            6.10 of the Interim Report. As set out above, there had been discussions

            with Second Sight about the Falkirk bug in June 2013.


67.2. In respect of your email at POL00098916, please expand on your reason

for writing "This isn't iust about SS - don't want to make them central. It is about

no system issues, some improvements to be made, and keeping perspective so

that our brand reputation is protected". What did you mean by "no system

issues"?


      435. Alice Perkins and I discussed how we would start the meeting by email

            on the morning of 3 July 2013 (POl00098916). Alice suggested that,

            since we would not have the chance for a pre-chat, we should begin by

            asking Lord Arbuthnot to share his thoughts with us. She proposed that

            we mention in our opening remarks that the position with Second Sight

            was not where we wanted it to be, with an incomplete Interim Report




                                   Page 211 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




        being circulated very late for the presentation meeting to MPs on Monday

        8 July 2013.


436. I responded that I had "advice from the ranch", and it was my own view,

        that this was not quite front foot enough. I can see from (POL00098911;

        POL00098912; POL00098921) that I consulted Mark Davies and Martin

        Edwards after receiving Alice's email. I felt her approach would give Lord

        Arbuthnot the opportunity to take control and put us on the defensive. I

        thought that the three headline points in the briefing were good, and we

        should lead with those. If the meeting started as a general conversation,

        we might lose the opportunity to make them.


437. The Inquiry has asked me to expand on the words I used in my email to

        Alice:


    "This isn't just about SS - don't want to make them central. ft is about no

   system issues, some improvements to be made, and keeping perspective

   so that our brand reputation is protected".


438. My response to Alice meant no more than it would be better to follow the

        speaking note than to begin with a general conversation and raising

        Second Sight. The three headline points in the briefing which I thought

        we should start with were as follows:



          "We take sub-postmasters' concerns very seriously which is why we

           set up investigation in the first place.



                               Page 212 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




               No evidence of systemic failures in the system. But does highlight

                some important lessons on wider support processes. Many of these

                are historical issues which have already been addressed, but we're

                determined to continue making improvements (with input from a new

                user forum).


               Important this is seen in context - 6 million transactions per day

                across 11,800 branches. Inevitable that some issues will arise on a

                system of this scale, the important thing is that they are handled

                properly."


     439. I believe that the phrase in my email to Alice, "no system issues", was

             shorthand for the second bullet point in the briefing, beginning "no

             evidence of systemic failures in the system".


67.3. On what basis did you distinguish "System 'exceptions"' and "systemic

issues with the Horizon computer system"?


     440. The Inquiry has also asked me to explain the distinction between two

             phrases in the speaking note: "System exceptions" and "systemic issues

             with the Horizon computer system". "System exception" was the term

             used in the briefing to describe the Local Suspense problem and the

             Receipts & Payments Mismatch problem. In retrospect it would have

             been better to have called them "bugs" or "defects": indeed, that is what

             they are called in section 6 and paragraph 8.2 (b) of the Interim Report.

             The difference between them is that I had been told by POL's IT function

             that the two bugs were not systemic issues or evidence of systemic
                                   Page 213 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




            issues. That also appeared to be Second Sight's own conclusion as set

            out in paragraphs 8.2 (a) and (b) of the Interim Report.


68. Please consider POL00098940. Please describe your meeting with Duncan

Tait on 4 July 2013. Please describe your involvement with Fujitsu in relation to

Second Sight at the appropriate point of your witness statement.


      441. On 4 July 2013, I had a meeting with Duncan Tait, the CEO of Fujitsu

            Europe.


      442. During the afternoon of 3 July, Richard Bryant emailed a briefing for the

            meeting to Sarah Paddison (cc. Gina Gould and Lesley Sewell), which

            Gina forwarded to Martin Edwards and Theresa lies (POL00098940).

            Martin emailed Lesley that evening. He had noticed that the briefing did

            not cover the Second Sight investigation, and he understood from

            conversations with me that I intended to raise it with Duncan Tait. Martin

            asked Lesley to respond.


      443. At 20:30, Lesley emailed Martin some points on the investigation, which

            Martin then emailed to me. Lesley suggested, in summary, that I should

            thank Fujitsu for their past support in responding and providing the

            information requested by Second Sight and ask for their support going

            forward as we responded to the Interim Report. She also suggested that

            I single out James Davidson at Fujitsu (a name I recognise from Inquiry

            documents, although I do not believe I knew him) for having done a good

           job. In addition, Lesley assumed that Duncan Tait would want my view

            on how the matter would move forward.
                                  Page 214 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      444. I do not remember what I said to Duncan Tait during our meeting. The

            email at (POL00098940) indicates that the meeting was mainly about

            matters other than Second Sight, which is why Second Sight was not

            mentioned in my briefing. I knew that Fujitsu had been supporting POL

            throughout the Second Sight investigation with the extraction of the

            Horizon data for the cases in the investigation and with technical support

            in relation to questions about the workings of the IT system. It is likely

            that I said something along the lines suggested by Lesley, but I cannot

            recall the conversation.


69. Please consider POL00099021 (email chain over 4/5 July 2013).


69.1. In your email of 4 July 2013, please explain your basis for the "cause for

concern in relation to the overall quality and professionalism of the drafting and

the widespread use of subjective (and at times somewhat emotional)

statements of opinion rather than more neutral and evidence-based insights"?

Please provide examples of (a) any subjective statements of opinion and (b) a

somewhat emotional statements of opinion on which this opinion was based.


      445. At 20:26 on 4 July 2013, Martin Edwards sent me a draft of an email to

            the POL Board to update them on where we were with the Interim Report

            (POL00099003). He apologised for its length but felt that the issues could

            not be discussed without providing a reasonably full explanation. At

            22:52, I sent the Board a version of the email which I had amended

            (POL00099021 ).




                                   Page 215 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




 446. The third paragraph of the draft, and the final version of the email stated

       that POL expected Second Sight to send a full draft of the Interim Report

       on 5 July 2013, and that they had shared today (4 July 2013) the

       introductory section. Before sending the email to the Board I made a

       change to Martin's draft to state that POL was concerned "in relation to

       the overall professionalism of the drafting and the widespread use of

       subjective (and at times somewhat emotional) statements of opinion

       rather than more neutral or evidence-based insights."


 447. I do not know whether I had read the draft introduction to the Interim

       Report when I emailed the Board on 4 July 2013. I have not seen any

       document which indicates that I had been sent a copy by this point. It is

       more likely that my comment to the Board was based on a discussion

       with the POL team who were reviewing the draft sections of the Interim

       Report as they were circulated for comments by Second Sight.


 448. As I have mentioned in my answer to Question 66, on 8 July 2013, I was

       sent a POL commentary on a then current draft of the Interim Report

       (POL00099096). I can see from this document that the POL review team

       had a number of areas of concern:


a.   Second Sight sometimes wrote in a way that could give the impression that

     the concerns they were investigating had been reported by a larger number

     of SPMs than was in fact the case: they used phrases like "in almost all of

     the cases", "in a number of cases" and "multiple SPMRs", instead of the

     actual numbers, which were small.


                             Page 216 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




b.   At points, Second Sight appeared to criticise POL's approach to their

     investigation. POL's review team believed these criticisms were unjustified.

     For example, POL's commentary on paragraph 2.4 of the draft Interim

     Report responded to a suggestion that delays in obtaining information had

     added to the length and cost of the investigation. The POL investigation

     team pointed out that POL was meeting the costs of the review, and that

     they had responded to Second Sight's requests for information by collating

     it from a range of sources across the business. They felt there should have

     been recognition by Second Sight of the effort POL had put into providing

     them with information.


c.   Another example is POL's commentary on paragraph 3.5 of the draft

     Interim Report. Second Sight had complained that POL's responses to the

     Spot Reviews were technical and would be inaccessible to the SPMs.

     However, the POL team had drafted the responses to be reviewed by

     Second Sight as forensic accountants, and that level of detail was required

     to understand what had happened in each of the cases in the review.


d.   In paragraph 3.5 of the draft, Second Sight stated that there had not been

     "closure" for SPMs. The POL review team pointed out that this was not

     surprising given that Second Sight had yet to conclude its work on the 4

     Spot Reviews analysed in the Interim Report.


 449. Although I did not see this document until after I emailed the POL Board

      on 4 July 2013, the criticisms it made of Second Sight are familiar to me:

      the POL commentary contains the type of feedback that I was given by



                              Page 217 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




            the POL review team - in meetings and conversations - since they had

            started looking at the drafts of the Interim Report earlier in July.


      450. At the time, I believed that POL's criticisms of Second Sight were fair: I

            trusted that the POL review team had collated the available evidence,

            and looked at the evidence, and Second Sight's findings, in an objective

            way. This team had no brief other than to be transparent and objective -

            all the correspondence and interaction from the Chair, POL Board, CEO

            and down was focused on POL undertaking this work objectively.


69.2. Please explain what information you provided to BIS regarding Second

Sight's work at this time.


      451. At this time, leading up to the publication of the Interim Report, the

            shareholder's representative on the Board was Susannah Storey. She

            was a recipient of my email update to the Board on 4 July 2013 and a

            further email update from me to the Board on 5 July 2013 (both in the

            chain at (POL00099021 )).


      452. I stated in my update to the POL Board on 4 July 2013 that I had briefed

            the BIS minister, Jo Swinson MP, on 3 July 2013 and that POL was

            staying in regular contact with her officials. (POL00098928) is a speaking

            note which appears to have been prepared for me to use when I spoke

            to the minister. The headline points I was to address were to provide

            reassurance on the extent of the problem:


     a.   Based on what POL had been told by Second Sight, we expected them to

          conclude that there was no evidence of systemic problems based on the 4

                                   Page 218 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




          cases they had assessed in detail. However, they would draw attention to

          issues and areas for improvement with our wider training and support

          processes.


     b.   Many of the reported issues with support systems were historic and had

          already been addressed - but POL was determined to keep on improving.


    c.    It was important to keep these issues in perspective: there were 6 million

          transactions per day across the Network's 11,800 branches and many

          more transactions per second (1,500) than there were in the entire review.


    d.    There was no reason to believe that any past convictions were unsafe.


      453. The note also mentions that there was a significant reputational risk if the

            Interim Report was not communicated in a careful and balanced way. I

            was to update her on the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and flagged that I

            might ask for her support (either directly or through other ministers) to get

            him to a better place. In that context, I can see from my email to the team

            on 4 July 2013 (POL00098973; POL00107985) that the minister had

            spoken to Lord Arbuthnot, though I do not know if this was at POL's

            request.


      454. I can also see that on 3 July 2013 (POL00098923) I asked Martin

            Edwards to send BIS the briefing for the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot

            (POL00115924) together with the note addressed to me on the Interim

            Report (POL00113369).


69.3. Did you agree with Mr Smith's suggestion in his email of 5 July 2013 that

"One of the main reputational and potentially financial risks arising from the
                                   Page 219 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




review relates to possible attempts to reopen past prosecutions based on its

findings". To what extent was the POL Board and I or senior management

concerned that convictions had been secured on the basis of potentially

unreliable data generated by Horizon?


     455. On 5 July 2013, Martin Edwards sent me a draft of another update email

           to the POL Board (POL00099021 ), which I sent to the POL Board on 6

           July 2013, having made some amendments (POL00115961 ). The Inquiry

           has asked about the penultimate bullet point in Martin's email, which

           reads as follows in the amended version I sent to the POL Board:


         "One of the main reputational and potentially financial risks arising from the

         review relates to possible attempts to reopen past prosecutions based on

         the findings. James Arbuthnot was certainly focussed on this. We had a

         stronger exchange on this point. It is not clear that any new evidence has

         emerged. If it does, as I pointed out to James, legal routes to appeal

         already exist. Susan and the legal team are working with our external

         lawyers to consider whether there are any implications from the report for

         past cases, and we can provide a further update on this work next week."


     456. I did agree with Martin's suggestion that attempts to re-open past

           prosecutions posed a reputational and financial risk to POL. That is why

           I retained this statement in my message to the POL Board.


     457. The question of past prosecutions raised a number of issues. There was

           of course the legal issue of whether the Interim Report raised implications

           for past cases. There was also the human aspect. I do recall having

           conversations at POL, with Alice Perkins in particular, about how terrible
                                  Page 220 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           it would be if SPMs had been sent to prison for crimes they hadn't

           committed. However, that was not an issue on which the POL Board or I

           could draw any conclusions. I considered that issue to be a matter of

           legal expertise, and I understood that Susan Crichton and the external

           lawyers were considering whether there was any evidence that this had

           happened.


      458. One of the roles of the POL Board was to consider risks to the business.

           It was only right that the POL Board should be informed that the

           possibility that convicted persons might try to re-open their convictions

           was a potential financial and reputational risk to the business.


70. Please consider POL00099063 (Second Sight's interim report). Please set

out your views on the Interim Report and what steps you took after having read

it.


      459. Between 3 July 2013, after the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot, and 8 July

           2013, when the Interim Report was published on POL's website, POL

           worked to formulate its immediate response to the Interim Report. This

           was an extremely busy period. It is clear from the documents that I had

           many meetings, discussions, and emails with colleagues, the Board, BIS,

           and the key stakeholders in the Second Sight investigation, Lord

           Arbuthnot and Alan Bates of the JFSA.


      460. I cannot remember most of these discussions and communications. I set

           out below a chronology of the key events during this period in which I

           was involved based on the documents and the recollections they trigger.


                                  Page 221 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




       Before doing so, I wish to address what POL was trying to achieve during

       this period:


a.   POL wanted to ensure that media reporting of the Interim Report was as

     accurate and proportionate as it could be. A major area of POL's concern

     with the Interim Report was that Second Sight had defined "Horizon" to

     mean not only the software, but the surrounding infrastructure and

     processes, including training and support. Second Sight's view of their

     remit was not itself the concern: I agreed with them that training and

     support fell within their terms of reference.


b.   However, there was a real danger that public and network confidence in

     Horizon would be undermined unfairly if stakeholder comments and media

     reports failed to capture the distinction between Second Sight's findings

     about the software and their findings on other aspects of what they defined

     in the Interim Report as the "system", such as training and support.


c.   Relatedly, we wanted to ensure that public statements and media reports

     described accurately what we understood to be the broad thrust of the

     Interim Report, namely, that while Second Sight had identified no systemic

     faults in the Horizon IT system, there would be criticisms of POL's training

     and support for SPMs.


d.   There are references in the documents from this time to POL's "reputation".

     To me, this did not mean POL's reputation as a company or the reputation

     of anyone who worked for it. Reputation in that sense was not my concern.

     My overriding concern was that the public should not lose confidence that

     their local Post Office would be able to carry out their transactions (many
                              Page 222 of 861
                                                                                          WITN01020100




           of which were very personal to them, such as pension payments) honestly

           and accurately and they could trust the Post Office with their affairs. If this

           confidence was undermined by inaccurate or unfair reporting of the Interim

           Report, it would be a huge disservice to the general public.


      e.   The way in which we sought to achieve these objectives was by close

           engagement with the stakeholders. It came as a relief that Alan Bates was

           also of the view that the JFSA did not want the media to (in his words) go

           "ballistic".


     f.    A second, but complementary, workstream was that we wanted to identify

           a package of measures POL could announce alongside the Interim Report.

           These needed to cover both the completion of the investigation begun by

           Second Sight and ways of making improvements in the future. Again, it

           was very important that these measures would satisfy the stakeholders and

           we engaged with them closely between 3 and 8 July 2013.


Emails with Lord Arbuthnot's office


      461. During the morning of 4 July 2013, POL engaged with Lord Arbuthnot's

             office to gain clarity about what he intended to say when the Interim

             Report was published. At 10:42 that morning, Janet Walker emailed Mark

             Davies (POL00098991 ). She would share Lord Arbuthnot's media

             statement with POL but added "it would be extremely helpful if we could

             have sight of the definition of 'Horizon' you will be citing, and vital that it

             is made absolutely crystal clear that it is not just the computer software

             programme. But I'm sure you know this!".


                                     Page 223 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      462. As I mentioned above, the importance of communicating the distinction

            between Second Sight's findings in relation to the Horizon software on

            the one hand, and the surrounding support structures on the other, was

            one of POL's key concerns. Janet's message indicated that those

            boundaries were at risk of being blurred in Lord Arbuthnot's public

            statement.


      463. I must have been told about Janet's email, because I emailed Alice

            Perkins at 11 :34 on 4 July 2013 (POL00098990) stating that: "/ have

            been reflecting (calmly) and I think we have to change our tack a bit both

            to support James and to share the lead on our story. He is still briefing

            more against us rather than with us."


Emails with Alan Bates and internal discussion on 4 July 2013


      464. On 4 July 2013 at 20:36 (POL00099012), Alan Bates emailed me the text

            of an email he had sent to Lord Arbuthnot setting out his "initial jottings"

            on a future structure for dealing with Horizon issues. Alan suggested that

            POL should appoint an independent external adjudicator supported by a

            team of technical and legal staff to resolve disputes with sub-

            postmasters.


      465. I forwarded the email to Mark Davies and Martin Edwards:


      a.   I stated in my email to Mark and Martin that I thought there was some merit

           in Alan's ideas, although I preferred the idea of an ombudsman or expert

           rather than adjudicator: however, I would defer to the experts on

           terminology.

                                   Page 224 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      b.   Mark replied that he agreed in principle, but there would be some issues

           and there would need to be safeguards. He suggested that, in the first

           instance, Alan could bring his idea to the Branch User Forum and perhaps

           appoint an independent person to carry out a review of the proposal. Mark

           also mentioned that he was musing on an idea of an independent and

           confidential hotline. He said these were good ideas politically.


      c.   I replied to Mark and Martin that the adjudicator/ombudsman role had an

           attraction.


      d.   However, Martin disagreed (POL00099011 ). He thought that the structure

           proposed by Alan would be cumbersome, resource intensive and

           inconsistent with where we wanted to take POL as a business, "i.e. a

           modern, professional retail business, working through a network of equally

           modern and professional retailers, with models of engagement built on the

           best principles of mutualisation".


      e.   I replied (POL00099011 ): "let's discuss tomorrow then. I imagined this

           could be a mechanism for delivering just that. Without some significant

           changes to the way we run the business - ie., forcing us to act differently,

           it won't happen quickly enough. I do like the helpline. Very much. But if

           (when) it doesn't work, an independent safety net is not a bad idea. Happy

           to remain open though:)"


The first draft of POL's public statement


      466. In the evening of 4 July 2013, Mark Davies sent the senior team and me

             a draft of POL's public statement on the Interim Report (POL00099005).

                                    Page 225 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




      He stated that he had been working with POL's in-house communications

      team, together with an external PR advisor, Portland Communications,

      and that the text "takes in comments and overall positioning set out by

      Paula earlier." I have not seen an email with my comments and

      suggestions on positioning, but I have no doubt that Mark and I at least

      spoke to discuss the content. The draft contained the following:


a.   A statement that the Interim Report "suggests that there are no systemic

     problems with the Horizon system but calls on the Post Office to improve

     its support and training systems for subpostmasters."


b.   A commitment to create a Branch User Forum to provide a way for sub-

     postmasters and others to raise issues around business processes,

     training and support at the highest level. Interested parties such as the

     JFSA would be invited to join the Forum.


c.   Comments from me personally, including:


          "We take this very seriously and apologise to any subpostmaster who

          has felt that our standards of support and training have not met their

          needs or believes we simply have not been 'human' enough in our

          dealings with them. I am determined to act on this ...

          We take our responsibilities to them very seriously and recognise that

          we can always improve the way we support them and their business.


          We will also be conducting a review of our support processes and

          training to ensure they meet the standards expected of us. We have

          made many changes over the last few years but are not at all

                             Page 226 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




                 complacent ... "


My Board update on 4 July 2013


467.   At 22:52 on 4 July 2013, I sent an update to the Board (POL00099016). In

       summary, I informed the POL Board that


       a.   POL understood from engaging with Second Sight that they had not found

            any evidence yet of systemic issues with the Horizon system. However, as

            expected, they intended to draw attention to wider failings in the training

            and support provided to sub-postmasters.


       b.   POL was working to ensure that (i) the final version of the Interim Report

            would be accurate; and (ii) POL had given feedback on concerns about the

            accuracy and professionalism of the drafting it had seen to date. However,

            we had to respect the independence of the report, and it was POL's firm

            view that it would not be credible or appropriate to take a firmer approach.

            There would inevitably remain elements in the final draft which would make

            for uncomfortable reading.


       c.   We were focussed heavily on media and stakeholder strategy. I stated:


            "To summarise very briefly, we have taken the view that the best way to

            minimise the reputationaf risks associated with the review and to do the

            right thing for the business and the people is to welcome the broad thrust

            of the report and commit to acting on its key findings in relation to the need

            for improvements in our support and training processes. This is entirely

            consistent with the broader imperative for cultural change across the

            organisation which the Board has discussed in recent months."
                                     Page 227 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      468. As regards the specific stakeholders:


      a.   I described Lord Arbuthnot as a "pivotal figure", who would be hosting the

           presentation of the Interim Report on 8 July 2013. I informed the POL

           Board that Alice and I had had a constructive but at times challenging

           meeting with him on 3 July 2013 in which we had emphasised the

           importance of an even-handed approach which would not undermine

           public confidence in POL. I had a further call scheduled with him for 5 July

           2013, and we were staying in close touch with his office.


      b.   We planned to engage with other MPs who may be attending the

           presentation, including Oliver Letwin MP, with the aim of ensuring they

           could help promote an even-handed discussion at the meeting.


      c.   I had spoken that evening to Alan Bates of the JFSA. It was a constructive

           conversation. I reassured him that POL intended to take the key findings

           of the Interim Report seriously and would like to work collaboratively with

           him to identify process improvements.


5 July 2013


      469. Alice responded to my update to the Board at 07:22 on 5 July 2013. She

              stated: "You are doing the right things and I have nothing further to

              suggest at this point" (POL00099016). I responded that I had received a

              text from Alan Bates and had had a further conversation with him. I also

              stated that "we will get through this and I hope deliver the 'triumph' not

              the disaster." I believe this was a reference to achieving the objectives I

              have set out at paragraph 460.

                                     Page 228 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




6 July 2013


6 July 2013 update to the Board


      470. At 08:43 on 6 July 2013, I emailed the POL Board with a further update

              on   the   Second        Sight   review     (POL00099026;   POL00099027;

              POL00115961 ). By this point I had had two constructive conversations

              with Alan Bates, which I believed confirmed his willingness to work

              collaboratively with POL in taking forward its response to the review. In

              particular, he agreed to participate in a new user forum to provide

              feedback on training and support issues related to Horizon and bring the

              existing review process to a conclusion. I gave the POL Board the

              following information:


    a.   I understood from speaking to him that Alan's main issue was not "the

         computer" but the human aspect. In his view, POL had failed to support

         vulnerable and "muddle headed [sic]" SPMs. I wrote those words in that

         way as the phrase "muddle headed" was Alan's and not mine.


    b.   He would collaborate with us in the user forum but would also need

         reassurance that we would not just ignore past cases. We would work with

         him to understand what had happened and I had offered again to meet him

         and one or two of his colleagues personally. (This time he accepted).


    c.   He also raised the idea of setting up a new independent third party that

         SPMs could approach if they were facing issues with Horizon which could

         not be resolved through the normal Post Office processes. This aligned
                                        Page 229 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




            with some of POL's own thinking. We were inclined to agree in principle

            without committing to any specific structure.


    d.      One of the main reputational and potentially financial risks arising from the

            review related to possible attempts to reopen past prosecutions based on

            the findings. Lord Arbuthnot was certainly focussed on this when I met him

            on 5 July 2013. I had told Lord Arbuthnot that it was not clear that any new

            evidence had emerged. If it had, as I pointed out to him, legal routes to

            appeals already existed.


    e.      Susan Crichton and the legal team were working with our external lawyers

            to consider whether there were any implications arising from the report for

            past cases, and we could provide a further update on this work next week.


    f.      We had received a full draft of the Interim Report on 5 July 2013, and would

            send Second Sight a version with tracked changes where POL and Fujitsu

            believed that it was inaccurate or open to misinterpretation.


Emails with Alan Bates and internal discussions on 6 July 2013


         471. Alan Bates emailed me at 09:51 on 6 July 2013 (POL00099029). He

              understood that the meeting with Lord Arbuthnot on 5 July 2013 had gone

              well. Alan asked me to provide a document to outline the way in which

              we proposed to deal with issues in the future. One issue that concerned

              him was the name of one of the bodies we had discussed setting up. Alan

              thought "user group" was inappropriate because the bulk of the JFSA are

              ex-SPMs. He proposed "task group", "working party'' or "review board''

              instead.

                                     Page 230 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




472. I replied to Alan at 10:35 (POL00099029). I began: "Yes, I thought the

     meeting with James was positive too. My main concern is still how we

     manage the publicity, to avoid - as you said- it "going ballistic." I stated

     we were re-working our media report and liaising with Second Sight on

     changes to the report where it is factually inaccurate. Once I had a final

     draft, I would send it to him.


473. I forwarded my exchange with Alan to the team. At 16:46 on 6 July 2013,

     Mark Davies emailed me in reply (cc. Martin Edwards, Mark Davies,

     Lesley Sewell, Susan Crichton and Alwen Lyons) (POL00099043). He

     thought my emails with Alan pointed to the need for our package of

     measures to include two or possibly three initiatives:


    "1. A Branch User Forum .... Chaired by Exco and reporting to Exco. But

   this doesn't cover historic issues (ie the JFSA and MP cases) so we could

   also have (2)


   2. A working party, to use Alan's phrase, to complete the MP and JFSA

   cases. This could "take over" the Second Sight review (perhaps involving

   them but perhaps not as they have effectively "cleared" Horizon, the remit

   of their inquiry). This would involve the JFSA and us working collaboratively

   on the remaining cases. We might wish to include an external party in this

   too (a PWC?). This is the area of greatest risk - looking back at historic

   cases which have gone through the courts. But it is also completing the job

   we asked SS to do.


   3. A review by a Mike oConnor [sic] or Patrick Burns figure to consider

   potential independent levers which could be developed to give SPMRs a
                             Page 231 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




   means of independent adjudication or (non statutory) ombudsman.


    This package, it feels to me, covers all bases. It looks ahead to fix internal

   issues and create independent balancing view, but it also completes the

   review and has the potential for doing so with SS playing a different, or no,

   role."


474. Alwen replied (POL00099050) "I think the only thing missing from James'

     agenda maybe not Alan's is what we do about past cases to scorch the

     suggestion os [sic] unfair convictions". Mark Davies replied that that was

     the Working Group (the second of his measures). Martin replied that he

     thought the boundaries between the groups in Mark's email were

     becoming blurred and confusing:


   "I thought the focus of the working group involving the JFSA would be

   primarily thematic (i.e. the 8 or so themes which emerged from the SS

   process) - rather than focussing on resolving specific cases, which we

   would pick up through the separate 1:1 briefings with MPs. The description

   below [in Mark's email] appears to shift it more towards the latter. Perhaps

   this is an academic distinction which we can't sustain in practice, but it

   certainly feels like safer territory to have the JFSA focussing on themes to

   do with training and support (which would then morph into the branch user

   forum) rather than individual cases ...


    We also need to think about how the review of past cases by our external

   lawyers plays into the messaging (if at all). Certainly not something we

   would put in our proactive media statement I would have thought, but would

   we refer to this in meetings as an avenue if pushed by MPs or the JFSA ?"
                             Page 232 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




475. I replied to everyone thanking them for their input (POL00099051 ). The

     position I thought we had reached was based on a variant of Mark's

     suggestion:


     "1) a working party over the next three/four months. This comprises PO

     working collaboratively with the JFSA and does three things:


     - Firstly explores the SS (8) themes for improvement (can we get less

     than 8?) and agrees how they can be implemented.


     - Secondly, looks at the remaining past cases with JFSA (and MPs if they

     wish) to see if either further themes or new evidence emerge.


     - Thirdly, our external lawyers review all prosecutions in the past 12118

     months since PO has been independent of RM, in the light of the SS

     findings. The JFSAIPO working group reviews the findings ...


     2) setting up of a review (chaired by PBIMO'C type) again via joint working

     between PO and JFSA, to determine how an independent safety net

     might be introduced ie., a commitment to an independent adjudicator or

     (non-statutory) ombudsman and the clear intention to agree scope and

     ToR.


     3) the future introduction of an ongoing branch user group, once the

     working party has completed it's [sic] task. This will ensure ongoing

     independent involvement of Spmrsl(inc JFSA if they would like) to ensure

     the business listens to and acts upon issues as they arise; and as

     importantly, consults users on future systems planning and changes.


                            Page 233 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




              [4) a statement that although the system has been proved to have no

              systemic issues, and our training, support processes and helplines have

              worked for most of the 50-60000 colleagues over the past decade, we are

              nonetheless genuinely sorry that some of our Spmrs, who were struggling

              did not feel we offered them sufficient help and support when they needed

              it. And that we are grateful to JFSA and JA for highlighting the issues.

              Many are historic and already improved but we are always open to new

              ways to improve how we do business to ensure the PO stays as trusted

              and effective in its communities as it ever was.]. .. "


      476. In the email, I asked two questions of Susan in order better to understand

              the situation regarding prosecutions:


    a.    First, why would the external lawyers not review all cases of false

          accounting, e.g. over the last five to ten years.


    b.    Second, would we ever ask our lawyers to consider reviewing past

          prosecutions? I asked Susan whether that was what we were talking about

          but not actually using those terms. If not, why not? And of the 500 past

          prosecutions, how many were for false accounting?


7 July 2013


      477. Mark Davies replied to my email at (POL00099051) on 7 July 2011 at

              07:27, not copying the group (POL00099053). He wanted to speak to me

              about how far POL should go in terms of the wording in my email. He

              was concerned that we could go so far in our commitments that it would




                                      Page 234 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




       fuel the story and that there was real danger in going too far in

       commitments about past cases. He said this was for two reasons:


a.   The substance of the Interim Report did not justify this response. In his

     view, the content of the Interim Report would lead to some coverage, but

     not very much, and from what he called "the usual suspects". "ff we say

     publicly that we will look at past cases (and whatever we say to JA and

     JFSA will be public) whether from recent history or going further back, we

     will open this up very significantly, into front page news."


b.   Mark was concerned that this would have the "ballistic" impact that Alan

     Bates was keen to avoid. It could lead to a narrative about the business,

     raise questions about Horizon, and have an impact on public views of POL

     and widening the issue to the whole network.


 478. I replied to Mark Davies (copying in Martin Edwards) at 7:48

       (POl00099055). I thought we were not too far apart. "I didn't say this

       approach would be our media statement but they would need to be

       aligned. You are right to call this out. And I will take your steer. no issue."

       I went on:


     "there two objectives, the most urgent being to manage the media. The

     second is to make sure we do address the concerns of JA and Alan Bates,

     mainly looking forwards (but we should be aware AB's driver is really

     justice for the past); otherwise they will call for re opening cases. It may be

     that we get to manage ABIJA by playing on the 'go ballistic' view: ie., - I

     will meet him privately to hear his views about these cases but that we


                               Page 235 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




   cannot refer to anything in relation to past convictions. Any challenge must

   go via normal legal routes."


479. What I meant here was that I understood Alan Bates' concerns about

     past cases and I was utterly genuine in wanting to meet SPMs who had

     suffered. But I could not get in the way of the legal reviews that were

     ongoing and so it would need to be done confidentially and not given

     media exposure. The future Mediation Scheme set out to do something

     similar - there was no intention of supressing the request to review past

     cases; there was simply at that time, no reason to do so.


480. In the meantime, Martin had replied to the group (POL00099054). He

     would defer to Susan Crichton's views, but his instinct was to keep the

     review by external lawyers as a parallel workstream that we would not

     refer to in our public statements and did not report to the Working Group.


481. Lesley Sewell agreed (POL00099056). In her view:


   "If we state that we will review the cases since Separation, that implies that

   there are material findings in the review and leaves us open to challenge

   against all cases. It may be better to offer in the spirit of the review and

   how we have listened to those who have been affected, and how we want

   to change our business.


   This is the delicate line we are balancing and from memory Susan quoted

   more that [sic] 500 cases in the fast 10 years. It may be an option to allow

   SPMRs to come forward to request a review. I agree on the points around

   the working group and user group.

                             Page 236 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




   A clear ToR for the WG will ensure that that is closed down whilst we start

    to establish the User Group. We also need to bring Kevin in or our thinking

    and how this will work with I alongside the engagement we already have

    with the NFSP."


482. On 7 July 2013 at 16:30, Simon Baker emailed others and me a copy of

     the final version of the Interim Report (email at POL00099062, Interim

     Report at POL00099063). In his covering email, Mr Baker stated that the

     good news was that the first finding in the summary was still: "We have

     so far found no evidence of system wide (systemic) problems with the

     Horizon Software."


483. On 7 July 2013 at 20:26, I emailed Alan Bates a copy of the current draft

     of POL's press statement, stating that I believed he had received a copy

     of the final version of the Interim Report (POL00099102). I told him in the

     email that we had worked on the statement to maintain balance but also

     to demonstrate that POL was very serious about how it responded to the

      Interim Report - with openness to listen and with keenness to improve

     where things could be better. I drew his attention to the three

     commitments in the press statement (which I discuss further below).


484. Alan replied at 21 :59 on 7 July 2013. The JFSA would have a few general

     points, but there was one comment in the POL press statement that the

     JFSA, if asked, would say they had a problem with. This was the

     comment that:




                            Page 237 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




         "The report confirms that no systemic problems have been found in relation

         to the Horizon system, but suggests that the Post Office should examine

         its support and training processes for subpostmasters.


         It is the 'no systemic problems' comment, and from reading the report it

         seems to be because they replaced the word 'systemic' with 'thematic'.


         In the past I have made it very clear to many others that it is the 'systemic

         failures of Post Office' in areas relating to investigation, support, training,

         etc that we believe have been the root cause of so many victims problems.

         With that comment as it stands undoubtedly I would be asked many

         questions about it.


         It seems the use of the word 'systemic' is causing us both concern, is there

         an alternative?"


8 July 2013


      485. I forwarded Alan's email at (POL00099102) to Martin, Susan, Alwen and

              Lesley on 8 July 2013 at 7:30. I asked if we could do something to diffuse

              the problem over the word "systemic" and asked them for a line before I

              spoke to Alan on a call at 9am. I wrote:


         "The problem is that the statement he doesn't like is in the SS report, which

         of course produced the outcome we needed in respect of Horizon. I do not

         wish to change that. We could show him willing by adapting something in

         our statement. But I need to understand better from him what is wrong as

         we have clearly said there were shortcomings in handling and response.



                                    Page 238 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




    Mark, if you are in, it might be good if you sit in the 9am call, so that you

    can hear his issue.


    What is good news is that he is looking for another word (last line). It would

    be good to find one because if he goes back to using 'systemic' in relation

    to PO failures to respond, we are not necessarily in a much better place."


486. Mark replied at 6:48 stating that he would think things through "But you

     are right - we must stick with systemic."


487. Lesley responded at 06:49 (POL00099103). She said she did not believe

     we could use the word "systemic" in relation to POL, and that Alan had

      missed the point that the use of that word related to Horizon, which

     should not change. If it did change, we would need to agree with Fujitsu.

     "Thematic" would work in relation to support and processes, as long as it

     was clear that it related to the cases which had been raised - these were

     a small proportion of POL's vast number of agents.


488. Susan also replied, at 06:54 (POL00099104). " ... to state the obvious it

     is difficult to find a different word for 'systemic' as that goes to our

     argument re proportionality ie it cannot be a systemic issue if we haven't

     had many more complaints from sub postmasters."


489. The upshot of this discussion was that, although I was open to

      possibilities, there was no real alternative to "systemic" because that was

     the word used by Second Sight themselves in the Interim Report. In that

     context, I wish to comment on my statement that the Interim Report had

      produced the result we "needed". In retrospect, I do not think this word

                             Page 239 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      quite captures the position. Second Sight had reported the position as

     we hoped and expected it to be. However, if Second Sight had reported

      systemic defects in Horizon we would have to deal with that squarely.

      What really underlay these discussions was that Second Sight had

      detected no systemic defects so far, and we believed that POL's public

      statement should reflect that finding.


490. At 14:57 on 8 July 2013, I emailed the Board with an update, having first

      spoken to Alan Bates and Lord Arbuthnot (POL00099126). I wrote:


   "I'm attaching the latest draft of our media statement, which we will be

    issuing later this afternoon. It sets out the 3 key strands of our response to

    the findings of the report:


    a. Establishing a 'working party' (involving) the JFSA to complete the
    review process and look at the thematic issues which have emerged

    (particularly related to training and support);


    b. conducting a review of how we might set up an independent 'safety net'

    to adjudicate in disputed cases in the future; and


    c. setting up a new 'Branch User Forum' involving sub-postmasters and

    other relevant stakeholders to provide feedback on our training and support

   processes on an ongoing basis.


    I spoke to Alan Bates again this morning and will be meeting him in person

    shortly. Overall he appears to be content with the package of measures

    outlined above and is striking a very constructive tone. He had one



                              Page 240 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   relatively minor concern with the drafting of the media statement, which we

   have now resolved to the satisfaction of both sides."


491. I also described my call that day with Lord Arbuthnot. He was positive

     about POL's proposed response but wanted to draw attention to the

     concerns highlighted in the Interim Report relating to the wider processes

     associated with Horizon. We were currently challenging some of the

     drafting in his statement where we believed he had drawn misleading

     conclusions from the review. The most significant remaining concern was

     his continued determination for POL to review past prosecutions and to

     make this review part of the next stage of the review process. On this:

     " .. .we are already planning to conduct review with our external lawyers

     of the implications of the report for past prosecutions - something we

     would have a duty to do in any case - but this significantly adds to the

     pressure and expectations around that process." I say in my email "we

     will send you in a separate email a copy of the SS report."

     (POL00099121 ). The report was also uploaded to the Board Reading

     Room, and a copy of the email at (POL00099215) confirms this.


492. The Interim Report was published on POL's website later that day. The

     accompanying press release stated that the Interim Report "confirms that

     no system wide problems have been found in relation to the Horizon

     software but suggests that the Post Office should examine its support

     and training processes for sub-postmasters" (POL00099129). It also

     contained comments from me that POL welcomed the broad thrust of the




                           Page 241 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




       interim findings and that the review underlined POL's cause for

       confidence in the overall system. However, I continued:


     "It does however raise questions about the training and support we have

     offered to some sub-postmasters and we are determined to address those

     issues.


     The people who work in the post office network in communities across the

     country are the lifeblood of our business and we take our responsibilities

     to them very seriously.


     We therefore regret very much if any sub-postmaster feels that our

     standards of support or training have not met their needs, and we are

     grateful to James Arbuthnot MP and the Justice for Sub-postmasters

     Alliance (JFSA) for raising these issues with us.


     In many of these cases I am confident that steps have already been taken

     which have improved support and training but we are always open to

     feedback and insights from sub-postmasters. So we will make further

     improvements in this area and take better account of individual

     requirements and circumstances going forward."


493. Within the statement, POL announced that it was taking three measures

       in response to the Interim Report:


a.   The creation of a working party to complete the review of the cases brought

     forward for investigation by MPs and the JFSA. The Working Group would

     examine the themes identified by Second Sight in the Interim Report



                               Page 242 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      together with any new themes that emerged from the individual cases. The

      JFSA had been invited to join this working group;


 b.   A review, chaired by an independent figure, to determine how an

      independent safety net might be introduced to adjudicate disputed cases

      in the future. Again, the JFSA had been invited to participate in the process;

      and


 c.   A new Branch User Forum to enable SPMs to provide feedback on training

      and support processes to senior management on an ongoing basis.


 494. The thinking behind each of these elements was as follows:


a.    The investigation to date had developed in a piecemeal fashion without any

      structure, oversight, or clear lines of communication between the key

      stakeholders. The Working Group was intended to fill these gaps by

      creating a formal structure for the key stakeholders to collaborate and to

      give direction to the investigation.


b.    A review to consider creating a mechanism for resolving future disputes

      stemmed from Alan Bates' ideas in our email exchanges as set out above.


c.    The Branch User Forum was a longstanding idea at POL that there should

      be a formal structure for SPMs to raise concerns directly with POL

      management.


 495. The announcement did not refer to any ongoing role for Second Sight.

        There was certainly a school of thought at POL, which I recall Alice

        Perkins subscribed to, that if the engagement of Second Sight was to


                                Page 243 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           continue beyond the Interim Report at all, it would need to change

           fundamentally (see: (POL00116114) and paragraph 634 below). Various

           possibilities were canvassed, including addressing the remaining cases

           bilaterally with the JFSA through the Working Group, or bringing in a

           larger firm to assist or possibly replace Second Sight. On the other hand,

           we were aware that the stakeholders, i.e. the MPs and the JFSA, may

           expect Second Sight's role to continue. We had not discussed this in any

           detail by the 8 July 2013 and so the position was left open.


      496. The feedback I received from the POL review team was that, although

           POL had cooperated fully with Second Sight, they had concerns about

           Second Sight's performance and their approach to the evidence

           (POL00113369). I shared those concerns because I trusted the team

           who were working on this project. My own perspective was that Second

           Sight's work was not achieving its objective for SPMs and MPs, and that

           it was late and over budget. However, I felt strongly that it was necessary

           for POL to put those concerns aside in responding to the Interim Report.

           In my view, POL's interests, including its reputation, and the interests of

           sub-postmasters in the Network, would be best served if POL used the

           Interim Report as an opportunity to demonstrate, contrary to the

           perception of some, that it was concerned for the welfare of the

           individuals and that it could listen to and act positively in the face of

           criticism.


71. Please consider POL00099153 (email from Lesley Sewell to you and others

on 9 July 2013). Please describe the discussion on the following bullet point:


                                  Page 244 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




"Consider      a        'suspense       account'       at         a       branch    level.

Cost/process/implementation."


     497. I have been referred to (POL00099153) which is an email sent by Lesley

            Sewell on 9 July 2013 to myself, Martin Edwards, Hugh Flemington,

            Susan Crichton, Alwen Lyons, and Mark Davies, with Simon Baker and

            Dave Hulbert cc'd. It appears to have been circulated in advance of a call

            due to take place that afternoon and records a list of proposed actions in

            response to the Interim Report which had been published the previous

            day. Under the heading "Immediate actions from the SS report" it states

            "consider     a     'suspense      account'      at       a    branch   level.

            Cost/process/implementation." Although I can clearly see that I received

            this email, I do not recall it now, nor do I recall discussing its contents.


     498. Having refreshed myself of the documents, I am aware that the Interim

            Report raised concerns that the end of trading period arrangements was

            too complex and this was said to be related to the absence of a 'suspense

            account', which would enable disputed transactions to be dealt with

            'neutrally' (at page 6 of (POL00099063) and page 8 of (POL00099063)).

            Again, although I believe that I read the Interim Report at the time, I do

            not have any independent recollection of this being raised within it.


     499. I can see from (POL00006546), which is an update to the Board dated

            12 July 2013 provided by Susan, that paragraph 3.3 refers to the IT team

            undertaking a review which included considering the possibility of

            introducing a suspense account at branch level (at page 2 of



                                    Page 245 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     (POL00006546)). Again, although I must have been part of these

     discussions, I do not recall them.


500. I have reflected on why it may be that I do not recall these discussions.

     My understanding at that time - which I now recognise was incorrect -

     was that the 'settle centrally' function itself provided a neutral space for

     SPMs to identify disputed transactions so that they could be investigated

     and resolved. In that sense, I conflated the 'settle centrally' function with

     the function offered by a suspense account. As a result of this

     misunderstanding, I do not think I recognised the potential significance

     or value of a suspense account, which may be why I do not recall this.

     Certainly, I did not know that Horizon previously had a suspense account

     function or that this function had been removed in 2004.


501. I accept without hesitation that Fraser J's conclusion - to change the

     contractual burden of proof - was the only sensible solution, as then

     settle centrally would work for SPMs and work as it was intended, and as

     was my understanding at the time.


502. I have considered how I came to misunderstand how settle centrally

     worked. I think it was likely to have been as a result of two factors. First,

      I relied upon what I was told about how 'settle centrally' worked. Although

      I cannot now say precisely when these conversations took place, I recall

     at least two or three conversations from 2013 onwards with Angela Van

     Den Bogerd, including during the GLO process, in which she reassured

     me that the 'settle centrally' function allowed for disputes to be raised and

     resolved without SPMs being forced to accept responsibility for disputed

                             Page 246 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     discrepancies before they could roll over into the next trading period.

     Second, I have seen a number of documents which show that the 'settle

     centrally' function was frequently described in terms which suggest that

     it was such a neutral space.


503. For example, (POL00045457) is a memo prepared by Andy Winn dated

     1 September 2005 which was seemingly prepared to explain the 'settle

     centrally' function to branches. In it, settling centrally is said to entail

     accepting the loss/gain "unless you follow the dispute process." The

     memo goes on to explain how one would challenge a loss/gain through

     the dispute process, including by asking for more time for the matter to

     be investigated.


504. (POL00039089) is the Operating Level Agreement on Product and

     Branch Network Accounting, Network and Service Delivery version 1.0,

     dated 28 March 2009. In discussing Transaction Corrections, the option

     to "make good'' is explicitly contrasted with settling centrally, such as in

     paragraph 3.1.11       where it is said that "(i)f a branch receives

     compensating Transaction Corrections, they must settle these both in the

     same way, either both make good or both settle centrally" (at page 10 of

     (POL00039089)). Later, when 'settle centrally' is defined at paragraph

     3.5 it is said that:


   "(C)hoosing the option to "Accept and settle Centrally" signifies the

   acceptance of a loss or gain within a branch unless the dispute process is

   instigated. "Settle Centrally" does not prohibit further investigation which

   might offset all or part of the loss/gain accepted earlier, but this is a

                             Page 247 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   branch's responsibility to initiate" (at page 14 of (POL00039089)).


505. This document goes on at paragraph 3.7 to describe the dispute process.

      It emphasises that "settled centrally debts are not recovered from sub-

     postmasters without reasonable time to investigate, challenge and

     resolve individual amounts" (at page 16 of (POL00039089)). The detailed

     description of this resolution process describes the debt recovery

     process being suspended pending investigation and attempts to resolve

     the dispute in cases where an amount has been settled centrally but is

     disputed   (at page    16 of (POL00039089) and          at page     17 of

     (POL00039089)).     This understanding of how the system functioned

     persisted and appears to have been widely accepted. Paragraphs 5.22

     to 5.26 of the Linklaters report dated 20 March 2014 discussed the ways

     in which losses are calculated and concludes at paragraph 5.26 (at page

     11 of (POL00105529)): "SPMRs are asked to agree accounts regularly.

      We understand that they signify their agreement by an appropriate entry

     on Horizon. If a SPMR disputes the state of his account, he is free not to

     agree that account on Horizon." I reviewed this report, and it reconfirmed

     my view. It was also reviewed by the POL Board, without challenge to

     this characterisation of how the system functioned. This included the

     CFO, whose teams operated the 'settle centrally' process, and Chris

     Aujard, the Interim GC.


506. Although I do not recall seeing these documents at the time, the way that

     they describe the 'settle centrally' function captures how I understood it

     to work. I fully accept that my understanding of this was incorrect. I did


                            Page 248 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




              not know that at the time and I considered it appropriate to rely upon the

              reassurances I was given by Angela. I thought that the settle centrally

              function already provided an effective tool to help SPMs if they had a

              dispute, so would not have challenged this proposition if this is what

              happened. I recognise now that, regrettably, my understanding was

              inaccurate.


72. Please explain the background to Project Sparrow, how it was established,

its management structure and reporting lines. To what extent was the Board

involved in establishing Project Sparrow?


      507. I have been asked to explain the background to Project Sparrow, how it

              was established, its management structure and reporting lines, and set

              out to what extent the Board was involved in its establishment. I address

              Project Sparrow elsewhere in this statement. To avoid duplication, I will

              address these issues as well at that point in my statement.


73. Please set out full details of your involvement with POL's strategy and

actions in respect of past convictions of SPMs that involved the use of data

from the Horizon IT System in evidence. Please explain to what extent you

communicated information about such issues and POL's response to the same

to the Board, ShEx/UKGI or BEIS. The following questions are not intended to

limit your response to this paragraph.


74. Please consider POL00021516 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 16

July 2013).


74.1. Please expand on the discussion that led to the minute "The Board also

                                    Page 249 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




asked for earlier warning when risks and issues arise to ensure that they were

not blindsided." To what extent, if at all, do you think the Board's effectiveness

was hampered in respect of oversight of Horizon and its associated issues as

a result?


      508. I have been referred to the minutes of the POL Board meeting which took

            place on 16 July 2013 (POL00021516). The first substantive item on the

            agenda was the Board Effectiveness Review, which had been carried out

            in June/July 2013.


      509. The Board Effectiveness Review, at pages 2 to 8 of (POL00099210), was

            conducted by Alice Perkins and, as is set out in her report, was the result

            of interviews with the Board Directors and Company Secretary and

            feedback from the Executive Committee ("ExCo"). Alice's report notes

            that, overall, this was a well-functioning POL Board, characterised by a

            spirit of respectful challenge, which had come a long way since its

            formation in the Autumn of 2011 (at page 3 of (POL00099210)).


      510. The Board Effectiveness Review was conducted as part of the constant

            learning processes which we engaged in as a business. Overall, the

            review was positive, but there are always ways to improve and this review

            aimed to identify how we might do this.


      511. During my time as CEO there were several other Board Effectiveness

            Reviews. (POL00027315) is an agenda for the meeting on 25 March

            2015 in which Alice Perkins discusses the review. (UKGI00002414) is a

            POL "Going Forward Agenda" which lists "Board Effectiveness Review


                                   Page 250 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




     (July)" under the annual events. This was something which happened

     regularly.


512. In discussing the Board Effectiveness Review, we talked about many

     points relating to overall efficiency. These included ensuring that POL

     Board papers arrived in good time so that the POL Board had a good

     opportunity to consider them. The minutes also record that we discussed

     measures aimed at making the best use of POL Board members' time

     and the time available for meetings (such as ensuring that Board papers

     were an appropriate length). This desire to ensure that time was used

     efficiently is reflected in the POL Board minutes (at page 2 of

     (POL00021516)):


   "The Chairman asked the Board to contact the ExCo member responsible

   for a paper before the meeting if they were unclear or didn't have the

   necessary detail. The Board also asked for earlier warning when risks and

   issues arise to ensure that they were not 'blindsided'."


513. By ensuring that the POL Board had sufficient notice to consider the

     issues raised in POL Board papers and by ensuring that requests for

     further details were dealt with in advance, we aimed to ensure that the

     meetings were as productive as possible. However, POL Board papers

     were not the sole or even main focus of this Board Effectiveness Review.

     As the minutes show, we also discussed initiatives such as arranging

     branch visits for NEDs and offering them the opportunity to attend

     meetings with stakeholders, should they wish to (at page 2 of

     (POL00021516)).

                            Page 251 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




514. Although I do not recall the precise details of this discussion, the

     reference to ensuring that the POL Board is not "blindsided'' is likely to

     be a reference to the need to provide POL Board papers in good time,

     something which did not always happen. From recollection, there had

     been a few late papers around the time of the Board Effectiveness

     Review, which may be why this was raised as an issue.


515. For example, (POL00099215) is an email sent at 17:37 on 12 July 2013

     from Alwen Lyons to the POL Board apologising that they still have not

     received two of the POL Board papers for the meeting on 16 July. The

     papers are described as a Horizon paper, which was to be circulated later

     that day (and which I discuss more below) and a funding paper, which

     would not be circulated until 14 July. Once ready, both were to be placed

     in the board papers section of the POL Board application, "BoardPad"

     and additional supporting papers were to be placed in the "Reading

     Room", an online repository of supplementary documents for NEDs. In

     this email, Alwen Lyons points the NEDs to the fact that "a// the Horizon

     documents eg JS statement, the Second Sight report. etc" will be loaded

     to the Reading Room "for ease of reference".


516. Similarly, the minutes of the POL Board conference call on 1 July 2013

     note that I "apologised for the short notice in keeping the Board updated

     but explained that issues had arisen over the last couple of days" (at page

     1 of (POL00021515)). This was a very busy time and, although I always

     tried to keep the POL Board updated, there were times when the pace

     meant that it was only possible to provide information at short notice.


                            Page 252 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




517. I do not consider that the issues flagged in the Board Effectiveness

      Review resulted in the POL Board being hampered in respect of its

      oversight of Horizon for two reasons. First, because, as the review itself

      noted, this was a well-functioning board. Although there were areas we

      could improve upon, overall, the review judged us to be effective. It is

      important to note that this was a board self-assessment, with the intention

      that the next review would be independently conducted. However, as the

      paper shows, the Chair received a range of opinions on matters. The

      POL Board was comprised of NEDs who were independently minded and

      challenging. Second, if a POL Board paper had to be circulated later than

      anticipated, then POL Board members responded to it regardless. If

      necessary, this would involve raising questions and challenges by email

      or in ad hoe phone calls outside of POL Board meetings. This feature of

      our working practices was also noted in the Board Effectiveness Review

      report (at page 16 of (POl00099210) ):


    "All the NEDs commented on how willing the Executives were to engage

    with them outside Board meetings and were impressed by the extent to

    which most of them, and especially the CEO, were open to challenge. In

    return, the Executives commented that the NEDs were very generous with

    their time outside the Boardroom."


518. Ultimately, the POL Board took its role seriously and part of that role was

      to challenge and look for ways for the business to improve. As is noted

      in the minutes of this meeting, I was very clear that I expected the

      business to be challenged: it is part of effective oversight (at page 1 of


                             Page 253 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           (POL00021516) ). This Board Effectiveness Review was one of the many

           ways that we looked to identify, and make, improvements.


74.2. Please describe how you briefed the Board on the Interim Report. In

particular, please explain precisely how you told the Board that "no systemic

issues had been found with the Horizon computer system." Was the report

submitted to the Board?


      519. The report appears to have been provided to the POL Board via the

           Reading Room. Alwen Lyons' email on 12 July 2013 confirms that she

           will upload it to the Reading Room alongside other relevant material so

           that the POL Board could review it in advance of the meeting

           (POL00099215):


         " .. .the Horizon paper will be circulated by email tonight ... and put on the

         iPad on Monday morning and I will also set up a file in the reading room for

         all the Horizon documents, eg., JS statement, the Second Sight report, etc.

         . for ease of reference."


      520. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 16 July 2013 (at pages 6 to 7

           of (POL00021516)) record the details of an update on Horizon I gave

           which notes, amongst other things, that the Interim Report had been

           challenging but that no systemic issues had been found with the Horizon

           computer system. This was my understanding based on the briefings I

           was receiving. I can see that the phrase had already been used in several

           other places before I communicated it to the POL Board, for example:




                                     Page 254 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




a.   (POL00021746), which I understand to be the draft Interim Report

     dated 1 July 2013, states at paragraph 12.2 on page 17 "we have

     so far found no evidence of system wide (systemic) problems with

     the Horizon software."


b.   In a conference call on 1 July 2013, I told the POL Board that "(t)he

     investigation to date had found no systemic issues with the Horizon

     computer system" (at page 1 of (POL00021515)). I explained that

     the report had highlighted areas for improvement including in

     training and support and Second Sight had found two "anomalies"

     which would be referred to in the report.


c.   Martin Edwards' draft briefing to the POL Board, which was sent to

     me on 4 July 2013, states that Second Sight "have not found any

     evidence yet of systemic issues with the Horizon system" though

     they had identified wider failings in the support provided to SPMs (at

     page 1 of (POL00099003)).


d.   The Significant Litigation Report dated 11 July 2013, which was

     provided to the Board for the meeting on 16 July (as noted in the

     minutes at page 10 of (POL00021516)), states that "(W)hile there

     are no systemic problems with Horizon, there are two specific

     "bugs", which gave rise to errors in a number of branches' accounts"

     (at page 105 of (POL00099210)).


e.   Susan Crichton prepared a Horizon Update paper for the Board

     meeting. I believe that the final version is at page 2 of


                       Page 255 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




                 (POL00006546), which also contains the phrase "no systemic

                 problems".


74.3. Please expand on "The Board were concerned that the review opened the

Business up to claims of wrongful prosecution." In particular, please state (a)

who expressed these concerns and (b) the basis for these concerns.


      521. The POL Board minutes for the meeting on 16 July 2013 (at page 6 of

            (POL00021516)) note that "(t)he Board were concerned that the review

            opened the Business up to claims of wrongful prosecution. The Board

            asked if Susan Crichton, as General Counsel, was in anyway implicated

            in the prosecutions."


      522. I do not recall the specifics of this conversation but my broad recollection

            is that this was a concern shared by the POL Board generally rather than

            one only expressed by specific individuals. I cannot recall whether there

            was any basis for this concern beyond the information provided to the

            POL Board by Susan in her report (POL00006546) and in the details

            recorded in the Significant Litigation report discussed above. Susan's

            paper refers to concerns being expressed by MPs and the JFSA about

            the possibility of unsafe convictions (at page 1 of (POL00006546)); if you

            are told that this is a possible concern by your General Counsel, then it

            is, in my view, appropriate for the POL Board to be concerned.


      523. I cannot recall who introduced the term 'wrongful prosecution' as none of

            us present had legal expertise. I can see that Susan used the terms

            'wrongful conviction' and 'wrongful termination' in (POL00006546). It is

            possible that the Board picked up on the 'wrongful' adjective; or simply it
                                    Page 256 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           was how the Company Secretary felt best described a point being made.

           The POL Board and executive relied on Susan to provide us with legal

           insight and advice. I had many conversations with her at this time, but it

           is very difficult now to recall what precisely I was told and when. I

           understood that Susan was working closely with our external lawyers,

           Cartwright King, as I mentioned this in my email of 6 July 2013 to the

           Board (at page 2 of (POL00099026)). However, I was not personally

           involved in this work.


      524. I remember that I was informed at some point that the expert from Fujitsu

           whom POL had been using in legal proceedings had not disclosed in

           Mrs Misra's case that he was aware of two bugs in the system and so the

           cases he was involved in needed to be reviewed. My understanding

           came to be that this was because he had proved to be an unreliable

           witness, but I cannot say with any certainty when I was given this

           information. I do remember being specifically told that these bugs had

           not affected Mrs Misra's case.


74.4. Please expand on "The Board expressed strong views that the Business

had not managed the Second Sight review well and stressed the need for better

management and cost control going forward." In particular, please state (a) who

expressed these views and (b) what they said.


      525. The POL Board minutes record that "(t)he Board expressed strong views

           that the Business had not managed the Second Sight review well and

           stressed the need for better management and cost control going forward"

           (at page 6 of (POL00021516)). I cannot recall the specific details of this

                                    Page 257 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           conversation, but my overall sense was that they were views shared by

           the whole Board. My broad recollection is that the POL Board was

           concerned that the business had paid a significant amount of money to

           external consultants from whom they had expected to receive to a final

           report - instead what had actually been produced was an Interim Report

           which had been published containing, in the eyes of those working on

           the project, identifiable inaccuracies. The POL Board took the view that

           the work had taken too long, had already cost more than was expected,

           was not yet complete, did not take account of POL's responses and was

           now going to cost even more going forward. They could not understand

           how we had reached this position; they were very challenging.


      526. I understood why the POL Board had these concerns and, to some

           extent, I shared them. It was a unique situation in my experience to have

           engaged specialist consultants for a specific purpose only for the project

           (as it seemed to me at the time) to have taken on a life of its own as time

           and costs had escalated and individual case reviews were far from

           completion. However, as the minutes note, it was a complicated situation

           and, given the input from MPs and the JFSA, there were many factors

           beyond the business' control.


      527. The minutes record that the "Chairman asked for a review'', reporting to

           the ARC, to explain how the contract was awarded and managed (at

           page 6 of (POL00021516)). I discuss this review in more detail in my

           responses to Question 86 below.


74.5. What effect, if any, did the Board's challenges at this meeting have on

                                  Page 258 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




POL's approach to the Second Sight review?


74.6. Was Susan Crichton asked to lead the Second Sight issue because of this

challenge? Who lead it before?


      528. Susan Crichton had led the Second Sight work prior to this and, to my

           mind, remained the right person to lead it going forward, despite the POL

           Board's challenge.


      529. In response to the POL Board's challenge and to assist Susan Crichton,

           Belinda Crowe was brought in as Project Director and reported to Susan.

           Additional support was given by Angela Van Den Bogerd, who was

           tasked with running the Business Improvement Programme alongside

           this. She was also assisted by an experienced team to provide support

           for the detailed data work and case reviews being conducted under the

           remit of the Working Group and the Mediation Scheme. I also reallocated

           one area of Susan's broader responsibilities to others in order to free her

           up to focus on this work.


74.7. To what extent, if at all, did POL's ongoing negotiations concerning the

future of Horizon impact on your or others' decision making in respect of

Second Sight and / or the handling of allegations regarding the Horizon IT

System?


      530. To the best of my recollection, the ongoing negotiations concerning the

           future of Horizon had no impact on my or others' decision-making in

           respect of Second Sight and the handling of the allegations relating to

           the Horizon system. These were very different strands of the business.

                                  Page 259 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




      531 . There was an awareness on the part of everybody involved in IT that we

            were too dependent on Fujitsu and there was a need to reduce our

            reliance on them. However, I do not think that anything in that broad IT

            strategy had an impact on the Second Sight review or how the allegations

            were handled. In part, this was because the IT strategy was inherently

            future-facing, whereas the Second Sight review was a backwards-facing

            analysis of what, historically, had or had not been going wrong. Although

            one aim of the Second Sight review was to identify improvements which

            could be made for the future and so the results of their investigation could

            foreseeably impact upon future IT strategy.


75. Please consider POL00040001 (email from Susan Crichton to Andrew

Parsons dated 23 July 2013) and POL00040002 (draft Update to Post Office

limited Board re: Horizon legal Issues - 22 July 2013):


75.1. Why at this stage was it considered necessary to obtain advice on

directors' personal liability for disclosure failures in a criminal case?


      532. I have been referred to an email from Susan Crichton to Andrew Parsons

            dated 23 July 2013, which refers to a previous request to advise on

            Directors'   liabilities   in   respect   of   POL's   disclosure   obligations

            (POL00040001 ). The email attaches a draft update to the POL Board

            dated 22 July 2013, which provides legal advice on various issues and a

            placeholder for "AP" (which I presume is Andrew Parsons) to include a

            paragraph on personal liability for disclosure failings (POL00040002).


      533. I do not now recall any conversation about seeking advice on personal

            liability or why it was requested. The only issue I recall discussing around
                                       Page 260 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            this time which may be connected is that, as recorded in the minutes to

            the POL Board meeting on 16 July 2013, Chris Day was asked to confirm

            the insurance position in light of the findings of the Interim Report and

            ensure that both RMG and the business' insurers were given notice of

            the same (at page 7 of (POl00021516)). I can see that this was followed

            up in subsequent emails between 19 and 22 July 2013 (POl00099349;

            POl00099331 ).


75.2. To what extent, if at all, did the Board and I or senior management's

concerns about personal liability arising from the convictions of SPMs affect

POl's decision making on how to approach past prosecutions based on

Horizon data?


      534. As set out above in my response to Question 75.1, I have no recollection

            of concerns around personal liability being expressed so, for my part, I

            do not recall having those concerns or them influencing my decision

            making. I cannot speak for others, but I do not recall this being discussed

            by the senior management team.


76. Please consider POl00108049 (email from you to Simon Blagden on 25 July

2013). Please expand on "we are planning carefully how we bring the

independent review to completion: it needs to progress at pace but not so

quickly that we fail to close it down." What did you mean by this and why were

you raising it with Fujitsu?


      535. My email of 25 July 2013 to Simon Blagden (the then Chairman of Fujitsu

            UK) was sent in response to his email of 24 July, which asked how things


                                   Page 261 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     were going further to a meeting I had recently had with Lord Arbuthnot

     (POl00108049).


536. In my reply, I explained that the meeting had been positive, noting that

     Lord Arbuthnot was reassured by the fact that POL did not want to cut

     short the reviews being conducted by Second Sight. I then provided a

     more general update on the situation at POL further to the release of the

      Interim Report and outlined the next steps we were considering (at page

     2 of (POl00108049)):


   "The situation is difficult and the PO Board left me in no doubt that they

    thought so. My team is taking good advice and we are planning carefully

   how we bring the independent review to completion; it needs to progress

   at pace but not so quickly that we fail to close it down. We will leave any

   prosecution challenges where they belong - with the courts; and are

    considering a mediation approach for non-criminal unresolved cases."


537. I have discussed the POL Board's response to the Interim Report in detail

     in my response to Question 74 above, where I addressed a number of

     challenges raised at the POL Board meeting on 16 July 2013

     (POl00021516). Chief amongst these was that the POL Board took the

     view that work that Second Sight had been commissioned to undertake

     had taken too long, had already cost more than was expected, was not

     yet complete, did not take account of POL's responses, and was now

     going to cost even more going forward (see especially my response to

     Question 74.4, at paragraphs 525 to 527).


538. This sense that the project was over time and over budget forms the
                            Page 262 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      background to my comments to Simon Blagden. We were concerned by

      the delay which had already taken place and the fact that we did not yet

      have a final report. We wanted to bring the situation to a satisfactory

      resolution but, since the project had already run for much longer than

      anticipated, there was a desire for that to happen quickly.


539. However, although it was important to move the project along, it was vital

      that whatever the end result was, it did actually achieve a final resolution

      to the complaints. If the cases were not investigated and resolved in a

     way that was satisfactory to the stakeholders involved - the JFSA, MPs,

      and POL as well as the SPMs makings the allegations - then it would all

      be for nothing because it would not actually put the issues to bed.


540. I think that is what I was getting at when I said, "it needs to progress at

     pace but not so quickly that we fail to close it down." Closing the issues

      down properly required there to be a real resolution because only that

     would give the matter finality. We should not move quickly at the cost of

      achieving that finality: achieving a genuine resolution that all parties

      could be content with was always the most important goal.


541. I am asked why I raised this with Fujitsu. To the best of my recollection,

      I raised it in my email to Mr Blagden because he had asked me, and it

     was in the spirit of our ongoing working relationship for me to keep him

      abreast of what was happening in broad terms. I did not know Simon

      Blagden well, but I always tried to maintain productive relationships in

      professional situations because it benefits everyone involved.


542. Working in an open and cooperative way does not prevent you from
                             Page 263 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           raising challenges and, in fact, might assist in resolving such challenges.

           As I mention in my email to Simon Blagden and when forwarding that

           email to Chris Day, Second Sight had complained that Fujitsu were not

           always prompt in providing support. Ensuring that Fujitsu continued to

           provide the necessary support to Second Sight was important for the

           progress of the investigation. Having open lines of communication with

           Simon Blagden where I could raise concerns such as this could only help

           in investigating and resolving any such problems if they were occurring.


77. Please consider POL00039994 (letter from CCRC to you dated 12 July 2013),

POL00039995 (draft paragraphs for insertion into reply to CCRC), POL00099346

(draft letter to CCRC addressed from you), POL00116111 (email from Amanda

Brown to CCRC dated 24 July 2013) and POL00116112 (letter from Susan

Crichton to CCRC dated 24 July 2013).


77.1. What was your understanding of POL's obligations in relation to convicted

persons prosecuted either by POL or RMG at the time of receiving the CCRC's

letter?


      543. As of 12 July 2013, I understood that POL was obliged to pass on any

           new information which undermined the conviction of a person who had

           been prosecuted and convicted of theft or false accounting.


      544. I was given this information by Susan Crichton. (POL00006546) appears

           to be the final version of Susan's update to the POL Board for its meeting

           on 16 July 2013. Paragraph 3.6 states that, on the advice of POL's

           external criminal lawyers, POL had begun a review of criminal cases

           conducted since separation from RMG on 1 April 2012, and that more
                                  Page 264 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




       details of this were set out in Annex 1 to the paper. Paragraph 1 of Annex

       1 stated:


     "Post Office have been advised by our external criminal lawyers to

     undertake a review of all cases going back to the time of the migration from

     Old Horizon to Horizon Online (aka HNGX) - 1st January 2010 - and this

     has already begun. They are essentially looking and whether or not

     anything in the SS interim report should be drawn to the attention of any

     defendants (current or past) and if so they will be writing to the relevant

     defendants providing them with a copy of the interim report. We have a

     continuing legal duty as the prosecutors to do this."


 545. In the first two sub-paragraphs of paragraph 1 of Annex 1, Susan

       explained that:


a.   It was believed that POL had undertaken about 55 prosecutions a year for

     the last 10 years, although there was difficulty in obtaining historic files from

     RMG. The external lawyers had advised that POL would need to disclose

     the additional evidence in 5% of cases and then it would be up to the

     defence lawyers to consider the evidence and apply to the Court of Appeal.


b.   Each individual would need to seek leave to appeal from the Court of

     Appeal if they wanted to overturn their conviction. The Court of Appeal

     would look at each case on its merits and consider the evidence that the

     person was convicted on. For example, there might be Horizon evidence

     but also other paper trail evidence or even admissions of guilt. It was by no

     means clear that each appeal would be successful.


                               Page 265 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




546. (POL00006590) is a paper by Susan Crichton to the POL Board dated

        26 July 2013 entitled "Update on the work programme arising from the

        Horizon Reporf'. It states in paragraph 1 that it was produced further to

        the Board discussion on 16 July 2013.


547. It stated in paragraph 14, under the heading "Prosecution Case Review''

        that:


   "There is a separate process in train for those cases which have been

    subject to criminal prosecution. As we discussed at the last Board, as a

   prosecuting authority we have a continuing duty to act properly and fairly,

   and that requires us to disclose to the defence any information which

    undermines the prosecution. This assessment is made on a case by case

    basis. Through our criminal law solicitors, Cartwright King, we are

    complying with this duty by reviewing past and present prosecutions to

    identify any cases where the Second Sight ought to be disclosed. It is then

    up to the defendant to decide whether to apply for permission to appeal a

    conviction based on the additional information."


548. In paragraph 15, Susan reported that, as of 22 July 2013, Cartwright King

        had reviewed 124 cases, with the following outcomes:


           "the prosecution has been discontinued in three cases as not being

            in the public interest;

           disclosure to the defence has been provided in 6 cases;

           in all cases, the recommendation is that we oppose any attempt to

            appeal; and


                                Page 266 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




         "it is not believed that any of the cases would satisfy the test for

         compensation from the Government for a miscarriage ofjustice under

         the Criminal Justice Act."



549. Paragraph 16 of the paper stated that the next step was to "review pre-

     separation case files held by Royal Mail, initially dating back to the start

     of 2010".


550. Paragraph 17 stated that POL was "consulting Brian Altman QC, a

     leading barrister ... to provide additional advice and independent

     oversight on this case review process and any wider criminal law

     questions that arise (for example questions from the Criminal Cases

     Review Commission ("CCRC") about how we are handling this matter)".

     Counsel's scope of work would also include recommendations about

     POL's future prosecutions strategy, to inform POL's thinking.


551. Although I cannot remember when it happened, or what exactly I was

     told, I can see from the documents that Susan had informed me at some

     point in early July 2013 that she was working with external lawyers on a

     review of past criminal cases. In my email update to the POL Board on 6

     July 2013 (POL00099026; POL00099027; POL00115961 ), I stated that

     "Susan and the legal team are working with our external lawyers to

     consider whether there are any implications arising from the report for

     past cases, and we can provide a further update on this work next week".

     In an email update to the POL Board on 8 July 2013 (POL00099126), I

     stated: ".. .we are already planning to conduct a review with our external


                            Page 267 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           Iawyers of the implications of the report for past prosecutions -

           something we would have a duty to do in any case - but this significantly

           adds to the pressure and expectations around that process".


      552. My emails to the POL Board on 6 and 8 July 2013 could only have been

           based on briefings Susan had given during meetings or emails or one-

           on-one conversations. I would not write to or brief the POL Board on

           POL's legal activities without that input. I have not seen any written

           briefings about the prosecution case review before Susan's paper for the

           16 July 2013 Board meeting.


      553. I cannot recall Susan giving me any more information about the nature

           of the review, or about POL's duties to people who had been convicted,

           other than the information I set out in my emails to the POL Board on 6

           and 8 July 2013 and the information contained in Susan's two written

           updates later in July 2013.


77.2. Please describe your initial thoughts on the CCRC's involvement in 2013

and how POL's response was handled. Did you consider this to be a significant

matter?


77.3 Why was POL's response sent by Susan Crichton despite the initial letter

being addressed to you?


554. The CCRC's letter dated 12 July 2013 was marked as being received by my

    office on 15 July 2013 (POL00039994). Although I cannot recall doing so, I am

    sure that I read it. My office received a huge amount of correspondence every

    day, which was reviewed by my PA, Theresa lies. I am confident, given its

                                 Page 268 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




     importance, that she would have given me a copy of the letter. A copy of the

     letter was sent to Susan Crichton (POL00039997) by Amanda Brown, PA to the

     POL HR & Corporate Services Director on 15 July 2013.


555. I have a recollection that I was relieved that the CCRC was involved, although I

     cannot remember whether this is a recollection from July 2013 or from a later

     stage of POL's engagement with the CCRC. My understanding was that the

     CCRC would add a layer of objective oversight to how POL was dealing with the

     past prosecution cases.


556. In its letter to me dated 12 July 2013, the CCRC described its role and referred

     to the recent media coverage of the Horizon IT system. It went on:


             "Clearly it would be very useful for us to have more information directly

             from the Post Office, especially accurate information as to number of

             criminal convictions that might be impacted by the issue and what action

             is proposed, or being taken, in that respect.


             We see that the Attorney General was called upon on Tuesday to set

             up an enquiry and we are in contact with his office about that.


             In essence, the Commission's role in this is likely to relate to anyone

             who is convicted of a criminal offence... where evidence from the

             Horizon computer system is relevant, where (i) they have already tried

             to appeal against that conviction or (ii) they were convicted in the

             Magistrates Court following a guilty plea."


557. The subject matter of the letter fell within Susan Crichton's area of management

     responsibility. In addition, Susan was, at this time, managing POL's review of
                                   Page 269 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     past criminal cases in response to the findings in the Interim Report. She was

     the person at POL who was best placed - in terms of expertise and direct

     knowledge of the subject matter of the CCRC's questions - to respond to the

     letter. I do not recall when or how we decided that Susan would reply on my

     behalf, but it would have been a sensible action: the CCRC would most likely

     have queries and / or follow-up requests, which would need to be dealt with by

     Susan and her team.


558. I do not recall whether I saw Susan's responses to the CCRC in July 2013 or if

     I was shown any earlier drafts of the responses. I and the Board, who were

     informed about the letter in a Board report (POL00006590), would have

     considered that the task of responding to the CCRC was in expert and capable

     hands.


559. I can see that, on 24 July 2013, Susan sent the CCRC what was in effect a

     holding letter (POL00040012) into which I do not believe I was copied. She

     stated that POL was looking at the findings of the Interim Report in detail and

     investigating whether those findings had an impact on any historic or ongoing

     prosecutions. She hoped to be able to send the CCRC a more comprehensive

     response by the end of the week.


78. Please consider POL00006798 (Simon Clarke's advice on expert evidence

dated 15 July 2013).


78.1. Please explain your knowledge and/ or involvement with the instruction

of Cartwright King to review the use of expert evidence in prosecutions.




                                  Page 270 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      560. I was not involved in instructing Cartwright King to review POL's use of

           expert evidence in prosecutions.


      561. The extent of my knowledge at this time was that Susan Crichton was

           working with external lawyers to review past cases, as set out in my

           emails to the POL Board and Susan's update for the July 2013 POL

           Board meeting.


78.2. Did you read Simon Clarke's advice of 15 July 2013; if so, when? If not,

were you briefed on it?


      562. I did not read Simon Clarke's advice until after I had left POL, when it

           was made public in 2021 during the Hamilton v Post Office appeals to

           the Court of Appeal. I do not recall exactly what I was briefed about the

           advice in 2013.


      563. I do recall that Susan told me, that as a result of advice given by an

           external lawyer, we had to commission a review to ensure that proper

           disclosure had been given in previous criminal cases. At around this time,

           I also had a conversation with Lesley Sewell. She also told me that POL

           had been advised that the expert witness that POL had used in criminal

           cases to give evidence about Horizon had failed to mention there were

           bugs in Horizon, including in the Seema Misra case. As a result, he had

           disqualified himself as an expert witness and POL would need to find

           itself a new expert for future cases. Lesley was unhappy about this,

           because she said the bugs were irrelevant to the cases in which the

           witness had given evidence. The issue was presented to me by Lesley

           as more of a practical problem than (as I now know it was) a serious legal
                                 Page 271 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           issue. I have no memory of being told by Lesley the name of this witness

           (who I now know was Gareth Jenkins): I was not told that the legal advice

           about the expert witness had been given in writing.


79. Please consider POL00006799 (Simon Clarke's advice on the duty to record

and retain material dated 2 August 2013).


79.1. Please explain if and when you became aware of this advice.


      564. I was not aware of the existence of Simon Clarke's advice of 2 August

           2013 until after I had left POL, when it was made public in 2021 during

           the Hamilton v Post Office appeals to the Court of Appeal.


79.2. What steps did you and/ or POL take in response to it?


      565. I can recall being told by Susan Crichton that POL had been advised to

           set up a hub for Horizon-related information so that all relevant data was

           kept together, and there would be weekly calls to add new data. This

           seemed to me to be an entirely sensible suggestion, although I cannot

           recall being told that POL had received a legal advice to do this.


      566. It may have been in the same conversation, or a separate conversation,

           but I remember Susan telling me that an external lawyer had criticised

           the Head of Security, John Scott, for directing that the discussions at

           these weekly meetings should not be recorded in minutes. I recall telling

           Susan that this was a stupid thing for John Scott to have done. I told her

           that she should speak to him to make clear that this was serious and

           unacceptable and that these meetings should be minuted.



                                 Page 272 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      567. I do not recall Susan mentioning anything about John Scott giving

             directions that emails and notes from these meetings should be

             "shredded". As far as I can remember, I only became aware of that when

             Mr Clarke's advice of 2 August 2013 was discussed in the media in 2021.


80. Please consider P0l00006583 (Brian Altman KC's advice of 2 August 2013).


80.1. When did you read and/ or were you briefed on this advice?


      568.    did not know, because I was not told, that Brian Altman QC had

             produced his advice of 2 August 2013. I therefore did not read the advice

             and I was not briefed about it.


80.2. Did you or senior management give any consideration to Mr Altman's

query as to whether non-disclosure by Gareth Jenkins was the only potential

issue to review (see paragraphs 11 and 12)?


      569. I was not aware that Brian Altman QC had raised this query. I do not

             know whether any other person in POL's senior management gave

             consideration to the query.


80.3. What, if any, steps did you and/ or senior management take to the issues

raised at paragraphs 15 and 24 of Mr Altman's advice?


      570. I did not see Brian Altman QC's advice of 2 August 2013, but paragraphs

             15 and 24 appear to contain his recommendations for Cartwright King to

             consider a number of legal issues.


81. Please consider P0l00027667 (email from Susan Crichton to you dated 13

September 2013). What was your reaction to reading that Mr Altman "confirmed
                                    Page 273 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




that this duty [of disclosure] was ongoing and continued after conviction"?


      571. I have no recollection of this email. Given that Brian Altman QC was an

            expert in criminal law, I believe that my reaction would have been to

            accept that this statement was correct. I do recall that I had asked Susan

            a number of questions about the removal of the Fujitsu expert witness

            and I am sure that Lesley Sewell did too. I know I wanted to understand

            the extent of the legal obligation, as this was now a serious undertaking

            involving external lawyers and a QC. I cannot remember what we

            discussed but this may be confirmation of what she had explained to me

            and to others about disclosure obligations.


82. Please explain POL's basis at this point for not disclosing (a) the Second

Sight interim report (b) the identification of bugs that led Simon Clarke to

conclude that Gareth Jenkins had not complied with his duties as an expert

witness and/ or (c) the Helen Rose report to all SPMs convicted on the basis of

data generated by the Horizon IT System.


83. On reflection, do you consider POL's approach to have been justifiable?

Please provide reasons.


84. Do you now consider this to have been a missed opportunity to seek the

overturning of unsafe convictions nearly eight years earlier than in fact

occurred?


85. To what extent did you rely on legal advice when making decisions in

respect of what to disclose to persons convicted using Horizon data? Did you

consider that advice to be adequate: do you now?

                                  Page 274 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     572. The question of what should have been disclosed to individuals who had

          been convicted of theft or false accounting is a legal issue on which I am

          not able to give an opinion. I do not recall the precise legal basis ever

          being explained to me, but I understood that our external lawyers

          (Cartwright King) were reviewing previous prosecutions and Brian

          Altman QC had been tasked with looking at their approach and POL's

          approach to prosecutions more generally. The message the POL Board

          and I received was consistently positive. See, for example, the summary

          given in Susan's update paper for the Board meeting on 25 September

          2013, in which she explains that Mr Altman QC "agreed with the

          approach taken by our external lawyers and confirmed that the protocol

          was well thought through being correctly applied in the cases he

          reviewed'' (at page 41 of (POl00027907)). I set out the updates I

          received on these issues in detail in my response to question 94 below.


     573. I did not make any decisions about what should or should not be

          disclosed and I do not have the knowledge or expertise to say whether

          the disclosure of this material would have resulted in those convictions

          being overturned earlier than they ultimately were. I understood that

          those decisions were made by experienced criminal lawyers, acting in

          good faith and applying the law. I was reassured that Brian Altman QC

          had offered an expert second opinion which had concluded that the case

          review was being conducted properly. However, as a non-lawyer, it is not

          for me to say whether the advice POL received at the time was adequate.


lessons learned Review


                                Page 275 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




86. Please consider POl00040029 (email chain on 29/30 August 2013 between

you and Susan Crichton), POl00040032 ("lessons learned" Review of

handling of alleged issues/ concerns about Horizon: Terms of Reference) and

POl00116123 (email chain between you and Alice Perkins on 6 September

2013).


86.1. Please explain why you commissioned the lessons learnt Review. What

did you see as its objective?


         574. Before I respond to this question specifically, there are two general points

               it is essential to make in order that the Inquiry understand my answers.

               The first is that 'lessons learned reviews' were a frequent practice we

               employed as a business. It was an important part of our culture to reflect

               on our actions and try to learn from them (I have addressed above the

               POL Board effectiveness reviews which set the example at the top of the

               business), so a "lessons learned review" was just that.


         575. The second point to be made is that, in respect of this specific review, it

               changed and evolved over time, with different parts of the business taking

               ownership of different aspects as and when it became clear that they

               would be better suited to investigate them. In what follows, I try to trace

               the history of this review, but I must emphasise that I have been heavily

               reliant on the documents disclosed by the Inquiry in responding to

               questions on this topic.


         576. I believe this Lessons Learned Review was formally initiated at the POL

               Board meeting on 16 July 2013. In my response to Question 74.4 above,

               I noted that the POL Board expressed strong views that the business had
                                      Page 276 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     not managed the Second Sight review well and stressed the need for

     better management and cost control going forward. In this meeting, Alice

     Perkins requested a review, which would report to the ARC, of how we

     had awarded and managed the Second Sight contract. Even prior to this

     meeting, I recognised that such a review would be useful: in my email of

     9 July 2013, I wrote "as we have already said, there will need to be a

     thorough lessons learnt as well as a way forward" (POL00099133).


577. As is clear from the minutes of the POL Board meeting on 16 July 2013,

     the focus of this review was narrow, and it was envisaged that the review

     would be conducted quickly. Speed was important here: we had an

     ongoing working relationship with Second Sight, and this was as much

     about how we managed that going forward as it was about ensuring the

     good management of future projects.


578. The POL Board Action Log records that the task of taking the review

     forward was assigned to Susan Crichton (at page 12 of (POL00021516)).

     Because the POL Board had been critical of how the Second Sight

     investigation had been managed prior to this, it was particularly important

     to me that Susan who had been and continued to be the lead Director

     understood the purpose of the review and supported it. At 06:49 the day

     after the POL Board meeting, I sent an update to Susan setting out an

     overview of the ongoing workstreams arising. I can see that we arranged

     to meet and to discuss this (amongst other things, notably her

     dissatisfaction at being stood down from the meeting by the Chair)

     (POL00108019).


                            Page 277 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




579. My 'update on the work programme arising from the Horizon report' dated

      26 July 2013 records that the work had already begun (at page 8 of

      (POL00006590) ):


    "In response to the Board's request for a post-mortem, Internal Audit has

    now been tasked with carrying out a review of our response to the Second

    Sight investigation, reporting to the ARC. The terms of reference will be

    agreed with the Chair of ARC over the coming weeks."


580. As this indicates, the original intention was for this review to be carried

      out internally by Internal Audit ("IA"). IA is an independent body within

      the organisation which reports to the Chair of the ARC. Assigning this

     work to the IA team was a significant step which indicated the depth of

      the POL Board's concerns.


581. I subsequently went away on holiday and, when I returned, Alice Perkins

      told me she had approached Richard Hatfield to undertake the review. I

      can see from an email from Richard Hatfield to Alasdair Marnoch on 14

     August 2013 that the proposed terms of reference had grown far wider

      than the POL Board had initially requested and, with that widened scope

      in mind, Richard Hatfield described the 20-day turnaround time proposed

      as "quite tighf', suggesting instead a deadline of the end of October (at

      page 4 of (POL00108064)). I was not involved in the appointment of

      Richard Hatfield and did not know him. I came to understand that he had

      expertise in large-scale reviews of organisational culture.


582. In his reply of 15 August 2013, Alasdair indicated that he would need to

      clear Richard Hatfield's proposed terms of reference with Alice and me.
                             Page 278 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     He also questioned the proposed involvement of third parties because

     the review had been envisaged as an internal exercise and, as he notes,

     the report "will be more forthright if it is only for internal purposes" (at

     pages 2 to 3 of (POL00108064)).


583. The comment that he would need to clear the terms of reference with me

     to ensure my "proper buy in" I believe, partly reflects the fact that I did

     not know Richard Hatfield and had played no role in choosing him .I

     believe that the Chair of ARC recognised that I would naturally want to

     understand more about Richard Hatfield and the work proposed.

     However, my involvement was also seen as important in terms of

     managing team dynamics. My recollection is that the relationship

     between Alice and Susan had broken down somewhat, but as noted

     above, there was also a continuing need to ensure that Susan remained

     on board with the review. In his email of 20 August 2013 to Richard

     Hatfield, Alasdair wrote that he had spoken to Alice and me and there

     were concerns about refining the scope and sponsorship of the review

     (at page 2 of (POL00108064)). My recollection is that I was asked to

     sponsor the review because, if I was supportive of it, that would

     encourage Susan to buy in to it as well. I was her boss, but I also think

     (and would hope) that she trusted me.


584. Throughout this time, I was concerned to manage Susan's perception of

     this review and to ensure that she understood its aims and value. I had

     spoken to her the previous day, so that the draft did not come as a shock

     and I emphasised that "the intention is to approach it positively, to see


                            Page 279 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           what lessons can be learned to help us manage the business in the

           future" (at page 1 of (POL00040029)). I wanted her to understand that

           the aim of the review was not simply to assess her individual actions and

           performance.


      585. I met with Richard Hatfield and I agreed to sponsor the review. In an

           update circulated to the Board by Alwen Lyons on 28 August 2013,

           wrote that (at page 2 of POL00027792)):


         "I am also in the process, with the help of Alasdair and Alice, of setting up

         a lessons learned review to understand what we could have done better in

         the independent review carried out by Second Sight, but also to understand

         how the Business responded to the Subpostmasters' challenges and

         whether our process for dealing with balance queries, suspensions,

         prosecution etc. were fair."


      586. The objective set out by the POL Board was to understand how we

           awarded but especially how we had managed the Second Sight contract.

           The need for this was two-fold: first, to ensure better management and

           cost control for the Second Sight investigation going forward and,

           second, to bring that learning to bear on future projects involving external

           consultants.


86.2. Please expand on the following in the draft terms of reference

(POL00040032) "What is the function(s) of Horizon? When it was developed/

introduced - were there problems? Who is responsible for a) day to day

operations b) the system c) overall integrity process". Had this work not been

carried out already in responding to 5PM complaints: if not, why not?
                                  Page 280 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




587. On 29 August 2013, I received a copy of the draft terms of reference,

     which I forwarded to Susan Crichton. As I say in my email, I had

     discussed them with "Richard'' (this was Richard Hatfield) and Alwen. I

     noted a need to avoid "scope             creep," saying (at page 1 of

     (POL00040029) ):


   "We flagged potential pitfalls, especially around going back too far, or

   spending too long on cultural issues we are already aware of,

   (acknowledging that Richard will need to explore some of this ground as

   context and I am keen to have his observations). Richard is also very aware

   of not duplicating existing work."


588. The draft terms of reference themselves (POL00040032) are a brief

     document accompanied by a two-page appendix. In the first two pages

     of this document, Richard Hatfield sets out the draft terms of reference

     including the background to the review, which notes that it is one of

     several pieces of follow-on work commissioned by POL further to the

     Interim Report. His draft states (at page 1 of (POL00040032)):


   "The purpose of the review is to not duplicate the work already done or

   under way; nor is it intended to investigate individual cases. Rather it is an

   internal review to see a) whether there are any lessons to be learned by the

   Post Office about how it handled the work leading up to the Second Sight

   interim report, in relation to process, governance and stakeholder

   engagement; and b) to highlight any cultural observations, which could be

   of use as the business continues its transformation to more mutual ways of

   working."

                            Page 281 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




589. The draft terms of reference set out a three-point scope (at page 1 of

        POL00040032)):


   a.      To identify what POL could have done differently, so that POL and its

           stakeholders (he refers to Lord Arbuthnot, the JFSA, and Second

           Sight) could have worked collaboratively and constructively from the

           start;


   b.      To identify whether the changes already made to how the Second

           Sight investigation is proceeding reflect good practice and, if there are

           gaps, to identify them; and


   c.      To identify what broader cultural lessons can be learned.


590. The reference to not duplicating work was important. The POL Board had

        originally requested a review with a narrow, practical scope, which could

        be conducted quickly so that it could usefully inform POL's relationship

        with   Second Sight going forward. There were several different

        workstreams ongoing at this time and I was conscious that the process

        needed to be efficient and focused to be valuable. While I understood

        that cultural issues formed the background context to his review, they

        were not the focus of it.


591. As set out above, the draft terms of reference are accompanied by a two-

        page Appendix in rough note form, which sets out a series of bullet points

        and questions grouped by topic. This gives an indication of how Richard

        Hatfield intended to go about his review.




                               Page 282 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      592. In a section entitled "Background - preparation for the report only"

           Richard Hatfield has written (at page 3 of (POL00040032)):


            "Establish basic understanding of PO organisation and identify

            potentially relevant responsibilities. How does the relationship with

            SPMs work? What is the function(s) of Horizon? When it was developed

            I introduced - were there problems? Who is responsible for a) day to day

            operation b) the system c) overall integrity of process."


      593. I am asked whether this work had already been carried out in responding

           to SPM complaints and, if not, why not. I think this question indicates a

           misunderstanding. This part of the document is not part of the terms of

           reference. It is instead explaining the background information which

           Richard Hatfield and I had discussed he would need to enable him to

           prepare his report, hence the title of the section "Background -

           preparation for report only." Certainly, there would be no need for POL to

           commission an external review in order to "establish basic understanding

           of POL organisation." Here, Richard Hatfield is setting out his

           methodology and process. The next paragraph states "(e)stablish outline

           of chronology of relevant events in order to arrange and structure initial

           interviews," which would seem to support this interpretation.


86.3. Why did the draft terms of reference (POL00040032) state that the matters

under "Early Indicators?" were "not to be reported on"? Had this work not been

carried out already in responding to SPM complaints: if not, why not?


      594. The next section within the Appendix is entitled "Early Indicators? -

           preparation for the report only (ie not to be reported on)". I am asked
                                  Page 283 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           whether this work had been carried out already in responding to SPM

            complaints and, if not, why not.


      595. As with my answer to Question 86.2. above, this section of the document

            is contained within the Appendix to the draft terms of reference. Richard

            Hatfield was not setting out the terms of reference but rather his

            methodology and a rough indication of how he intended to approach the

            task of preparing his report. This was not work which we were proposing

            he complete as part of his review. It related to background matters he

           would need to understand in order to conduct the review.


86.4. Why was "going back too far" a "potential pitfall", as you describe in your

email of 29 August 2013 (POl00040029)?


      596. In my email I note that, having reviewed Richard Hatfield's draft terms of

            reference I had raised with him the need to avoid "scope creep." I then

           wrote (at page 1 of (POl00040029)):


          "We flagged potential pitfalls, especially around going back too far, or

          spending too long on cultural issues we are already aware of,

          (acknowledging that Richard will need to explore some of this ground as

          context and I am keen to have his observations). Richard is also very aware

          of not duplicating existing work."


      597. There were two central reasons why I considered that going back too far

           would be a potential pitfall:


     a.   First, as I have explained above, the objective set by the POL Board was

          to understand how we awarded and managed the Second Sight contract.
                                   Page 284 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




         Given this, the report needed to focus first and foremost on our interactions

         with Second Sight and the time period during which they occurred. Although

          I recognised that Richard Hatfield would need to go beyond this to some

         extent to understand the context in which these interactions had occurred,

         the review itself needed to focus on quite a specific period of time to serve

         its purpose.


    b.   Second, this review had been commissioned with a narrow, precise scope

         so that it could be produced quickly and therefore play a useful role in

         informing our existing relationship with Second Sight and how we managed

         that going forward. I was concerned when reviewing this draft that it could

         create overlaps, especially on cultural work elsewhere and not deliver on

         the matter in hand.


86.5. Why were the various issues and recommendations raised by Simon

Clarke and Brian Altman KC in respect of the handling of past convictions not

included within the scope of this review?


      598. The objectives of the review (see my response to Question 86.2 and (at

           page 1 of (POL00040032)) were: to identify what POL could have done

           differently, so that POL and its stakeholders (he refers to Lord Arbuthnot,

           the JFSA, and Second Sight) could have worked collaboratively and

           constructively from the start; to identify whether the changes already

           made to how the Second Sight investigation was proceeding reflected

           good practice and, if there were gaps, to identify them; to identify what

           broader cultural lessons could be learned.



                                  Page 285 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      599. Accordingly, I would not have expected the work being done by

             Cartwright King or Brian Altman QC to appear in this review as their work

             focused on issues of law rather than operational matters. As was set out

             in the draft terms of reference, this was expressly not about examining

             individual cases, whereas that was the focus of the Cartwright King

             review. To the extent that I was aware of the work being done by Richard

             Hatfield, Brian Altman QC, and Simon Clarke, I considered that they had

             different aims and objectives.


86.6. What was the outcome of this review?


      600.   This review had originally been conceived as a focused, internal

             exercise which could usefully feed into our ongoing management of

             Second Sight's work.


      601. By 6 September 2013, I had discussed the issues with Alice Perkins. I

             can see that I mention the possibility of standing Richard Hatfield down

             in my email of 10:49 (though had not done so yet) (at page 1 of

             (POL00116123)). Alice replied at 11 :49 saying she had not understood

             that the proposal was to stand him down and asking for my reasoning

             with reference to other options we had considered, including drafting

             much narrower terms of reference. She refers to a comment I had made

             about the difficulty in conducting the review given changes in personnel

             (at page 1 of (POL00116123)).


      602. I replied at 13:04, clarifying my comments, and saying (at page 1 of

             (POL00116123)):


                                    Page 286 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




   " .. .if Susan and Simon Baker had left the business, then we couldn't

   effectively do Richard's review. I heard you say that you had the same

   thought. I felt we should stand him down, as the context is now different."


603. As I mention above, both Susan Crichton and Simon Baker had been

     involved in managing and overseeing the project; the approach to project

     management during their time was to be considered and likely to be

     criticised in the review. In my email of 13:04 I suggested that, once those

     involved had moved on, the business could conduct the review internally,

     as originally intended. As my response shows, I was still keen to

     undertake the review and, indeed, Martin Edwards was drafting revised

     terms of reference at that time.


604. Once she understood my explanation, Alice agreed with the proposal to

     stand Richard Hatfield down and I can see from my email to Alasdair

     Marnoch on 11 September 2013 that we had taken that step. In that

     email, I noted that the revised terms of reference were "more tightly

     focused on our internal handling of the investigation" and proposed the

     use of an internal facilitator (as originally intended), with the opportunity

     for external challenge and input on the conclusions (at page 2 of

     (POL00108113)). I can see from my email of 21 :21 that day that I already

     had Belinda Crowe in mind as a person well placed to conduct the review,

     as she ultimately did (at page 1 of (POL00108113)).


605. Belinda was highly recommended by Alice. Belinda had worked as a

     project director in Treasury at the time when Alice also worked there.

     Alice was sure that her experience of dealing with complex situations,

                            Page 287 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     multiple stakeholders and particularly delivering on sensitive projects

     wou Id be excellent. I recall that she had taken early retirement but agreed

     to change some personal plans and was brought in on a short-term

     contract to see the work through.


606. At the POL Board meeting on 25 September 2013, I provided an update

     explaining that an internal lessons learned review, led by Belinda would

     be undertaken for Project Sparrow over the next few weeks (at page 8 of

     (POL00021518)). There were then frequent updates to the POL Board

     regarding this report, although it was delayed by several months. For

     example, the POL Board Status Report dated 16 January 2014 noted

     that the review would be presented to the February 2014 ARC (at page

     2 of (POL00027472)), see also the minutes of the POL Board on 21

     January 2014: (at page 5 of POL00021521)), but this did not in fact take

     place. At the POL Board meeting on 26 March 2014, the POL Board

     requested that Belinda provide "a one page lessons learned covering 3

     or 4 areas by the next Board meeting" (at page 3 of POL00006564)).


607. The review ultimately culminated in a paper prepared by Belinda dated

     24   April    2014,   which    made      a   number    of   recommendations

     (POL00100592). This was presented to the ARC on 15 May 2014. The

     minutes      record   that   Belinda's   paper   was    discussed   and   its

     recommendations were considered (at pages 4 to 5 of (POL00021426)).

     As indicated in those minutes, the ARC noted the need to introduce a

     formal protocol for an enterprise-wide response to crises, risks, and high-

     profile issues and the possibility of establishing an in-house team for this


                              Page 288 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           purpose. Chris Aujard was tasked with raising the matter at the ExCo

           with a view to bringing the proposal to the POL Board in due course.


The establishment of the Initial Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme


87. Please consider POL00027792 (email from Alwen Lyons to Alice Perkins and

others on 28 August 2013), POL00099510 (email chain between you and Alice

Perkins on 28/29 August 2013), POL00116131 (email from Martin Edwards to

you dated 24 September 2013), POL00116132 (attachment to the prior email)

and POL00116136 (note of meeting with Sir Anthony Hooper on 24 September

2013). Please describe your involvement with the implementation of the Initial

Complaint Review and Mediation Scheme ("the Mediation Scheme") as well as

POL's conduct in relation to the same. Please explain to what extent you

communicated information about complaints about the Horizon IT System and

POL's response to the same to the Board, ShEx/UKGI or BEIS. Without limiting

your answer, please address the following issues:


      608. By June 2013, there was a recognition that the work that Second Sight

           was doing needed to be brought to some kind of closure and we were

           looking at how that might be achieved. I can see from his email of 4 June

           2013, that Lord Arbuthnot communicated this to Ron Warmington and

           Ian Henderson. In that email he referred to a conversation he had had

           with me where I had proposed that any further cases submitted be

           investigated in-house by the Company Secretary and asked for them to

           consider this (at page 2 of (POL00098459)).


      609. An email sent by Janet Walker on behalf of Lord Arbuthnot on 13 June

           2013 indicates that he had discussed this with Alan Bates: "James
                                 Page 289 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     touched on the point Paula has made about potentially bringing the

     investigation of further cases in-house within the Post Office. Alan said

     he was not entirely comfortable with this, but James persuaded him to

     put this matter into abeyance for the time being, and Alan agreed'' (at

     pages 4 to 5 of (POL00098592)).


610. As noted in Lord Arbuthnot's email of 4 June 2013, the Second Sight

     investigation had, by this point, run for longer than anticipated and at

     higher cost, and we had concerns about the quality of the work being

     produced. More generally though, it was never intended that we would

     retain Second Sight indefinitely. Ultimately, as a matter of good business

     practice, you would always look to bring learning and skills back into the

     business, rather than bear the cost of hiring external consultants on an

     ongoing basis. However, there was always an intention to improve

     mechanisms for SPMs to be involved and raise complaints, for example,

     through a 'Horizon User Group' made up of existing SPMs, which was

     being considered as part of the Business Improvement Programme.


611. I can see that Alan Bates emailed me on 4 July 2013 suggesting that

     POL could use an external independent adjudicator to review cases (at

     pages 2 to 8 of (POL00099013)). I can see from this email chain showing

     our internal discussions that we considered this proposal. In his email of

     4 July within that chain, Mark Davies noted that we had just proposed the

     Branch User Forum and "a working group to review our processes

     around support and training" (at page 2 of (POL00099013)).




                           Page 290 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




612. My initial thoughts were that the idea had merit, but I preferred an

     ombudsman or independent expert to an adjudicator. At this stage, I

     recall that what I really wanted was a way through the difficulties and a

     resolution of the complaints being made which both sides could be

     satisfied with. I can see that I met with Lord Arbuthnot on 5 July 2013 and

     we discussed these suggestions and the issues surrounding them, which

     were myriad (POL00115958). I recognised that there was a real need for

     SPMs' voices to be heard, there was also a desire for independence, but

     we also needed a process which could provide resolution and finality for

     those involved.


613. The next day, on 6 July 2013, I provided an update to the POL Board,

     setting out the progress of these discussions. I noted there that Alan

     Bates' main focus was less on the computer system, but more on the

     human issues: "how in his view Post Office failed to support and help

     vulnerable   and   'muddle-headed'       [sic]   Spmrs"   (at   page   1   of

     (POL00115961 )).    The   phrase 'muddle-headed' was Alan              Bates'

     terminology and I repeat it here without any intention of disrespect. I

     understood him to be attempting to capture the concern that these

     problems arose primarily because SPMs needed more help and support

     to work with the Horizon system and that providing that support could

     avoid these problems in future. I suggested that we work closely with

     Alan Bates, rather than indirectly through Second Sight, to provide

     reassurance to him and others on this issue.




                            Page 291 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




614. Later that day I exchanged emails with Alan Bates and then sought input

     from Mark on what was discussed. His email of 16:46 draws out a key

     issue at this time which is that the processes being put in place needed

     to be both backwards-facing - to arrive at resolution on the existing MP

     and JFSA cases - and forwards-facing - to provide an ongoing

     programme of support and improvements going forward (at pages 2 to 3

     of (POL00099051 )).


615. Mark noted that the working party being proposed by Alan Bates could

     "take over" the Second Sight review, with POL and the JFSA working

     collaboratively to resolve the remaining cases, perhaps with the oversight

     of an external party. He suggested that this would carry the risk of looking

     at historic cases which had been decided by the courts, but it would also

     enable us to complete the work Second Sight had been asked to do.

     Martin Edwards' comments at 20:08 within this chain show that it was still

     a live question at this point whether the existing cases would be best

     resolved through the Working Group or through more direct one-to-one

     engagement with MPs. He also expressed a concern about having the

     JFSA so directly involved in resolving individual cases.


616. I did not share this concern and was content for the JFSA to be involved

     in looking at cases. Throughout this process, my view was that we

     needed to be open with them. My response of 21 :46 to these emails (at

     pages 1 to 2 of (POL00099051)) makes clear that I imagined that we

     would be working collaboratively with the JFSA to resolve past cases. I

     also foresaw that the JFSA might play an important role in reviewing the


                            Page 292 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     findings of any review of past prosecutions conducted by our external

      lawyers. Nonetheless, I took seriously the need to consider all angles

     and so (as recorded in my email) I asked Susan Crichton to advise on

     the legal implications of the options being considered.


617. On 8 July 2013, I provided an email update to the POL Board. I can see

     from this that JFSA's involvement had been confirmed (POL00099126).

      I noted that Lord Arbuthnot was determined that the review of past

      prosecutions remain part of the review process. As I noted to the POL

      Board, we were already planning to engage our external lawyers to

     conduct a review of the implications of the report for past prosecutions,

      but this would be kept separate from the wider review.


618. In the press release statement on the findings of the Interim Report dated

     8 July 2013, I set out three new initiatives including the creation of a

     working party including MPs and the JFSA, tasked with completing the

      review of cases started by Second Sight (POL00090219). This was not

     to say that Second Sight would not continue to have a role. However, it

      reflects the wider issues noted above that, even leaving aside the

     concerns being passed to me about the quality of the work that Second

     Sight had produced, it was never the intention that they would become a

      permanent fixture (POL00099510): that is simply not the purpose of

     external consultants.


619. Those at POL working closely with Second Sight repeatedly expressed

     their concerns to me about the quality of Second Sight's work, the delay,

     and whether they had the expertise to assist going forward. However,

                             Page 293 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




      against this, there was a firm (and understandable) desire amongst MPs

     for Second Sight to remain involved and we had to respect this: POL is

      a public body and the MPs are our shareholders. As is clear from Mark's

      email of 9 July 2013, the day after the release of the Interim Report, it

     was already understood that Second Sight would remain involved, and

      our attention had shifted to how we could support them to bring the

      investigation to a timely resolution (at page 1 of (POL00099146)).


620. At this point I was managing competing priorities from different sides: the

      MPs wanted their cases looked at and wanted Second Sight firmly

      involved, but the Board was dissatisfied with the fact that Second Sight's

      investigation had run over time and over budget. I had to navigate a way

      through this that would give us what seemed most important to me: the

      resolution of the cases for the SPMs and for POL. Regardless of the

      outcome of the Second Sight investigation, our main priority had to be

     finding a way to achieve resolution.


621. That was one fundamental intention behind the establishment of the

      Mediation Scheme. I can see that (POL00116076), an email from Mark

      Davies to me sent on 15 July 2013, reflects some of this thinking. Here

      he suggests an independent panel, "chaired by a QC or perhaps a former

      MP/peer" to which we proactively encourage SPMs to submit their cases

     for evaluation or, in Mark's terms, ''judgement". This would run alongside

      the final Second Sight report and allow us to achieve finality for those

      involved and for POL. As Mark says there it was an opportunity to make

      a big statement about the kind of business we were and intended to be


                            Page 294 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     going forward. I agreed: resolving the cases would be good for the SPMs

     and it would be good for POL.


622. By 19 July 2013, this new proposal was being described in terms of

      mediation as set out in an email from Simon Baker to me that day. He

      records a list of actions, including communicating the proposal to Second

     Sight, Alan Bates, and Lord Arbuthnot (POL00117036). The reasoning

      behind the proposal was set out by Simon in this email: (a) it would

      provide independence through Second Sight and an independent

      mediator; (b) it should be faster as Second Sight and the mediator could

     share the workload; (c) it would provide a professionally trained mediator

     and so, hopefully, would bring resolution; and (d) it would get Second

     Sight out of the role of both mediator, judge, and "sub postmaster

     advocate(s)" so that the process could continue after the MPs' cases had

      been completed.


623. Although I do not recall this email, I recognise the thinking behind these

     factors. I think it is a recognition of the fact that Second Sight were

     themselves in a challenging position. In a POL Board update sent on 26

     July 2013 (at page 2 of (POL00006590)) which I discuss in more detail

      below, I note that:


    "(T)heir approach of seeking to reconcile the conflicting evidence and

    views of the Post Office and sub-postmasters - which stems from James

   Arbuthnot that they needed to 'keep the JFSA onside' - is pushing them

    into an almost impossible situation, which both extends the time taken to

    conclude each case and, more worryingly, creates a tendency for them to

                            Page 295 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




   place greater weight on the sup-postmaster's [sic] version of events,

   irrespective of the evidence we present."


624. I believe that the reference to the difficulty in Second Sight being

     mediator, judge, and SPM advocate is a reference to the same kind of

     impossible situation I described here.


625. Throughout this time, we were also trying to manage the cost of Second

     Sight's engagement going forward. As noted above, the investigation had

     overrun in time and cost and it was a significant concern to the POL

     Board that, despite this, Second Sight had not finished the work they

     were tasked with completing having, so far, only produced an Interim

     Report. The budget for this project had essentially been exhausted and

     the Board felt that POL had paid for work which had not been completed.

     Alongside this, POL was now going to have to fund the Mediation

     Scheme, at further cost. As discussed in emails between Susan Crichton

     and me on 22 July 2013 (see (POL00099341) and (POL00099342)) we

     engaged in robust negotiations with a view to persuading Second Sight

     to either complete the further work within the original budget or at a

     severely reduced rate. From recollection, the proposal that they complete

     the work pro bona was a negotiation tactic which was originally

     suggested by the POL Board.


626. This increased focus on management is also clear from an email I sent

     on 21 July 2013 in advance of the meeting on 22 July to discuss the

     proposal with key figures involved (see below) (POL00108037). This

     records that Alasdair Marnoch was to be fully briefed in his capacity as

                           Page 296 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     Chair of the ARC to make any challenges he saw fit. As I say here, it was

     important that we could demonstrate concrete proposals for monitoring

     progress and keeping the POL Board updated. I was aware that, prior to

     this, the POL Board had had relatively little exposure to the work, and I

     wanted them to understand the complexities of the project by bringing

     them in closer. The POL Board had significant commercial experience

     but, with the exception of the Chair and perhaps the Chair of the ARC,

     little experience of public and political stakeholders in something this

     complex. I felt strongly that bringing Alasdair in would assist us by

     providing constructive challenges and enhanced support.


627. On 22 July 2013, Susan, Mark and I attended a meeting with Ron

     Warmington, Ian Henderson, and Lord Arbuthnot, to discuss the

     proposed mechanics of the Mediation Scheme. I can see that we

     discussed the provision of an independent advisor to assist SPMs in

     preparing material but also explained that we did expect costs to be

     controlled and overseen by the 'MOB,' which although I do not now recall

     the name, is the Monthly Oversight Board ("MOB") (POL00099354). I

     recall being pleased that we were working collaboratively together.


628. A detailed update was prepared, which I sent to the Board dated 26 July

     2013 (POL00006590). This set out the different workstreams and their

     objectives, including: the completion of the review of cases started by

     Second Sight; continuing to review disclosure obligations in cases

     subject to criminal prosecutions; identifying improvements to be made in

     training and support; and reviewing how best to resolve disputed cases


                           Page 297 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     in the future. Resolving the existing cases, with Second Sight's

     involvement, was of central importance. However, the previous way of

     working had not enabled them to do this.


629. The report sets out the changes we intended to make so that we could

     achieve resolution, including by providing them with senior level resource

     to respond to queries and ensure they could prepare an accurate

     evidence base quickly and efficiently and by restricting their remit to

     preparing an impartial evidence base from which an independent

     mediator could assist the parties in agreeing a resolution. My belief was

     that this process would still identify any shortcomings on the part of POL

     (as noted at paragraph 7 and paragraph 26) and so would allow us to

     make changes to our ways of working where these were warranted (at

     pages, 2, 6 and 7 of (POL00006590)). I recognise here that there may

     be cases where financial compensation is warranted but that was not the

     fundamental purpose of the Mediation Scheme and such payments

     would be the exception rather than the norm (at pages 2, 6 and 7 of

     (POL00006590) ).


630. The desire to achieve better management and oversight of Second

     Sight's investigation going forward, and to ensure that costs did not

     continue to spiral as they had previously, was an ongoing concern at this

     time. The POL Board was provided with a table of estimated costs at

     paragraph 25, although these were necessarily provisional (at page 6 of

     (POL00006590)). The anticipated costs included improvements to the

     helpline and to our IT and other processes, aimed at preventing future


                           Page 298 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     problems arising. These included an investment in software designed to

     highlight high-risk situations / opportunities such, as amongst other

     things, flagging where SPMs made repeated calls so that support could

     be proactively offered. From memory, I believe this was led by Angela

     Van Den Bogerd and was called Horice (an acronym).


631. I can see from (POl00118496), an email I sent to Alice Perkins on 26

     July 2013 about a meeting I had had with Susan, that management of

     the project and of costs in particular (including the negotiations with

     Second Sight) remained a central concern. I set out three key objectives:

     costs control; discipline and delivery and monitoring of work in progress;

     maintaining close and frequent communication with JFSA / Alan Bates.

     It is natural that costs were a central theme. As a publicly funded

     organisation we had responsibilities to the public and to our shareholders

     to ensure that we were managing our costs efficiently.


632. Susan updated me and others in an email at 11 :53 on 26 July 2013,

     which detailed a workshop attended by Alan Bates and Second Sight on

     25 July 2013, where the proposed scheme had been discussed in detail

     (POl00116113). This felt constructive, although it was clear that there

     remained areas of disagreement. I can see that there was discussion of

     who would fund the provision of an independent advisor to assist SPMs.

     This would assist SPMs and of course would also improve the efficiency

     of the process by ensuring that the necessary details were provided in

     the first instance. Susan emphasised again to Second Sight that there

     was "considerable internal concern about the time and money taken so


                           Page 299 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     far" as I have noted above. Alan Bates considered that this should be

     paid for out of central government funds, but POL was already subject to

     budgetary pressures from ShEx, as well as compensating SPMs for Post

     Office closures and conversions as part of the Network Transformation.

     We were tightening our belts in every area - it was by no means just this

     project where costs were a concern - and I did not consider that we could

     secure funds from the government for this. This was an operational

     matter for POL, which it would be expected to fund itself.


633. On 26 August 2013, the POL Shareholder team shared a draft mediation

     pack, draft press statement, and draft letter to MPs with ShEx updating

     them on progress (POL00099504). A copy of the draft mediation pack

     had already been sent to Lord Arbuthnot on 21                August 2013

     (POL00095442).


634. (POL00116114) records the response from members of the POL Board

     to my update paper discussed above (POL00006590). Alice's email to

     the POL Board sent on 31 July 2013 refers to the need to 'pin down and

     cap SS's costs' and to cap their involvement at the 47 existing cases. For

     my part, I recognised that Second Sight would remain involved and did

     not consider that we could or would draw a line at 47 cases: they would

     remain involved until their work was complete. However, I shared these

     broad concerns about the situation: POL had hired Second Sight to get

     to the bottom of the cases and find out what was going on and they had

     not done this. Reflecting on this now, if they had completed those

     individual cases then we might have got closer to the real problem - the


                           Page 300 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     large numbers (600+) of unknown bugs and defects being corrected by

     Fujitsu without POL's (as I believed at the time) or my knowledge.


635. On 28 August 2013, I provided an update to the POL Board addressing

     the announcement of the Mediation Scheme, amongst other things. I

     explain in summary terms how the Mediation Scheme would work, noting

     my central aim of achieving resolution to the complaints that had been

     made. I explained to the Board that "(t)here is the clear risk that in some

     cases the sub-postmaster will argue that financial compensation is

     appropriate, which again will have to be assessed carefully on a case by

     case basis" and outlined how financial settlements will be managed (at

     page 1 of (POL00027792) ).


636. I can see that Alwen Lyons prepared the initial draft of this note on 27

     August 2013 and I responded with my comments, cc'ing in Susan for her

     input (POL00116218). I noted that the POL Board will want to know the

     risks of mediation, including the financial risk of compensation payments,

     and receive reassurance on how POL would manage these. That kind of

     oversight was essential to the POL Board's role and I knew we had to be

     upfront about the financial risks in explaining this to them. The parts in

     my final note relating to costs reflect this.


637. In my email I say, "when we discussed this, the hope of mediation was

     to avoid or minimise compensation but as far as I can see, the pack

     doesn't really suggest any other outcome" (at page 2 of (POL00116218).

     This referred to a conversation I had had with Susan about the purpose

     of mediation and what value it could add. Although I expressed this badly,

                             Page 301 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           I was making the point that we needed to clearly emphasise that the aim

           of mediation was resolution, not simply paying compensation to close an

           issue. As the final POL Board note shows, it was always understood that

           compensation would be paid in appropriate circumstances, but I felt it

          was extremely important that everyone involved (including the POL

           Board) understood that the aim was to achieve resolution: that was the

           real value of the Scheme. I did not want it to be misunderstood as simply

           being a compensation scheme so we had to be clear that, although

           compensation was possible, there should be no expectation that it would

           be the end result in every case.


87.1 What was the purpose and objectives of the Mediation Scheme?


     638. As I have set out in detail above, the Mediation Scheme had several

           objectives. The most important one for me was that it offered a way to

           bring resolution to seemingly intractable cases, which would be good for

           the SPMs and good for POL. I recognised that it was vital that SPM

           voices were heard and essential that POL engage in meaningful dialogue

          with SPMs, recognising where we had fallen short and identifying

           improvements     and,    in   appropriate   cases,   providing   financial

           recompense.


     639. Crucially, the Mediation Scheme also offered a way to complete the

           review with which Second Sight had been tasked in an independent, fair

           but also efficient (and cost effective) manner. The Second Sight

           investigation to date had seemed unable to achieve resolution and the

           Mediation Scheme offered a route through this. By finding new ways of

                                   Page 302 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           working with Second Sight we could ensure that they were adequately

           supported to complete the work in a way which would not compromise

           their independence (and so, the value of the end result). Closer, more

           collaborative, working would also ease the transition when Second

           Sight's work came to an end and allow us to bring that work back in-

           house, as we intended to do.


87.2 In your note dated 28 August 2013 (POl00027792), why did you write

"There are a range of outcomes, from an acceptance that...the subpostmaster

was at fault and that no specific redress should will [sic] be required; to

recognition that the Business could have more effective support which will feed

into the process re-engineering work now underway". Did you not consider that

one of the outcomes may have been that SPMs' complaints may have been

caused by BEDs?


      640. My view was always that, if the review was conducted thoroughly,

           particularly by re-looking at individual cases, any BEDs would be

           identified. In my note I refer to Second Sight's remit being the specific

           task of preparing an impartial evidence base. Working impartially,

           Second Sight would flag any BEDs, of that I was sure. Additionally, I refer

           several times to the fact that this approach should enable us to identify

           "shortcomings" and make changes where these were needed (at pages

           2, 6 and 7 of (POl00006590)). I was not intending here to set out an

           exhaustive list and I accept I could have been clearer about BEDs - but

           both I and the POL Board knew that the identification of BEDs was one

           possible outcome because we had already received the Interim Report


                                  Page 303 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           by this stage. I think it was also true that although open to the possibility,

           I / the POL Board did not expect to find many bugs at all; our

           understanding was not that there were 600+ as became known but that

           there had been three, which it was understood had been dealt with

           satisfactorily.


      641. The minutes of the Working Group (at page 2 of (POL00026641))

           illustrate POL's continued openness to the potential existence of BEDs:

           "Clause 4.10 was ... accepted subject to the Post Office commitment

           (which was reaffirmed in the meeting) that should they make any firm

           admissions during the mediation on the basis of a newly discovered flaw

           or fault in Horizon ... they would report this back to the Working Group."


      642. It should be borne in mind that the purpose of this document was not to

           outline all the possible outcomes of this process. I was conscious that

           the POL Board had concerns about the delay and cost of the Second

           Sight investigation to date and here I was setting out a programme of

           future work which would require yet more resources and costs. It was

           essential that they understood the purpose and value of the Mediation

           Scheme and that was what the document was trying to convey.


87.3 What were Alice Perkins' views on the scheme and its terms of reference?


      643. On 28 August 2013, I exchanged emails with Alice Perkins about the

           terms of reference for the Mediation Scheme. In her email of 15:24 she

           states "(y)ou should by now have my thoughts on the TOR" (at page 1 of

           (POL00099510)). I have not been able to identify precisely what this

           refers to but believe it is likely to refer either to a separate email or a
                                   Page 304 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




              printed and annotated document. I do not think I have yet seen the

              document or email, if the same has been disclosed to the Inquiry. I have

              no independent recollection of what it might contain but would be happy

              to comment if the Inquiry is able to locate and provide me with that

              document.


      644. Although I do not recall precisely what this reference was to, as I have

              noted above, Alice had several key concerns throughout including: (i)

              controlling costs; (ii) ensuring that Second Sight did not become a

              permanent fixture; (iii) ensuring good management and effective

              reporting lines back to the Board; and (iv) ensuring effective corporate

              governance of the project going forward.


87.4 Please explain what you meant by "Angela will work hand in glove with SS

over the next few months to enable this, and as importantly, to give SS the

reassurance that they can safely hand over to her" in your email dated 28

August 2013 (P0l00099510). Why did you intend to phase out Second Sight at

this stage?


      645. In the series of emails with Alice Perkins on 28 August 2013, we

              discussed costs going forward and I stated that (at page 1 of

              (P0l00099510) ):


          "The intention is for Second Sight to have finished their work by year end

          (I think calendar year?). And then for any ongoing activity to be handed

         over to Angela and her team, so that it becomes a BAU process. Angela

          will work hand in glove with SS over the next few months to enable this,

         and as importantly, to give SS the reassurance that they can safely hand
                                    Page 305 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




    over to her. So far, I understand this is working well and they have

    expressed respect for her input and capability."


646. I can see that Chris Day provided further explanation later on in this email

      chain where he provided specific details of Second Sight's costs going

      forward and noted (at page 1 of (POl00099513)):


    "SS have agreed to transition out (subject to our in house team being

    sufficiently competent/independent in both carrying on with existing

    investigations and supporting SPMRs appropriately) over the coming

    months; depending on (a) the incidence of new cases arising, and (b) the

    rate of take up of the mediation scheme, Susan's view is that this is likely

    to be achievable by the end of this calendar year or latest first quarter

    2014."


647. This provisional handover is also noted in Susan Crichton's update of 30

      August 2013 where she explained that a cost cap had been agreed with

      Second Sight and "(t)hey have also agreed that subject to Angela and

      her team being able to provide the right level of investigative support to

      subpostmasters they will hand over the work to her, we are aiming to put

      that process in place by the end of the year'' (at page 1 of

      (POl00108087) ).


648. These emails provide a good overview of our intentions for the Mediation

      Scheme going forward. As I have noted above, no organisation wants to

      retain external consultants indefinitely: POL looked to bring knowledge

      and skills in house - if possible, so as to become a BAU process. We

      had this in mind throughout and discussed how that transition could occur
                             Page 306 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     with Second Sight. However, as the above discussions make clear, there

     was never a hard and fast cutoff date for Second Sight's work and the

     handover was always subject to caveats, most importantly, Second Sight

     being satisfied that POL had the competence and independence to do

     the work.


649. When I suggested to Alice that Second Sight's work was likely to be

     completed within the year (and hopefully the calendar year), that was my

     expectation based on how long I expected their review to take, not a

     suggestion that we would end their involvement on an arbitrary date. We

     had already dismissed the viability of simply imposing a deadline

     because it would not be credible or in the best interests of the business

     overall (see my POL Board update of 26 July 2013: (at page 3 of

     (POL00006590)) and it was certainly foreseeable that their work would

     continue until the end of the financial rather than calendar year: my

     update to the POL Board of 28 August 2013 envisaged that the work

     would be concluded by March 2014 (at page 1 of (POL00027792)).


650. As I have explained in several places above, one fundamental

     requirement going forward was that POL bring the skills, experience, and

     learning from the Second Sight review in-house. Although there were

     concerns about the quality, cost, and timeliness of Second Sight's work,

     this would have been an aim of the business in any case where external

     consultants were engaged. We would never look to retain external

     consultants indefinitely and it would not be a responsible use of public

     funds to do so.


                           Page 307 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      651. However, as these discussions show, although we were looking for that

            reason to phase out Second Sight's involvement, that intention was

            caveated and subject to the more fundamental requirement that the

            cases be resolved in a way which was fair and which was seen to be fair.

            Ultimately, the intention was always that Second Sight would finish the

            task with which they had been assigned before their involvement came

            to an end, even though I understood why some on the Board such as

           Alice wanted their involvement to be curtailed more swiftly.


88. Please consider POL00066817 (email from Martin Smith to Susan Crichton

dated 26 September 2013). Were you aware of this advice: if so, how did it affect

POL's position in respect of convicted SPMs?


      652. On 24 September 2013 Alasdair Marnoch and I met with Sir Anthony

            Hooper, (Martin Edwards also attended) to explain the purpose and

            requirements of the Mediation Scheme and assess his suitability for the

            role of Chair. Prior to this meeting, Martin had sent me a briefing for it

            ((see POL00116132) and         Martin's email providing       that briefing

            (POL00116131 )).


      653. Although my recollection of the meeting itself is limited, I recognise the

            points detailed in Martin's note (POL00116136) which he produced and

            emailed to Alasdair Marnoch, Susan Crichton and me on 25 September

            (POL00066817). This email chain shows that Susan forwarded the note

           without comment to Martin Smith the next day, who responded with his

            views.



                                  Page 308 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      654. I was not aware that these notes were sent to Martin Smith, nor was I

            aware of his comments in response. I was reliant on Susan, as GC, to

            advise me on the legal implications of our approach to this work. I do not

            recall Susan briefing me on Martin Smith's email, if she ever did. Given

            this, I am unable to comment on how, if at all, it may have affected POL's

            position in respect of convicted SPMs.


89. Please consider POL00116166 (email chain on 2 October2013), POL00099695

(email chain on 3 October 2013), POL00099702 (your email of 4 October 2013)

and POL00099711 (your email to Alice Perkins on 4 October 2013).


89.1. Please explain what you meant by the application making for "disturbing

reading".


      655. I have been referred to an email Ron Warmington sent me at 16:04 on 2

            October 2013 attaching eight example applications for my consideration

            (POL00116166).


     I can see that I responded to Ron Warmington at 21 :30 the same day to say

     that I had read the applications. I described them as "very disturbing". I said

     that I took the issues very seriously, and commended the format of the form he

     had devised as being helpful in removing some of the emotion and clearly

     setting out the issues we needed to discuss (at pages 1 to 2 at (POL00116166)).


      656. I forwarded Ron Warmington's email and attachments to Martin

            Edwards, Belinda Crowe, and Mark Davies in the first instance at 21 :50

            that evening, noting that they "make disturbing reading" (POL00099695).




                                  Page 309 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




      I can see that Martin replied at 21 :55 saying he would look at them in the

      morning (at page 1 of (POL00116166)).


657. I will use Lee Castleton's application as an example of why I used the

      words "disturbing reading". There are words within the application which

      really concerned me at the time and still do, in particular the statement

      that POL "vindictively pursued'' Mr Castleton in court proceedings. I was

      the CEO of an organisation which I cared deeply about and which I

      considered existed to serve communities. The idea that Mr Castleton felt

      that POL had behaved that way was deeply disturbing. He paints a picture

      of POL's support services as inadequate, hard-hearted, sloppy, and

      unprofessional and describes making 91 calls to the helpline without

      receiving assistance. I was deeply concerned by the whole tenor of how

      POL was said to have responded in his case.


658. I have since heard the human impact statements provided as part of this

      Inquiry which portray deep human suffering. I heard people, SPMs who

      had served their communities, describing losing houses and businesses,

      becoming ill with stress and in almost all cases, their families being

      impacted. POL was meant to support vulnerable people and for the

      organisation to treat people, whatever it felt they had or had not done, in

      this way was unacceptable.


659. I recall it being powerful to read about these accounts in the applications,

      just as it was difficult to hear them in the SPMs' own words in the human

      impact sessions.



                             Page 310 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      660. It was undoubtedly also striking to read so many accounts laid out

           together so black and white with no media narrative around them. The

           structure of the applications starkly laid out the facts and those facts were

           deeply upsetting because of their content. That is what I meant when I

           said to Ron Warmington that the format was so effective.


89.2. What was the Executive Committee's reaction to these applications?


      661. On Friday 4 October 2013 at 13:56 I forwarded the email and

           attachments from Ron Warmington to Alwen Lyons, Chris Day, Fay

           Healey, Kevin Gilliland, Lesley Sewell, Mark Davies, Martin Edwards,

           Martin George, Nick Kennett, Susan Barton and Susan Crichton, asking

           them to read the applications (POl00099702). I asked them to do this,

           firstly, because I considered it important that they were aware of them,

           and, secondly, because I wanted wider input on how best to disseminate

           and learn from them.


      662. I have not been able to identify any replies from the ExCo to my email in

           the material disclosed by the Inquiry to date. However, in the email

           attaching the applications I had said "If we get time at Monday's Weekly

           ExCo, I would like to raise it then, otherwise we will pick up during A 08

           on the 15 October''. I believe that we discussed this material at the ExCo

           meeting on the following Monday. I remember in particular, that Martin

           George, who was new to POL, was shocked by this material. Although I

           do not recall the discussion, I recall that everybody was affected by the

           material.


89.3. To what extent, if at all, did your or senior management's approach to 5PM
                                     Page 311 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




complaints about the Horizon IT System change after reading these

applications?


      663. I do not think reading these applications necessarily changed how we

           approached this - the Mediation Scheme had been designed to address

           these complaints: there would be an investigation and review to establish

           the precise facts in each case. However, reading these accounts did

           reinforce the importance of what we were doing and made clear how

           critical it was that we saw it through. Those working closest on Business

           Improvement, Angela Van Den Bogerd in particular, had been closely

           involved in reviewing applications for a lengthy period of time and so

           would have been very familiar with their content.


      664. I considered it important to share this material with the wider team

           because I felt that if anyone had any doubts about the overall seriousness

           of Project Sparrow, then it was clearly important that they saw the raw

           data. Whether these accounts did change how others responded though,

           I cannot say, but it was my intention to do what I could to set the standard

           of care and challenge and commitment to change where it was needed

           and by circulating these accounts, I was trying to show a commitment to

           care and challenge.


89.4. Please explain what you meant by Ron Warmington having been "fickle

with his loyalties" (POL00099711). Diel you consider that Mr Warmington owed

POL loyalty?


      665. On 4 October 2013, shortly after I sent the material to the Executive

           Team, I forwarded Ron Warmington's email and attachments to Alice
                                  Page 312 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          Perkins separately, noting that they will "depress and distress" her

          (POl00099711 ). In that email I also flagged a number of points for her

          to keep in mind including that:


        "Second Sight are now fully back on board and very complimentary about

        how we are handling the process for such cases. My phone call with Ron

         Warmington could not have been more positive. I remain wary of Ron as

        he can be emotional and has been fickle with his loyalties, but I will forward

        you a mail trail that shows his support."


     666. I cannot recall precisely what I meant here but I believe this was an

          attempt to reassure Alice that we had already made good progress with

          Second Sight without overemphasising the positive response we were

          currently receiving from Ron Warmington. I have mentioned already that

          Second Sight had to walk a difficult line in terms of maintaining

          independence while keeping the JFSA on board and, perhaps as a result

          of this, Ron Warmington had tended to blow rather hot and cold in the

          past.. While I felt we could take some comfort from his positive feedback,

          I think I was also sounding a note of caution.


     667. On reflection, "loyalty'' was the wrong word to use because it does not

          capture what I intended to convey. Certainly, Ron Warmington did not

          owe POL loyalty. I did consider that Second Sight held professional

          duties in relation to the work they were undertaking. Notwithstanding this,

          I recognised that he had a difficult role to play and was under pressure

          from all sides to manage different groups of people.


90. Please consider POl00116181 (email from Martin Edwards to you on 8
                                 Page 313 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




October 2013). What was the "the hiccup around the due diligence on Sir

Anthony Hooper".


     668. On 8 October 2013, Martin Edwards sent me an email which addressed,

          amongst other things, POL's relationship with Bond Dickinson. Martin

          wrote (at page 2 of (POL00116181)):


        "I discussed with Hugh whether there were any particular issues you should

        be aware of or raise with Simon related to the wider work they are doing

         with us. In short, no - generally the relationship is working well and BD are

        providing high quality support. They are particularly involved in Project

         Sparrow as you know (I thought Andy Parsons was very good today on the

        compensation policy. If there's time you might want to ask Simon for his

        thoughts on this issue). I probably wouldn't mention the hiccup around the

        due diligence on Sir Anthony Hooper - without Susan around to confirm

        it's not clear exactly what support they were asked to provide ahead of the

        interview (i.e. the blame might partly be with us if we didn't ask them to do

        a thorough pre-vetting). They are also heavily involved in NT strategy work

        and potential agreements with the Fed, where again they are providing high

        quality support."


     669. I am asked what Martin was referring to by "the hiccup around due

          diligence". I cannot now recall this matter precisely and my response

          within this email chain does not shed any further light. From memory, I

          vaguely recall that I had heard that Sir Anthony Hooper had been

          involved in Hillsborough in some way when Jack Straw (who was married

          to Alice Perkins) was Home Secretary. Alice was not involved in Sir

                                  Page 314 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




            Anthony's appointment, but I believe she may have been concerned after

            that time about the potential for the appearance of conflict, which Bond

            Dickinson had not identified from their work on the due diligence. My

            memory of this is very vague, but I do not recall it ever being a matter of

            any consequence.


The death of Martin Griffiths


91. Please consider POL00116133 (Mark Davies' email to you on 24 September

2013), POL00027757 (email chain on 11 October 2013), POL00108132 (email

from you to Angela van den Bogerd on 12 October 2013) and POL00116188

(email from Rodric Williams to you and others on 13 October 2013).


91.1. Why did you consider the exchange between Susan Crichton and Alan

Bates to be "unhelpful" (POL00116133)?


      670. Mr Griffiths' death was a deeply sad event. It has been difficult to write

            about this and I can hardly imagine how much harder it must have been

            for Mrs Griffiths and her family. I am deeply sorry.


      671. As is shown in (POL00116133), the picture of what had happened was

            initially very confused. We were exchanging emails late at night and

            trying to understand what had taken place. Earlier that day I had been

            informed that Alan Bates had said that Mr Griffiths had attempted to take

            his own life and that POL was to blame. There had then been two sets of

            separate information (from Susan Crichton, and the following day from

            Mark Davies) countering this, which suggested that Mr Griffiths had been

            involved in a car accident. In her email to me at 21 :38 on 23 September,

                                   Page 315 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      Susan Crichton explained that she had spoken to Alan Bates again and

      understood that Mr Griffiths had indeed attempted suicide (at page 1 of

      (POL00116133)).


672. As my reply of 22:12 shows, my first priority was to find out how Mr

      Griffiths was (at page 1 of (POL00116133)). We needed to support him

      and his family and so we needed to establish the facts and understand

     what had happened. From past experience of suicide, I knew that nothing

      is ever as simple as it seems and I recognised that there were likely to

      be more aspects to this incident, all of which would be needed to be dealt

     with sensitively, than any of us knew late that night. I really wanted to

      make sure that we did the right thing for Mr Griffiths and his family. I

      immediately offered to reach out and encouraged support and

      condolences from POL. As is indicated in his email of 07:20 on 24

      September 2013, this contact was initially through Mr Griffith's contract

      advisor, who passed our sympathies to his family (at page 1 of

      (POL00116133)).


673. Secondly (and, as I say in my email of 22:12, it was "very definitely'' the

      second priority), I wanted to bring some calm to what was obviously a

     fraught and distressing situation. I was disappointed that Alan Bates had

     jumped to the conclusion that POL was to blame and was voicing these

      opinions in this situation. This was a time of great distress for Mr Griffiths'

     family (and for my colleagues who were handling this tragedy) and I felt

      that accusations of blame were unhelpful.




                              Page 316 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      674. This is what I intended to express in my comment about his exchange

           being "unhelpful': it was an expression of regret and disappointment.

           Both in this situation and going forwards into mediation, I wanted to build

           a relationship of trust with SPMs and challenge Alan Bates' assumption

           that POL was uncaring or could not be relied upon. I recognise now that

           he was, of course, right, and as was shown in the group litigation and

           Court of Appeal judgments, his mistrust of how POL had treated SPMs

           was entirely well-founded.


91.2. Why did you request someone to look in Mr Griffiths' background,

including his mental health?


      675. First and foremost, I wanted to support Mr Griffiths and his family and

           offer what possible care we could. When I received the sad news of Mr

           Griffiths' passing on 11 October 2013, his family were my first thought.

           As I said in my email of 21 :28 responding to the news, I have close

           personal experience of suicides and additionally had ministered to

           families where loved ones had taken their own lives. I was very aware

           both that the background to suicide can be complex and is sometimes

           not apparent until long after the fact, and that there is often a desire by

           those closely affected by such a death to look for an explanation

           (POL00027757).


      676. As my email shows, I wanted to offer my personal assistance in any way

           which would be helpful. I offered to speak to or meet with Mr Griffiths'

           family. This was something I had done in other cases where SPMs or

           their families had lost loved ones and I offered to do it here, if it was

                                  Page 317 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     something that would help them. I wanted them to understand, as I said

     in my email, that we would look after them as much as we could and as

     much as they would allow.


677. Secondary to this, but also very important, was the duty of care I owed

     to my colleagues at POL. I was conscious that Glenn Chester knew Mr

     Griffiths best and was closest to him and I wanted to ensure that Glenn

     received support. As I note later in my email, I was aware of the toll that

     this incident had taken on Angela Van Den Bogerd and did not want to

     put further strain on her when deciding who would undertake which tasks

     going forward. Throughout my involvement, I tried to offer care and

     support to those involved in this deeply sad event before looking to the

     needs of the business.


678. Whilst supporting the people involved was my major concern - Mr

     Griffiths' family being the top priority - I did also need to understand what

     had happened from a business perspective. It was my duty to provide

     information to the POL Board and I wanted to give them a full and

     accurate picture. As I said in my email, I had previously been given

     information suggesting that there were pre-existing mental health and/or

     family issues. I cannot recall who had suggested this but, as I note there,

     we did not yet have a full formal report into the incident and so I asked

     for what background we had, including whether or not this suggestion

     had been confirmed.


679. I recognise that such rumours are unhelpful. I am so sorry, especially to

     Mr Griffiths' family, because reading this now it seems a very intrusive

                            Page 318 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




           question. I was clumsily trying to establish the facts and, although this

           did need to be done, I should have waited.


91.3 What was "Alan's reaction" to Mr Griffiths' death? What were your views on

his reaction?


      680. This imperative to try and understand what had taken place is also clear

           from the email I sent to Angela Van Den Bogerd on 12 October 2013, the

           day after receiving the news of Mr Griffiths' death (POL00108132). As I

           said there, this was a tragic case, and, inevitably, one with many complex

           factors involved. However, especially given all the work that was going

           on at the time, I wanted us to be proactive in learning from it, if there was

            learning to be done. From a business perspective, we also needed to

            understand what role, if any, POL may be asked to play in any

           subsequent coronial proceedings. I can see that Rodric Williams

            provided legal advice on this issue and others by email on 13 October

           2013 (POL00116188).


      681. In my email on 12 October 2013, I note that Alan Bates' reaction to Mr

            Griffiths' death was one reason why it was so important for us to do this

           work (at page 1 of (POL00108132)). As set out in my response to

           Question 91.1 above, Alan Bates' initial response had been one of anger

           and blame. Those working more closely with Alan Bates will be able to

            recall this better but, my sense of the situation was that he had been very

           difficult to deal with and was essentially accusing POL of causing Mr

            Griffiths' death.



                                   Page 319 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     682. Although his reaction, at the time and even more so with hindsight, was

           understandable, I was concerned that he was reaching conclusions

          without evidence and that his views would lead to a breakdown of trust

          which would hinder the Working Group and Mediation Scheme and

           prevent them from bringing about positive changes for SPMs. My role

          was to demonstrate the very sincere care that I felt for Mr Griffiths and

           his family (and that I wanted POL to show to them throughout), and, at

          the same time, to attempt to steer a route through this incredibly

           distressing situation and learn any lessons we could, especially if POL

          was implicated in any way.


     683. This was very difficult to navigate. My colleagues at POL were

           desperately sorry, especially those who knew Mr Griffiths and had been

          working on his case, and Alan Bates' attitude of blame would make

          working together harder. Nonetheless, it was essential that we did

           continue working together.


91.4. What effect, if any, did Mr Griffiths' death have on how you and POL

handled SPMs' complaints concerning the Horizon IT System?


     684. For me, Mr Griffiths' death heightened the importance of the Mediation

           Scheme and the need to provide answers and resolution to the SPMs

           involved. It reinforced the need to understand our culture, how

           complaints were dealt with, and how we could support SPMs in all

           aspects of their professional life.


     685. This was a tragedy that affected all those involved. As I emphasised in

           my email of 12 October 2013 discussed above, I wanted to know that
                                   Page 320 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




                senior managers involved were following the correct procedures and

                whether any other cases needed to be reviewed or any colleagues re-

                briefed. I also wanted to ensure that any challenge to POL's culture

                needed to be taken seriously.


Brian Altman QC's Second Advice


92. Please consider POL00006581 (Brian Altman KC's advice of 15 October

2013).


92.1. Please explain if and when you reviewed Mr Altman's advice.


         686.     did not read Brian Altman QC's advice of 15 October 2013

                (POL00006581) until it was provided to me in the course of this Inquiry.


         687. As I have explained above, I have no legal experience or expertise myself

                and I was entirely reliant on POL's legal team. On matters such as legal

                advice I had trust in particularly POL's GC (Susan Crichton, then Chris

                Aujard, then Jane Macleod) to keep me abreast of any relevant legal

                issues.


92.2. Please consider paragraphs 70 and 130 of Mr Altman's advice. Were you

aware at the time Mr Altman prepared his advice that there had been BEDs in

legacy Horizon? If so, please explain the basis on which POL accepted Mr

Altman's advice to limit its review of past convictions to 1 January 2010.


92.3. What was your view of Mr Altman's statement that the Callendar Square bug

"represents an isolated instance, which has no relevance to events falling within

CK's review but if during mediation an individual complained of, for instance,

                                      Page 321 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




the identical issue during the period before the 2006 fix. then the Falkirk event

would almost certainly fall for disclosure as being a highly material issue in that

case".


         688. I did not read Brian Altman QC's advice of 15 October 2013

              (POL00006581) until it was provided to me in the course of this Inquiry.

              I have no legal experience or expertise myself and I trusted POL's GC

              (at this time, Susan Crichton then Chris Aujard) to keep me abreast of

              any relevant legal issues.


         689. As I set out in my response to Question 82 above, I was informed about

              Mr Altman QC's work only in very general terms: I understood that he

              was evaluating the review of past prosecutions being conducted by our

              external lawyers, Cartwright King. The updates I received were positive

              (see POL00027150; POL00027667; POL00027134) and I took from

              them that the approach that had been adopted was fundamentally sound.


         690. In drafting this statement, I have considered the contents of paragraphs

              70 and 130 and the comments on the Callendar Square bug which the

              Inquiry has identified. I did not read the advice at the time and so had no

              view on Mr Altman QC's comments. I do not recall being briefed on these

              points and do not think that the legal basis for any consequential

              decisions was explained to me. Given this, I cannot say on what basis

              POL accepted or acted upon the advice received.


92.4. Please explain what steps POL took in relation to past convictions based on

Horizon data following this advice.


                                     Page 322 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      691. As I have explained, I did not see Mr Altman QC's advice and was only

           briefed in broad terms on his work.


      692. My understanding based on the information given to me by those

           including POL's GC and wider legal team, was that Cartwright King had

           reviewed POL's approach to past prosecutions, identified cases where

           disclosure needed to be made, and had notified the Defence in those

           cases. Mr Altman QC had been instructed to consider the adequacy of

           this review and had concluded that it was "fundamentally sound''. I am

           not a lawyer and have no expertise or experience of matters of criminal

           law but I was assured, and I accepted, that we were doing everything

           that we needed to do.


POL's change in approach to the Mediation Scheme


93. Please describe POL's approach to the SPMs' complaints relating to Horizon

thereafter and your involvement with the same. Please explain to what extent

you communicated information about such complaints and POL's response to

the same to the Board, ShEx/UKGI or BEIS. The following paragraphs are not

intended to limit your response to this request.


      693. The questions immediately preceding this in the Request concern Brian

           Altman QC's advice, which was dated 15 October 2013. I am then asked,

           by the Inquiry, to describe POL's approach to the complaints of SPMR's

           "thereafter", which I am taking to mean after the events I describe

           immediately above, in October and November 2013.




                                   Page 323 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




         694. The Board, ShEx / UKGI and BEIS were briefed regularly, as was the

              case before this timeframe.


         695. Because the HMG NED sat on the Board and on the Sparrow Sub-

              committee, the Government was fully aware of all matters brought to

              those meetings.


         696. In response to questions 94 to 97 below, I set out the chronology of

              meetings (including Board, Steering Group and ExCo) and the matters

              which were discussed on each occasion. Those are examples of the way

              in which POL's directors were kept informed of the on-going progress of

              complaints and investigations into those matters.


         697. Rarely would those meetings discuss individual cases in detail. Instead,

              those meetings would be used to discuss and explore thematic and

              strategic issues.


94. Please consider POL00027136 (your report to the Board dated 24

October 2013) and POL00021519 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 31 October

2013):


94.1. Please explain what you told the Board regarding the Second Sight review,

the Mediation Scheme and POL's approach to criminal prosecutions.


         698. I cannot specifically recall the discussions in this meeting and so am

              unable to add anything beyond what is recorded in the contemporaneous

              documents.




                                    Page 324 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




699. As these set out, in my CEO report of 24 October 2013 I provided an

     update on the Mediation Scheme. I explained that Cartwright King were

     conducting a review of past prosecutions to assess whether POL had

     complied with its duty of disclosure, and in particular whether POL was

     under a duty to disclose the findings of the Second Sight report and

     associated issues. The expression "associated issues" was included in

     the CEO report by members of my team. I do not recall questioning what

     this meant at the time. I recorded that Cartwright King had concluded that

     further disclosure to the defence teams was appropriate in 10 of the 301

     cases reviewed, writing to the teams to tell them (at page 5 of

     (POL00027136) ).


700. I went on to explain that a paper would be submitted to the November

     ARC which would consider POL's overarching policy in respect of

     investigating and prosecuting future cases, and which would be informed

     by a report being prepared by Brian Altman QC which would consider the

     effectiveness of our current approach to prosecutions more broadly (at

     page 5 of (POL00027136)). As I explained in my response to question

     92, I did not read Mr Altman QC's advice of 15 October 2013

     (POL00006581) until it was provided to me in the course of this Inquiry,

     and was not aware at the time that he had provided it as a separate piece

     of written work. I have no legal experience or expertise myself and so

     was entirely reliant on POL's legal team and, particularly, POL's GCs

     (Susan Crichton, Chris Aujard, then Jane Macleod) to keep me abreast

     of any relevant legal issues and to facilitate my understanding of legal



                           Page 325 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     advice (both its content and the format in which it would normally be

     given).


701. My understanding of these issues was based on the updates I received

     from my legal team, chiefly Susan, in briefings and papers prepared for

     the POL Board, such as her paper dated 18 September 2013 which set

     out the work being done by Cartwright King and Brian Altman QC for the

     POL Board meeting on 25 September 2013 (at pages 40 to 43 of

     (POL00027907) ).


702. The text of the CEO report itself was drafted for me by others.

     Contemporaneous emails show that Rodric Williams, Andy Holt, and

     Martin Edwards all had input into this part of this particular report

     (POL00108163) and that Chris Aujard and Belinda Crowe were asked

     to review and approve the text suggested (at pages 3 to 5 of

     (POL00114194)).


703. This input from others was necessary given my role as CEO. I had to

     have sufficient understanding to explain and respond to questions at a

     high level, but the CEO report covered a wide array of work. I could not

     have a detailed knowledge of every part of it, nor, particularly where it

     concerned legal or technical knowledge, could I be an expert on every

     issue within it. However, any text which appeared in my report would

     have been either written by or checked by the ExCo Director responsible

     for the relevant area of work. I relied on their input for this and to brief me

     on whatever I needed to know to explain it to the satisfaction of the POL

     Board.

                             Page 326 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      704. In the meeting itself, I can see that the report was noted and only a few

           specific items were discussed, including a brief discussion of Project

           Sparrow which explained that Sir Anthony Hooper had been appointed

           as Chair and setting out how the work was progressing (at pages 4 to 5

           of (POL00021519)). I did not usually present my reports in full as there

           were always many other papers to consider and discuss; the whole report

           would of course be available for the POL Board to read, before and

           indeed after the meeting. Where I could, I would answer questions, with

           or without the assistance of others present who may be working on the

           projects themselves. If there were questions I could not answer, they

           would be passed by the Company Secretary, Alwen Lyons, to the

           relevant Director.


      705. As an example, I can see that the minutes record that "there were likely

           to be up to 150 cases put to the Working Party for a decision on whether

           they progress into the mediation process" (at page 5 of (POL00021519)).

           This is not something contained within my CEO report, so I can only

           assume that this was a figure provided by one of the other people present

           who had knowledge of Project Sparrow. As Susan did not attend that day

           it may have been Alwen Lyons, who was also close to that work, but I am

           speculating: I cannot recall this question or this response.


94.2. Please expand on the following from your report to the Board: "Our

external firm of criminal solicitors, Cartwright King (CK), has now completed a

review of 301 cases subject to past prosecution to identify whether we have a

duty to disclose the findings of the Second Sight report and associated issues".


                                  Page 327 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




What were the associated issues?


       706. As set out above, this part of my report was drafted for me by others, and

             I relied upon the briefings being given to me by my legal team for my

            wider knowledge and understanding. I do not have any specific

             recollection now of what the phrase "associated issues" refers to, but I

            can see that it is used verbatim in other documents from around this time,

             including the POL ARC Board Sub-Committee Briefing Book which

            also contains an update on this work (at page 35 of (POL00027138)).


       707. Cartwright King were disclosing both the Second Sight Report and Helen

             Rose Report by this point, so it is possible that whoever drafted this

            section of the Report was referring to either of those Reports, however, I

            was not aware of the Helen Rose Report at this time and so cannot say

             if this was the case or not.


94.3. Were you aware of the Helen Rose report at this point in time? If not, why

not?


       708. Please see the answer that I have given at paragraphs 378 and 379

            above as to my knowledge of the Helen Rose Report.


       709. In respect of Brian Altman QC's review, I did not read the advices

            themselves (where the Helen Rose Report is mentioned by name, (at

             page 5 of (POL00006801 ); page 10 of (POL00006801 ); page 20 of

             (POL00006803); page 54 of (POL00006803)).


       710. Although the issues at the Lepton branch were discussed in the Interim

             Report, it was not until the Briefing Report Part Two, dated 21 August
                                    Page 328 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     2015, that the Helen Rose Report was referred to by name in relation to

     these issues (at pages 14 to 15 of (POl00030160)). As set out in

     paragraph 379 above, I do not recall seeing the January 2014 Chris

     Aujard paper (POl00147248), but I may have been briefed about it at

     the time.


711. Perhaps the clearest indication that I was not aware of the report in

     October 2013 was that the discussions which took place by email

     between Rodric Williams and Martin Edwards on 23 and 24 October 2013

     while they were preparing the text for my CEO report, indicate that (i)

     myself and the POL Board were not aware of the Helen Rose Report;

     and (ii) there was a decision made not to include reference to it in the text

     then provided to me (POl00108163).


712. Subsequent emails suggest that Martin requested a briefing to be

     prepared for me on these issues on 28 October 2013 (POl00108161 ).

     In this chain, Martin provides Belinda Crowe (cc'ing Chris Aujard,

     Rodric Williams, and Sarah Paddison) with the final text on Project

     Sparrow for the CEO's report and asks Belinda to coordinate the briefing

     for me ahead of the POL Board to prepare me for any questions from the

     NEDs. Although we know that the CEO report text he sends does not

     address the Helen Rose Report, he asks for them to prepare a short

     briefing    addressing,     amongst     other   things   (at   page   1    of

     (POl00108161 )):


   "Any explanation of the issues around the review of past criminal cases,

   which Rodric can help provide, covering: a) what exactly has been

                               Page 329 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          disclosed so far; and b) our best guess of the implications of these

          disclosures (i.e. explaining that at this stage we have no reason to believe

          this means past cases will be found to be unsafe). I've attached an email

          from Rodric which contains some of the answers to these questions, but

          would be useful to have this together in one place."


      713. The attached emails from Rodric referred to are the ones in the chain

            discussed above (POL00108163). The POL Board Meeting referred to

            is the one which takes place on 31 October 2013 and the material

            provided to the POL Board makes no reference to the Helen Rose

            Report. I have not been able to locate the briefing referred to, if it was

            prepared, and I do not recall being briefed on the Helen Rose Report at

            this stage.


      714. It is difficult to say why I was not aware of the Helen Rose Report at this

            time without simply engaging in speculation. I was receiving high-level

            briefings from members of my legal team who were aware of these

            issues, most notably Susan Crichton and Rodric Williams. They did not,

            as far as I can recall, brief me on this matter at this time.


94.4. Please explain the basis on which you believed that POL should not

disclose Second Sight's interim report and I or the Helen Rose report to SPMs

convicted on the basis of data produced by Horizon.


      715. I am not a legal expert and have no knowledge or expertise of disclosure

            obligations in the context of criminal or civil proceedings. My

            understanding, based on what I was told by my GC and POL's legal team

           was that we had instructed our external lawyers, Cartwright King, to
                                    Page 330 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     investigate these issues and I assumed that this work was being done

     fully, fairly, and competently. I had no expertise which would enable me

     to assess this myself but my understanding of what I had been told of

     Brian Altman QC's work was that the processes we had put in place were

     solid.


716. Although I was not aware of these underlying discussions at the time, I

     can see from the documents that Rodric Williams discussed the

     disclosure of both documents on 10 July 2013 (POl00066789).

     Cartwright King advised that they should be disclosed and Rodric

     appears to accept this and instructs that appropriate disclosure be made.

     On 15 January 2014, Martin Smith of Cartwright King appears to confirm

     to Chris Aujard that the documents have been disclosed in cases where

     Cartwright King assessed that they should be (POl00006776). This

     appears to have been confirmed to Bond Dickinson and is referred to in

     their    risk   management    document    dated    24   January     2015

     (POl00040061 ). I can see that I state in my CEO report of 24 October

     2013 that Cartwright King had concluded that disclosure was appropriate

     in 10 cases and had written to the defence in each case to notify them of

     this (at page 5 of (POl00027136)).


717. Leaving aside the fact that I do not think I was aware of the Helen Rose

     Report at this time, I had no belief one way or the other as to whether

     these documents were or were not disclosable: I simply was not qualified

     to make this assessment. I relied upon those who were qualified to make

     that determination and to perform consequential actions, including


                           Page 331 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           disclosure, in cases where that was appropriate. Insofar as I was

           receiving updates on this process, I was told that disclosure was being

           made in cases where it was deemed appropriate.


95. Please consider POl00116189 (email from Andy Holt to you and others on

16 October 2013) and POl00116190 (slides for Sparrow Weekly Steering

Group).


      718. The Inquiry directs my attention to (POl00116189), an email which Andy

           Holt sent to me, and others due to attend the next day's Sparrow Steering

           Meeting, on 16 October 2013. Attached to it was a PowerPoint document

           entitled ""Sparrow Weekly Steering Group 17th October 2013"."

           (POl00116190).


      719. The agenda, at the second slide of the PowerPoint deck, begins with

           "Update on Brian Altman's work". The slides do not contain any detail

           about what that update was. These slides were of course sent the day

           after Brian Altman QC completed his advice, as I now know.


95.1. What update was given on Brian Altman KC's work?


      720. I have not seen any minutes of this meeting disclosed by the Inquiry. I

           can see from an email from Andy Holt to me on 20 October 2013

           (POl00027677) that Rodric Williams had provided an update at the

           Steering Group meeting on Brian Altman QC's work to date. I am unable

           to assist the Inquiry in describing the nature of the update on Brian

           Altman QC's work. I do not recall this, more than 10 years later.


95.2. Did the committee discuss Simon Clarke's advices? If not, why not?
                                 Page 332 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      721. I do not recall other advices being discussed at the meeting. There is no

             mention of these in the slides, nor in Rod Williams' email.


96. Please consider POL00027150 (agenda for POL Executive Committee on 12

November 2013), POL00038678 (minutes of the POL Audit, Risk and Compliance

Sub-Committee on 19 November 2013), POL00021520 (minutes of the POL

Board meeting on 27 November 2013), POL00026626 (meeting pack to former

meeting), POL00099976 (email from Alwen Lyons to you and others on 29

November 2013), POL00099977 (attachment to the prior email) POL00100193

(note on prosecution policy dated 4 February 2014), POL00030900 (note on

prosecution policy dated 7 February 2014), POL00027692 (email chain between

7 - 10 February between ARC members), POL00100223 (your email to Alasdair

Marnoch on 11 February 2014), POL00021424 (minutes of POL Audit, Risk and

Compliance Committee on 11 February 2014) and POL00116285 (email from

Chris Aujard to you on 23 February 2014). Please describe your involvement

and knowledge of the discussions concerning POL's change in prosecutorial

policy. Without limiting your response to this paragraph, please address the

following:


      722. I am asked by the Inquiry about my involvement in, and knowledge of,

             the discussions within POL concerning its changes in prosecutorial policy

             between November 2013 and February 2014.


      723. My 24 October 2013 CEO report (POL00027136) stated at page 5: "We

             will submit a paper to the November ARC reviewing our overall policy for

             investigating and prosecuting future cases." That gave rise to Chris

             Aujard's Prosecutions Policy paper on 8 November 2013 (at page 2 at

                                   Page 333 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     (POL00027150)). That paper was considered by an ExCo meeting which

     I attended on 12 November 2013. I do not recall that meeting in any

     detail.


724. I delivered my CEO report on 31 October 2013 at the Board meeting

     (POL00021519). A briefing was prepared for me, in addition to what was

     in the CEO report, at the request of Martin Edwards. This was to include

     "anything more to say on the prosecutions 'policy' paper" (at page 2 of

     (POL00108161 )). I have not been able to identify that briefing within the

     documents disclosed by the Inquiry and do not recall it.


725. I next attended the ARC meeting on 19 November 2013, which took place

     by conference call (POL00038678). The minutes record in some detail

     the update which Chris Aujard gave the Sub-Committee in relation to

     prosecutions. In summary:


a.   Chris updated the Sub-Committee on the current and historical approach

     and sought views on potential changes to the policy "before any formal

     recommendation could be made for any changes to the prosecutions

     policy".


b.   The Sub-Committee raised various concerns with the proposal including

     that any changes now "might influence the mediation process by raising

     questions on previous prosecutions", and whether prosecutions served

     an important deterrence function.




                           Page 334 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




c.   The Sub-Committee asked whether, if prosecutions stopped, "the

     business would still be able to recover branch losses through the Civil

     Courts". Chris said that this would be "slower and not recover as much".


d.   I thanked the Sub-Committee for these challenges and stated that there

     were other methods of deterrence in addition to this.


e.   I said that the business intended to be more circumspect in the cases it

     chose to take.


f.   The decision was to be taken at the January Board.


726. The Board met on 27 November 2013 (POL00021520). There was

     discussion of the approach to future prosecutions:


         "Alasdair Marnoch, Chairman of the ARC, reported that a paper on

         future prosecutions had been discussed at the ARC but that no

         decision had been taken. Chris Aujard explained that the Business

         had no special prosecuting rights but brought cases in the way that

         any individual could do. The CEO explained that prosecutions were

         not brought lightly and the Business was reviewing its approach

         alongside other deterrents, such as suspending, or giving notice, to a

         sub-postmaster.


         . . . The Board agreed that it would be appropriate to consider the

         future approach to prosecutions at a future Board alongside the

         improved support processes for sub-postmasters which should see a

         reduction in cases."


                            Page 335 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




727. Chris and Angela Van Den Bogerd had prepared a paper as an Update

     on Horizon. It described that Project Sparrow initially "comprised two

     main initiatives, both of which were launched in response to the Second

     Sight Report released in July 2013": the establishment of a mediation

     scheme, and the development of a business improvement programme

     ("BIP"). The Steering Group had "recently agreed that the Post Office's

     interests would be better served, and greater focus would be achieved,

     by separating these activities into two distinct projects with Belinda

     Crowe being appointed as Programme Director for the first (the

     mediation scheme) and Angela Van Den Bogerd acting as Programme

     Director for the second (the BIP)" (at page 2 of (POL00026626)).


728. A Status Report for the POL Board, dated 4 December 2013, records

     that Chris and Angela were to "consider future approach to prosecutions

     alongside the improved support processes for sub-postmasters"(at page

     4 of (POL00099991)), arising from the November 2013 meeting.


729. Cartwright King produced a note entitled "Observations and Analysis of

     the Cartwright King Prosecution Review Process Relating to duties of

     disclosure   in   Criminal Prosecutions" dated    4   December     2013

     (POL00040194).


730. I attended the Initial Complaints Review & Case Mediation Scheme

     Steering Group on 16 December 2013 (POL00100032). Chris did not

     attend. There is no record of discussion of prosecution policy in the

     minutes.



                           Page 336 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




731. On 6 January 2014 I received a written briefing for my one-to-one with

     Alice Perkins (POL00116241 ). It included the prosecutions policy as an

     area "where it might be useful to update Alice". The update I was given

     was:


         "Firstly Hugh is making good progress on the paper on our approach

         to Prosecutions which will shortly be going to ExCo and then the

         Board ..."


732. The Board met on 21 January 2014 (POL00010084). An updated version

     of the Status Report showed that the action assigned to Chris and Angela

     in respect of the future approach to prosecutions was "Underway; being

     led by Hugh Flemington" (page 54).


733. The Board did not discuss the prosecution policy, but in a document

     prepared for the meeting by Chris it said, "it is anticipated that POL's

     approach to criminal prosecutions will be discussed at the February 2014

     Board meeting" (page 68). I am not clear from the documents I have seen

     in preparing this witness statement, when or by whom the decision was

     taken not to discuss the matter at the January meeting as had initially

     been planned. However, I see that the Board "agreed that the February

     ARC would consider an update on Sparrow including lessons learned

     along   with     the   Prosecuting   Authority paper"   (at   page   5   of

     (POL00021521 )).


734. Belinda sent a briefing to Alice and me on 21 January 2014 for a meeting

     with Lord Arbuthnot, ahead of a meeting on 28 January 2014

     (POL00093696). As part of the proposed agenda for that meeting, it was
                              Page 337 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     suggested that we would explain to Lord Arbuthnot that the Board was

     overseeing a review of prosecutions, and clarify with Lord Arbuthnot the

     basis of such prosecutions.


735. That      briefing   note was   updated    the   day   before   the   meeting

     (POL00100124). This included a speaking note which said, among other

     things:


        "Given that we are now suspending fewer people and expect to

        prosecute fewer too the Board is reviewing Post Office's approach to

        prosecutions. Although we are conscious that we need to design a

        prosecution policy which fits with the new approach and not the old

        prosecution volumes."


736. A note of the meeting includes, in this regard (at page 136 of

     (POL00090358) ):


        "PV then raised Post office's prosecution policy. First she clarified with

        JA that Post Office was not a prosecuting authority and had not been

        so since 1985. Since 1985 Post Office had been taking forward private

        prosecutions on the same basis as any company or individual in

        England and Wales can. The Post Office Board had not yet taken a

        view on what the final policy should be but they were considering how

        (including looking at how retailers and banks prosecute) what the

        policy should be moving forward particularly as Post Office expected

        the numbers prosecuted to decrease in a similar way to the decrease

        in suspensions. JA commented that this would be a difficult dilemma


                              Page 338 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




         for Post Office to balance supporting their agents and protecting

         public money."


737. Chris Aujard's paper on prosecution policy was sent by email to Alwen

     Lyons, Rodric Williams and Belinda Crowe on 5 February 2014

     (POL00027760). It was noted in an email from David Oliver that I had

     "asked if ExCo could consider this paper [as] quickly as possible". I had

     also asked for Kevin Gilliland, Neil Hayward and Chris Day to sign off the

     paper. The paper was forwarded to me (POL00100192).


738. Chris Day, as Chief Financial Officer, responded the next day saying that

     he supported Chris' approach but wanted "reassurance that the process

     of reviewing each case against the range of factors ... is no more onerous

     and time-consuming ... than the current one".


739. In discussing Chris Aujard's paper by email, Alice raised a specific

     concern: why should POL prosecute its own matters when other financial

     institutions were content to hand over the responsibility of prosecution to

     the CPS? I described Alice's questions as "a good set of challenges" in

     an email to Chris Aujard, and noted in response that our business was

     significantly larger (by many multiples) than most businesses that Brian

     Altman QC had compared us to (POL00027688).


740. This email which I sent shows some knowledge of the detail of the advice

     given by Brian Altman QC. I still do not think I had read his written advice

     at this stage, but rather I was aware of certain points of it in some detail

     from other sources.


                            Page 339 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




741. Alasdair Marnoch replied to Alice. I replied to Alasdair. Alasdair shared

     Alice's concerns, as well as others. I shared my thoughts with the group

     in relation to the scale of the business (largely repeating what I had said

     to Chris separately) (POL00027692).


742. Susannah Hooper had similar concerns to those of Alice and Alasdair

     (POL00027687).


743. I sent an email to Alasdair Marnoch, the chair of the ARC, on 11 February

     2014 (POL00100223):


         "Hi Alasdair


         "As I'm going to be travelling during the ARC call and may have

         problems with the signal, I thought I'd send you quick note in advance

         summarising my thoughts on the prosecutions paper.


         In short, on balance I agree with the recommendation to pursue option

         B, at least for the time being.


         As I set out in my email on Sunday, I do believe there are a number

         of factors which distinguish us from other financial institutions who are

         content not to pursue their own prosecutions - our scale, our unique

         relationship with sub-postmasters, the amount of cash that is handled

         by our branches (and in many cases by individuals who are not

         employees), our large number of vulnerable customers who are more

         easily defrauded, and the fact that public money is at stake.




                             Page 340 of 861
                                                                      WITN01020100




While I can appreciate the attractiveness of a 'clean' option like C, the

three key considerations in my mind are as follows:


      With the sub-postmaster mediation process underway and

       continued close interest from the media and MPs in all our

       actions in this area, any change of policy is likely to be closely

       scrutinised and over-interpreted - with the likely inference

       drawn that this is an admission that we were wrong to pursue

       prosecutions in the past. This is compounded by the fact that

       we will be shortly launching the procurement process for the

       replacement to the Horizon system - something which we were

       due to do now in any case, but the media will inevitably attempt

       to link the two stories and suggest this is an admission that we

       needed to fundamentally overhaul our systems and processes

       in the wake of the Second Sight report. This will overshadow

       the positive story we have about the actual changes we're

       making    in    the   context of the    Business    Improvement

       Programme.


      Secondly, I do believe there is a need to have an effective

       deterrent effect and to protect our vulnerable customers. If the

       view is correct that the CPS is overstretched, then relying on

       the CPS is likely to be inadequate in this respect. By retaining

       the option to pursue prosecutions in certain circumstances, but

       putting in place effective filters to reduce substantially the

       number of cases which go down this route and outsourcing the


                      Page 341 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




                associated investigatory activity, we will still be able to meet

                these objectives while extracting the PR and operating cost

                benefits of option C.


               Thirdly, I do not believe it is currently in the business interests

                (including those going through the mediation process) to put

                anything relating to this policy adjustment on our website, nor

                to communicate that adjustment proactively.        The few cases

                coming through, the fact that fewer 'on hold' cases will proceed

                to prosecution and the improved ways of working should speak

                for themselves. We may want to revisit this view over time and

                the end of the mediation process would be a sensible moment

                to do that.


         If the ARC agree with the overall conclusion in the paper, we should

         of course review the situation in 12 months and periodically thereafter

         to check that the filters are operating as effectively as intended and

         we're still striking the right balance between these difficult situations."


744. I did then go on to join the ARC meeting by conference call (as did other

     attendees)    (POL00021424).       The     Sub-Committee      approved     the

     recommendation in the paper.


745. The recommendation was different from Chris Aujard's original

     recommendation in his initial paper in November 2013. The final version

     (POL00030900) cross-referred to the November paper and reached the

     following conclusion:


                              Page 342 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




   "6.1 It is proposed that:


   a) A revised prosecution policy be implemented and applied against more

   stringent financial and conduct criteria set out in paragraphs 4.3 and 4.4.


   b) Consideration be given to whether the policy be published on our website

   and if so what elements of it, to comply with best practice and transparency

   while not undermining our ability to implement the policy.


   c) The new policy, its interpretation and application be reviewed by a

   committee of ExCo every twelve months.


   d) An individual within Post Office Limited be appointed to take

   responsibility for deciding whether or not an individual case should be

   prosecuted against that policy (currently this accountability is shared across

   a number of individuals).


   e) Any prosecutions be conducted through an external law firm.


   t) The Communications team maintain a living strategy for dealing with all

   PR issues arising from any and all prosecutions.


   g) In conjunction with BIP, we work to improve our civil recovery operation

   to maximise the losses it can recover."


746. An email which I sent to Mark Davies after the ARC shows that I was

     involved   in   conversations about POL's communications on             the

     prosecutions policy (POL00116262). I shared the ARC's discussion of

     communications considerations with Mark (and others), noting that "the



                               Page 343 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




              same point was made by Alice re the comms sensitivities, ie., avoiding

              the conflation of various unrelated events,, .. "


         747. On 13 February 2014, the ExCo discussed prosecution policy, receiving

              a copy of Chris Aujard's latest report (POL00027478).


         748. On 21 February 2014, whilst I was on holiday, I sent some comments on

              the prosecutions paper to Angela, Belinda, Chris Aujard and Mark

              (POL00116281 ). Chris replied with brief comments in line with mine

              (POL00116285).


         749. On 26 February 2014, the POL Board, as agenda item 17, considered a

              Review of the Current Prosecution Policy (at pages 2 to 3 of

              (POL00021522)). The POL Board noted the summary of discussions

              which had taken place at ARC and ExCo and approved the

              implementation of the option which Chris had recommended in his final

              version of the paper.


96.1. Please explain to what extent you considered it appropriate to bring

criminal, rather than civil, proceedings against SPMs because of the perceived

efficiency of the former. Did you and others in senior management at the Post

Office    understand     the   difference     between     criminal   prosecutions   and

proceedings in the civil courts?


         750. In the context of decisions which POL made between November 2013

              and February 2014, the Inquiry has asked that I explain the extent to

              which I considered it appropriate to bring criminal, rather than civil,




                                      Page 344 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     proceedings against SPMRs because of the perceived efficiency of

     criminal proceedings.


751. I understand the premise of the question to be Chris Aujard's November

     2013 paper on Prosecution Policy (at pages 2 to 7 of (POL00027150))

     which was provided to ExCo for its meeting on 12 November 2013. At

     paragraph 4.4, Chris states:


   "Option a) above was felt to be, at best, sub-optimal and was not explored

   to any great extent, other than to ask the question of Brian Altman whether

   it was "efficient" in terms of the criminal process (which it is)"


752. This was in the context of Chris' paper discussing the future of the

     business's prosecutions policy. Option a) in Chris' paper was "preserving

     the status quo". The paper concluded that it was appropriate for POL to

     prefer:


   "Ceasing all prosecutorial activities as per option c) BUT coupled with work

    (as yet not formally defined but some of which has already started as part

   of project Sparrow and NT):


    to gather better Ml from the network;


    to improve the overall control framework around the branch network; and


    to provide more support to sub-postmasters."


753. I am not entirely clear in what way Chris and Brian Altman QC considered

     that criminal prosecutions were "efficienf', and I do not recall the nature

     of any discussion of this point at ExCo or in any other setting. To the
                             Page 345 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           extent that it means that a criminal prosecution was an efficient method

           of recovering lost funds from an SPM, that is not a consideration that I

           recall playing any material part in my thinking at this time (if I was aware

           of it at all).


96.2. Please set out your recollection of the Board's discussion on 27

November 2013 relating to POl's approach to past prosecutions and/ or the

Mediation Scheme. In particular, please address the following:


96.2.1. Why did the Steering Group decide that "Post Office's interests would

be better served, and greater focus would be achieved, by separating these

activities into two distinct projects with Belinda Crowe being appointed as

Programme Director for the first (the mediation scheme) and Angela Van Den

Bogerd acting as Programme Director for the second (the BIP)". What interests

of POL were being referred to here?


      754. By separating out the projects of the Mediation Scheme and the

           establishing of the BIP, POL was able to ensure far greater focus was

           placed on actions to assist post offices. For example, Angela Van Den

           Bogerd was encouraged to be rigorous in identifying all possible

           improvements, which would then be prioritised. Getting colleagues to be

           open about past shortcomings was not easy but was imperative. The

           Mediation Scheme was to be run separately and overseen by Belinda

           Crowe to ensure the clear accountability and project management which

           had been missing previously on Second Sight's work.


96.2.2. On what basis did the Working Group anticipate that they would receive

only around 75 applications to the mediation scheme?
                                  Page 346 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




     755. I do not now recall the basis on which the Working Group made this

           assessment.


96.2.3. How was the budget for the mediation scheme agreed? What factors

were taken into account when increasing the budget from 1.3m to 2.2m?


     756. The ARC met on 19 November 2013 (POL00038678). The POL Board

           then met on 27 November 2013. I address that meeting elsewhere in this

           statement in more detail, at paragraphs 726 to 727, 764 and 783. The

           meeting pack prepared for that meeting included a paper by Chris Aujard,

           dated 21 November 2013 (at page 2 of (POL00026626)) headed "Project

           Sparrow Update". At paragraphs 3.5 to 3.6 it stated:


         "3.5 The scheme has received more applications than originally anticipated

         (140 as against an initial planning estimate of 75) and, given this fact and

         the complexity of some of the applications, additional resources have now

         been allocated to the project, principally aimed at ensuring that each

         application is investigated thoroughly and professionally. It is expected that

         the full team will be in place by 6 December 2013.


         3.6 The increased number of applications will also increase the overall

         costs of the scheme, much of which will be incurred on a "per case" basis.

         Thus, an initial budget of 1.3m (ex vat) based on 75 applications has been

         increased to 2.2m (ex vat) for 130 cases proceeding all the way through

         to a concluded mediation. This does not included the costs of any financial

         compensation which may be offered to facilitate resolution of individual

         cases (as to which, see para's [sic] 3.8 and 3.9 below [re. "expectation

         gap'']."
                                  Page 347 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




757. That paper was noted by the POL Board on 27 November 2013 (see

     POLB 13/126).


758. The reasons for making that decision were discussed in the ARC meeting

     on 19 November 2013 (at page 4 of (POL00038678)), as minuted:


   "(g) The CEO updated the Committee on Project Sparrow... The CEO drew

   the Committee's attention to two risks to the delivery of the Project.


   (h) The first risk highlighted was the Business has envisaged that the final

   number of cases would have been under 100, but as the scheme neared

   the deadline for application the number of applications was nearer 150, with

   nearly 50 received in the last couple of days before applications closed. As

   a result, the timetable will have to be extended as each case will need

   individual investigation and Second Sight will need to be with us for longer.

    There will also be a resource cost to the Business which the CFO is aware

   of


   (i) The second risk that had arisen concerned the compensation that

   subpostmasters believed they were entitled to. It has become clearer from

   the applications for mediation that there was an expectation gap which the

   Business needed to mitigate where possible."


759. I had said to Chris Aujard, on 14 November 2013, that the budget needed

     to be restated to take into account additional resource and additional

     length of time for the scheme to reach its conclusion (POL00116209).

     That was against a background of the initial assumptions in the budget

     being that there would be 75 cases (POL00116190), but the Mediation

                            Page 348 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           Scheme had already received 64 applications by 12 November 2013,

           with a week left until the deadline (at page 7 of (POL00027150)).


      760. Given that this figure more than doubled, the documents show that the

           assumption of "under 100" was an under-estimation and the business

           had to respond to that. I do not recall the detail of how the costs broke

           down, but I would expect that the additional applications added direct

           marginal costs but that the fixed costs varied less.


96.2.4. Why did the Board seek a note from POl's GC on "who was named in

past prosecutions the liability for the Business and individual Board members".


      761. I do not now recall exactly why this request was made. I have some

           recollection of a conversation about whether past directors and

           colleagues would need to be alerted at any stage on the risk.


96.2.5. Did you consider there to be a real risk that POL had inappropriately

prosecuted SPMs at this time?


      762. I was always open to the possibility that some convictions could have

           been unsafe, and I always sought to be questioning in my approach.

           However, investigations which had been carried out and advice which we

           received consistently presented the position that Horizon worked as it

           should, and that some SPMs had found themselves out of their depth

           and in some cases had covered up discrepancies.


      763. I was always open to receiving new information.




                                  Page 349 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      764. The views I expressed in the 19 November 2013 ARC and the 27

           November 2013 POL Board meeting were that prosecutions should not

           be pursued lightly and the business should be circumspect in choosing

           when to prosecute.


96.2.6. Which was considered more important to you and the Board: avoiding

liability arising from past prosecutions; or seeing that POL took all steps to

ensure that past convictions were safe?


      765. The most important outcome for me, and the POL Board, was to ensure

           that POL complied with its legal obligations regarding past convictions.

           Indeed, it was important for me to resolve all issues for the SPMs.


96.2.7. Were the Altman and / or Clarke advices discussed or provided to the

Board?


      766. The Brian Altman QC advices were discussed at the POL Board but I do

           not recall copies being provided. On 26 July 2013, following the POL

           Board meeting on 16 July 2013 board members were sent an "Update

           on the work arising from the Horizon report" (POL00298004) which refers

           to Brian Altman QC's advice.


      767. I have addressed elsewhere in this statement that I did not see Brian

           Altman QC's advice of 2 August 2013 (at paragraph 570), although the

           POL Board was led to understand that Brian Altman QC had reviewed

           the approach taken by Cartwright King and considered that the approach

           was well thought through and being correctly applied across the samples

           of cases which he saw.

                                 Page 350 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




768. On 18 September 2013, Susan prepared a paper for the POL Board

     (which it was asked to note) which included at paragraph 6.2 and 6.3

     reference to Brian Altman QC being asked to advise POL and its external

     solicitors on continued disclosure obligations, with particular reference to

     concluded cases. It makes reference to Brian Altman QC having given

     initial advice, and specifically that there was a meeting on 9 September

     2013 (at pages 41 to 42 of (POl00027907)).


769. My October 2013 CEO report stated that "we have also asked our

     criminal barrister Brian Altman QC, to conduct an independent review of

     the overall process we have taken to review past cases, reaching the

     conclusion that our approach is "fundamentally sound"" (at page 5 of

     (POl00027136)). This report was delivered at the 31 October 2013 POL

     Board meeting (POL00099806).


770. In a report on prosecutions policy prepared for the POL Board by Chris

     Aujard in February 2014, he made reference to advice from Brian Altman

     QC at paragraph 2.2, describing POL's prosecution policy as "perhaps

     anachronistic" (at page 6 of (POL00026629)). I do not recall ever seeing

     Brian Altman QC's 6 February 2014 advice until I saw it as part of this

     Inquiry's disclosure (POL00105068).


771. The POL Board was made aware in the Significant Litigation Report on

     25 September 2014 that Brian Altman QC would be asked to review

     comments from stakeholders in relation to the proposed prosecution

     policy which he had drafted (at page 179 of (POL00040271 )).



                            Page 351 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      772. Later in March 2016, Jane prepared a paper for the POL Board which

            made reference to advice from Brian Altman QC in respect of the

            publication of the prosecution policy (POL00027210).


      773. I do not recall the Simon Clarke advices being discussed at or provided

            to the Board. However the Board update paper (see paragraph 766

            above), refers to the prosecution case review being undertaken to ensure

            that POL complied with its ongoing disclosure obligations.


96.3. To what extent, if at all, did the Board apply pressure to limit the scope of

the mediation scheme and/ or POL's approach to it because of costs concerns?


      774. The POL Board was consistent in its cost challenge on all programmes

            and Sparrow was not exempt.


      775. However, at no time did I feel the team was held back from taking good

            decisions or completing work professionally because of cost constraints.

            The follow up POL Board paper attempts to quantify the compensation

            costs and sets out clearly that the case questionnaire prompts for

            compensation requests and includes e.g. "pain and suffering". The POL

            Board balanced well its desire and obligation to do the right thing with its

            need to apply responsible cost and timing pressure on management.


96.4. To what extent, if at all, did the Board and / or senior management take

account of the Post Office's corporate brand when considering whether to

change its prosecutorial function? If it did, please explain why that was

relevant.


      776. I do not recall this being a discussion point.
                                   Page 352 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




96.5. Please explain why you took the ongoing mediation into account when

considering whether POL should continue to bring prosecutions.


      777. The Sub-Committee considered whether a change in position in relation

           to prosecutions would influence the outcome of the mediation scheme.

           This was one of a number of matters considered by the Sub-Committee

           in that meeting, and did not represent the Sub-Committee's final

           conclusions on the issue.


      778. The number of different angles considered shows the full consideration

           which meeting attendees gave to discussions such as this, whether that

           is in the ARC, the Sub-Committee or the POL Board. There is no

           indication in the documents I have seen that this was a factor which any

           meeting took into account when considering the February 2014 paper

           which Chris Aujard prepared.


97 Please consider POL00116209 (email chain on 14/15 November 2013

between you, Martin Ec:lwarc:ls and Chris Aujarc:I), POL00099929 (your email to

Chris Aujarc:I elated 20 November 2013), POL00027506 (agenda for POL

Executive Committee on 19 November 2013), POL00021520 (minutes of POL

Board meeting on 27 November 2013), POL00100032 (agenda for Initial

Complaints Review and Case Mediation Scheme Steering Group on 16

December 2013), POL00116241 (briefing for 1-2-1 with Alice Perkins on 6

January 2014), POL00021521 (minutes of POL Board Meeting on 21 January

2014), POL00116284 (Belinda Crowe's email to you elated 22 February 2014),

POL00100321 (email from Belinda Crowe to you on 23 February 2014),

POL00100322 (briefing for meetings with Sir Anthony Hooper and Second Sight

                                 Page 353 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




dated 22 February 2014). POL00100323 (annotated agenda for meeting with

Second Sight on 24 February 2014), POL00116305 (email from you to Belinda

Crowe dated 23 February 2014), POL00100337 (file note of meeting with Second

Sight on 24 February 2014), POL00116312 (email from you to Belinda Crowe on

26 February 2014) and POL00116313 (speaking note for Board meeting on 26

February 2014) and POL00027337 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 26

February 2014).


      779. On 14 November 2013, Theresa lies sent an email on my behalf to Chris

           Aujard and others, following a one-to-one meeting I had had with him that

           day (POL00116209). On the topic of Project Sparrow, I noted:


           a.     That the budget needed restating to take account of additional

                  resource and additional length of time for the scheme to complete,

                  to be presented to the next Steering Group;


           b.     That Angela Van Den Bogerd and her investigation team, as well as

                  the team of network mediation representatives "are working to

                  Belinda re the delivery of Sparrow"; and


           c.     The role of Second Sight "going forward" is to do an independent

                  authentication of reports produced by Angela's investigation team,

                  which should cause their rates to reduce (subject to negotiation).


      780. This final point - that Second Sight would have a different role in the

           future, authenticating reports rather than writing them - follows on from

           the matter I addressed above in relation to Question 87.4. It was never




                                   Page 354 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     POL's intention to retain external consultants indefinitely and that would

     not have been an appropriate use of funds.


781. The ExCo met on 19 November 2013. Chris Aujard prepared an update

     and provided a draft "Settlement Policy for the Initial Compliant Review

     and Mediation Scheme" (at page 2 of (POL00027506)). ExCo was asked

     by Chris to approve the policy and "note the arrangements for managing

     the Expectations Gap". By that last point, Chris meant that there was a

     risk that SPMs would be dissatisfied with the scheme because POL

     wou Id expect any settlements to be "reasonable and based on properly

     evidenced facts" and "not necessarily ... financial". Chris considered that

     POL should use opportunities presented in meetings with MPs and

     others to restate and reaffirm its original position in respect of

     settlements.


782. The next day, Chris sent a briefing for Alice Perkins' meeting with Sir

     Anthony Hooper. I queried it: the briefing suggested that Second Sight

     would continue to write reports, rather than verify reports which POL had

     written internally (POL00099929).


783. The Mediation Scheme was discussed by the POL Board on 27

     November 2013 (POL00021520). The POL Board, as an action, asked

     for "a regular update showing cases received, where they are in the

     process and the overall costs attached to the claims where possible".


784. The Steering Group met on 16 December 2013 (POL00100032).




                            Page 355 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     a.      There was discussion of matters including Second Sight's workload,

             and the incoming workload for POL's investigation team.


     b.      It is recorded that I asked that Chris develop a relationship with

             Second Sight to ensure that POL and Second Sight would work

             through any problems together.


     c.      Belinda Crowe was to work with Martin Edwards and Chris to

             "design a firm proposal for sign off" in respect of managing the

             increasing workload and managing "the accountabilities in light of

             this in the context of the programme".


     d.      Chris was to chair a workshop on 18 December to look at how POL

             might develop the content of its investigation reports to satisfy the

             Chair and Second Sight, to ensure an appropriate outcome at

             mediation.


785. As I note above in response to Question 96, I met with Alice in a one-to-

     one on 6 January 2014. In the briefing note prepared for me, I was

     reminded that POL had agreed the high-level process for moving a report

     from Second Sight via the Working Group into mediation, but the detail

     still needed to be worked out (POl00116241 ). The briefing note also

     said:


   "We are in the process of recruiting Post Office representatives for the

   mediation process. Successfully recruiting the right calibre of staff and

   securing their release for both training and mediation will be crucial for the

   programme, and will be challenging."

                              Page 356 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




786. The note recorded that the capacity of Second Sight was becoming more

     of an issue and said that "we have taken steps to minimise the burden

     on them by taking on the administration of the scheme and encouraging

     them to make their reports on each case as focussed and concise as

     possible (with a common generic report)". POL had by this time taken

     over the administration of the Mediation Scheme from Second Sight and

     had instituted more rigorous monitoring and proactive chasing of

     deadlines, to ensure all cases moved through the scheme as quickly as

     possible.


787. At the POL Board meeting on 21 January 2014, I gave an update that

     Sparrow "was taking longer than we had originally expected but that

     cases should start to go into mediation in March" (POL00021521 ).


788. Belinda provided a written briefing to me on 22 February 2014 for

     meetings with Second Sight and Sir Anthony Hooper, both of which were

     due to take place on 24 February (POL00100322). The purpose of the

     meeting was "to allow [me] to explore the issues with a view to informing

     a plan to discuss with the Board" (POL00100321 ). She suggested that I

     speak to Second Sight about their capacity to deliver their role in the

     mediation scheme, among other topics. She wanted me to set out POL's

     position:


          "The generic report is being produced for the Working Group

           and the need to avoid any publication that will skew the mediation

           process while it is in progress.



                             Page 357 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




          Scope of the Working Group is narrow and designed to oversee

           the mediation Scheme and not other issues.


          MPs cases and any consequential investigation is now

           subsumed in the Scheme - as you confirmed with James

           Arbuthnot the work for MPs is now subsumed within the Scheme

           and Second Sight should be focussed on that.


          A final report that you are happy for a final report to be produced

           by at the end of the scheme and do not want a running commentary

           during the scheme."


789. I was also asked to address Second Sight's capacity and the final report

     with Sir Anthony.


790. I refer above to an email which I sent on 21 February 2014 to Angela,

     Belinda, Chris and Mark whilst on holiday (POL00116281 ). I described

     Chris' reply (POL00116285). Belinda responded with a lengthy email

     (POL00116284) the following day. Belinda was not overly positive about

     the scheme but did say that it was "too early to say" whether it was going

     well. Belinda was happy that the "investigators are good and fully

     operational". Much of the email concerned the need to manage the

     expectations of SPMs participating in the Mediation Scheme.


791. On 24 February 2014 I met with Ron Warmington and Ian Henderson of

     Second Sight, along with Chris. I had a pre-meeting with Belinda

     (POL00100321). An annotated agenda was prepared (POL00100323)

     for the Second Sight meeting. It included matters such as the fact that

                            Page 358 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




           POL "need a firm commitment on the number of cases Second Sight will

           be able to review and report on a week". The current pace of work of

           Second Sight was "concerning" because there was a backlog.


     792. I raised some questions the night before, by email, to Belinda

           (POL00116305). I expect we discussed the answers in our pre-meeting.


     793. The meeting, as is recorded in the file note held by POL, was at my

           request "in order to discuss the progress of the mediation scheme with

           SS". We discussed the projected value of the claims, the fact that some

           claims involving criminal prosecutions could have a "quite significant"

           value but that some were, in the view of Second Sight, unmeritorious.

           We also discussed the timescales of the next stages of work, and the

           contents of the thematic report.


     794. I met with Sir Anthony that afternoon.


     795. At the POL Board meeting on 26 February 2014, I gave a report on my

           meetings of 24 February with        Second Sight and       Sir Anthony

           (POL00027337). I reported that Sir Anthony felt unable to form a view on

           the best way to manage the Mediation Scheme. The POL Board

           discussion records "possible support for Second Sight to enable a more

           efficient process". I had a speaking note for the POL Board meeting,

           prepared by Belinda (POL00116312; POL00116313) to which I added

           some of my own notes.


97.1 What thought did you give to the POL personnel who would be deployed

to work on the Mediation Scheme? Please describe what, if any, IT expertise

                                 Page 359 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




there was within this cohort.


      796. My understanding was that if there were IT issues arising in the course

            of the Mediation Scheme, those would be passed to Fujitsu for

            investigation. For example, in Belinda Crowe's email to me of 22

            February 2014 she wrote that:


         "... Fujitsu has appointed a project manager to work with us on this and

        Angela's team speak regularly with IT colleagues to resolve issues/delays."


97.2 Why did Second Sight's role change from it writing reports to it reviewing

work produced by Angela van den Bogerd?


      797. I have addressed this in the narrative above 780 as well as earlier in the

            statement in reference to Question 87.4. I cannot remember anything

            further.


97.3 Please explain the work of the Initial Complaints Review and & Case

Mediation Steering Group.


      798. The Steering Group is defined in POL's draft Initial Complaint Review

            and Mediation Scheme as "the internal Post Office steering group that

            supervises Post Office's response to the criticisms of Horizon" (at page

            33 of (POL00027506)).


      799. It held meetings which I chaired, such as on 16 December 2013

            (POL00100032). It was established to ensure that the project was given

            support and oversight to assist the POL Board and to manage the detail




                                  Page 360 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           of the Sparrow work better, with appropriate professional project

           management.


     800. This was vital work as POL had committed to undertake in-depth reviews

           of SPMR cases, it had made commitments to the minister and to MPs

           and it was genuine in its desire to do this.


     801. It was the responsibility of the CEO to 'step in' to a project if it was not

           progressing as it should and so I believe I chaired the group until Chris

           Aujard took over and/or the Working Group became fully functional.


97.4 Please describe your work in the Mediation Scheme, including both

external meetings with the Working Group and I or Second Sight and internal

POL discussions.


     802. As CEO I could not realistically lead the work in the Mediation Scheme

           given the volume, but I was briefed on an ongoing basis. I was hugely

           supportive of the work and my involvement was to provide that support

           but also challenge where appropriate.


     803. There were experienced senior managers leading the work, including (i)

           key staff being taken from their 'day jobs' to be dedicated to Sparrow;

           and (ii) funding being allocated. And when issues became difficult, my

           role was to step in and to try to facilitate a way through, when asked

           either by the team, or the Board, or stakeholders including Lord

           Arbuthnot, Second Sight, Alan Bates and Sir Anthony Hooper.




                                  Page 361 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      804. For example, I describe below that I met Sir Anthony with Chris when

           there seemed to be disagreement between the POL Board and Sir

           Anthony as to the scope of the Scheme.


97.5 Please explain what, if anything, you did to test the views expressed by

members of your team that progress with the scheme was slowed by the

capacity of third parties (i.e. Second Sight and Howe & Co.)?


97.6 Please explain the concerns you had with the ambit of Second Sight's

investigation. Why did POL take steps to limit it?


      805. I address these two Questions, 97.5 and 97.6, together.


      806. This follows on from the evidence I have given above.


      807. As I say above, the need to limit the number of themes which Second

           Sight was addressing was led by concerns as to Second Sight's capacity,

           and the fact that their slower work was creating a bottleneck in the

            mediation scheme. Such a bottleneck was contrary to the expectation

           that the Scheme would be completed appropriately quickly and

           efficiently, so that nobody would wait unnecessarily long time and it would

            be at a reasonable cost.


      808. I explored the capacity of Second Sight with all involved.


      809. We brought in extra resource to supplement the work POL was doing to

           support Second Sight. I considered whether to add to their capacity by

           adding resource from another external consultancy, but I was aware how

            much work and effort Second Sight had invested. This was a complex

                                  Page 362 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            project and it was important to see it through. I understood the capacity

            issues and worked to address them.


97.7 Please describe the discussion at the Board on 21 January 2014 that led to

the minute "The Board asked if the Terms of Reference agreed with 2nd Sight

precluded them from working with claimants against the Post Office". Did you

or the Board trust Second Sight; if not, why?


      810. By the time of this discussion the Board was aware of threats of litigation.


      811. I believe, from my recollection, that this was a concern raised by a NED

            and discussed with Chris Aujard. The concern from some was that if the

            work Second Sight was doing could be used against the Post Office, this

            should at least be the subject of some discussion and consideration. It

            was a sensible conversation about risk. I don't recall much more than

            this, but I note that Second Sight were retained for another 12 months

            from this time.


      812. I see that after this meeting, Alwen sent an email (on 24 January 2014)

            to attendees stating (amongst other things) (POL00100121):


          "As reported to the Board late last year, we have been endeavouring to

          formalise SS's engagement by putting in place a formal appointment letter,

          one of the terms of which will expressly restrict SS's ability to act against

          PO. For a variety of reason (mainly related to defining the scope of their

          work), this letter has proved very difficult to finalise, though good progress

          has been made in the last few days. Ss are, however, still (mildly) resisting

          the inclusion of a clause imposing any form of restriction on their ability to

                                   Page 363 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          undertake future related work. That said, we do expect that over the course

          of the forthcoming week (and ahead of the next face to face meting of the

          working ground) all outstanding issues, including this one, will be resolved

          in our favour. In the meantime, the provision of the confidentiality

          agreement that was put in place at the start of their engagement continue

          to provide some, albeit limited, protection in that they expressly prohibit SS

          divulging, without our consent, any confidential information obtain by them

          as part of their work."


      813. This provides useful further context to the discussion which is not in the

            POL Board minutes.


      814. There were individuals in POL who believed Second Sight were acting

            against POL's interests and working for the SPMRs (as I discuss below).

            My view was that they were working for the SPMs independently, as they

            had been commissioned to do. and that they believed they had found

            issues to be explored. I had different reactions over time about Second

            Sight, depending on the matter at hand, but overall my view was one of

           frustration, rather than lack of trust, in that they were not taking account

            of POL's input and responses in that process. I owe them an apology, as

            with hindsight, they were right in terms of what needed to be looked at

            and I was wrong.


97.8 Please expand on the discussion that led to the minute of the 26 February

2014 Board meeting (POL00027337) stating "it was acknowledged that. in light

of the facts now available, and the projected level of legal claims and costs, it

would be sensible to commission more generic legal advice on the overall level

                                    Page 364 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




of legal and financial exposure ... This advice should consider the steps that

could be taken to mitigate any exposure including considerations of alternative

structures that might be available to deal with mediation cases". In particular,

please identify any legal advice that had been received to that point and explain

the type of advice the Board sought.


      815. I do not have any independent recollection of this discussion apart from

            what is set out in the minutes. I discuss the instruction of Linklaters,

            arising from this meeting, below in response to Question 98.


Instruction of Linklaters and Deloitte


98. Please describe your knowledge of and involvement with the instruction of

Linklaters and Deloitte in 2014 and any steps taken by POL following their

reporting. Please do not limit your response to this request when addressing

the matters below.


      816. The decision to instruct Linklaters was made by the POL Board at its

            meeting on 26 February 2014. I attended this meeting and provided an

            update on the progress of the Initial Complaint Review and Mediation

            Scheme (POL00027337). By this time, we had significant concerns about

            the lack of progress and escalating costs of the Mediation Scheme and

            were actively seeking other ways to resolve the cases in a timely and

            cost-efficient manner.


      817. The POL Board received a paper entitled 'Review of the Current

            Prosecution Policy' dated 18 February 2014 prepared by Chris Aujard (at

            pages 2 to 5 of (POL00026629)). This paper addressed Project Sparrow

                                     Page 365 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




     and POL's prosecutorial role (and appended a further paper from Chris

     dated 7 February 2014 which had already been presented to the ARC on

     11 February 2014 (POL00021424) and ExCo on 13 February: see (pages

     6 to 12 of (POL00026629)).


818. The POL Board also considered a paper by Belinda Crowe dated 20

     February 2014 which set out the central challenges facing the Mediation

     Scheme, which were considerable (at pages 16 to 18 of (POL00026629)).

     They included:


a.     Slower than expected Mediation Scheme performance: of the original

       147 applications, 139 were still in the Scheme;


b.     An increasing expectation gap: the applicants valued their claims at

       around 100,000,000 but Bond Dickinson had provisionally estimated

       the likely value of the claims (assuming they were successful) to be

       6,000,000. The Bond Dickinson advice was very provisional, however,

       as it was extrapolated from a relatively small sample of claims;


c.     High resource demands, including a considerable ongoing workload for

       POL staff and our external lawyers;


d.     Issues with the scope of the Mediation Scheme: Belinda described

       attempts by Second Sight and the JFSA to widen the scope, seemingly

       with the Chair's support. I can see that I was due to meet with Second

       Sight and Sir Anthony Hooper to discuss this;


e.     Stakeholder management, including concerns about how to manage

       the expectations of MPs; and
                           Page 366 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




f.       The standing difficulties associated with the release of Second Sight

         reports: on the working assumption that the reports would contain

         criticism and may well be leaked, this was an ongoing risk which we

         needed to manage.


819. On 24 February 2014, Chris Aujard and I met with Sir Anthony. I can see

      from the notes that we discussed the issue of compensation and Sir

      Anthony expressed his opinion about the potential value of such

       payments (at page 2 of (POL00100338)):


     "TH noted that the applicant's CQRs often painted a very distressing

     picture, where there had been a loss of livelihood, and other losses. His

     view was that, should the evidence show that POL had not acted properly,

     then the amount of compensation payable could be quite material (NB this

     contradicts the legal advice obtained by POL from BD which categorically

     states that the maximum loss POL could expect to pay would be limited to

     3 months "pay" under the SPMR's contract. When this was pointed out to

     TH, he defended his contention because 3 months notice was a different

     kettle of fish from summary termination, criminal record, no ability to sell

     on/or only sell at a discount, etc. ie., therefore, compensation for causing

     personal distress could be legitimate. (Can PO recheck this advice?) It was

     not entirely clear whether TH had in mind criminal cases only when he

     made these comments."


820. These issues form the background to the POL Board's decision on 26

       February to commission further legal advice. This decision and the



                             Page 367 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     reasons for doing it are set out in the minutes (at pages 3 to 4 of

     (POl00027337) ):


   "It was noted that, in respect of each individual application, the project team

   were taking extensive advice about the Post Office's potential legal

   exposure. However, it was acknowledged that, in light of the facts now

   available, and the projected level of legal claims and costs, it would be

   sensible to commission more generic legal advice on the overall level of

   legal and financial exposure (taking account of the possibility of class

   actions). This advice should consider the steps that could be taken to

   mitigate any exposure including considerations of alternative structures that

   might be available to deal with the mediation cases. Such advice should

   have regard to alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, such as the

   Financial Ombudsman."


821. The minutes and action log show that this task was assigned to Chris

     Aujard (at pages 3 and 8 of (POl00027337)). As I recall it, Chris managed

     the interactions with Linklaters and determined the scope and instructions

     given. As GC, he had the knowledge and experience to do this. I had

     never been involved in giving instructions to external lawyers and was not

     involved in doing so in this case.


822. As Chris was handling the details of the work, my role was largely to

     ensure that the team stayed on track to deliver what the POL Board had

     requested. Given this, I was in regular contact with Chris and others. For

     example, at 09:49 on 10 March 2014, Alice sent me an email asking for

     an update on several issues including this work, in advance of the March

                            Page 368 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     POL Board meeting (POL00116321 ). My reply of 12:21 shows that I had

     already obtained an update from Chris: "/ have already spoken to Chris

     A: we will circulate a list of questions to the Board on Wed at the latest. I

     have asked to see them this pm" (at page 1 of (POL00116321 )). I then

     forwarded this email chain to Chris and confirmed that deadline for the

     proposed questions. As I say in this email, Alice was taking these matters

     seriously (which was appropriate) and I wanted to ensure that everyone

     was on top of what needed to be done (at page 1 of (POL00116321 ).


823. The meeting referred to ("I have asked to see them this pm") must have

     taken place as I see that David Oliver sent me an email at 18:38 on 10

     March 2014, cc'ing in Chris, Belinda Crowe, Angela Van Den Bogerd,

     Martin Edwards, and Mark Davies saying (POL00027696):


   "Following discussion with you this afternoon we have further cut down and

   reconfigured the Linklaters paper ... It is with them overnight but conscious

   you asked for sight of where we got to. Grateful for any comments - we

   plan to finalise with Linklaters before submitting to the Board tomorrow."


824. I do not recall having input into the content of the work so much as

     overseeing the team. They were responding to the very clear questions

     from the Chair and my additional request about advice on an external

     adviser (ombudsman option). I needed to know where the work had got

     to, but I do not believe David was asking for my input into the legal

     content, which would have been inappropriate. It is more likely that I had

     checked that we were on track and would soon be ready to circulate /

     double-check with the POL Board, the list of questions to be commented

                            Page 369 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




     upon by Linklaters. Additionally, I am sure that I commented on using

     accessible language and keeping the paper to a reasonable length for the

     POL Board, both of which the Chair was keen on and which enabled

     better POL Board discussion.


825. The ExCo met on 13 March 2014 and I attended, along with Chris,

     Belinda, Neil Hayward, and several others (POL00092172). I can see that

     Belinda's paper of 20 February 2014 was annexed to the agenda for this

     meeting. It was the subject of separate discussion and was part of the

     agenda slot on strategic risk review led by David Mason, Head of Risk

     and Chris Aujard.


826. At 13:10 on 19 March 2014, Belinda appears to have sent Neil Hayward

     a draft cover paper for the POL Board intended to accompany the

     Linklaters' advice, cc'ing Chris Aujard, Chris Day, Mark Davies, Martin

     Edwards, David Oliver and me (POL00116348). With the exception of

     Neil Hayward, we were all involved with Project Sparrow. I believe that

     Belinda was asking for Neil's comments. I do not recall having any input

     into this draft myself.


827. The documents show that Chris Aujard was in correspondence with

     Linklaters between 19 and 20 March 2014 to finalise the Executive

     Summary of their work, which would be presented to the POL Board.

     Chris was aware that, given the amount of pre-reading for every POL

     Board meeting, the summary would be an important document for the

     POL Board members. In his remit as GC, he appears to have decided the

     key legal points he wanted the POL Board to take away from this work

                               Page 370 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     and, in his email of 00:18 on 20 March, he asked Jonathan Swil of

     Linklaters to bring them to the fore (POl00022012):


   "The executive summary is still pretty long, and doesn't hit the reader

   between the eyes with what I understand to be your main conclusion -

   namely: Unless there is something wrong with the system, we are entitled

   to rely on the accounts produced by Horizon as the basis of claiming sums

   of money from SPMRs. Further that there can be no question of a claim for

   consequential losses based simply on the recovery by the Post Office of

   losses if the losses were properly payable and the Post Office was entitled

   to the money. These 2 statements together are quite powetful, and need to

   be brought our (sic) clearly, and it also needs to be said that in consequence

   the amounts that could be successfully claimed in court are a fraction of the

   aggregate amounts (c1 00m) that has been claimed under the scheme."


828. Chris prepared a brief cover paper dated 19 March 2014 which seems to

     have been circulated alongside an Executive Summary which does

     indeed emphasise these points (POl00105529). Linklaters' overall

     conclusion is said to be that "in strict legal terms, many, if not all, of the

     claims submitted under the Scheme would be unsuccessful if they were

     considered by a Court" (at page 2 of (POl00105529)). At paragraph 2.2

     of his paper, Chris summarised the work in the following way (at page 1

     of (POl00105529)):


   "(A)t a high level and by way of an indication of the direction of their advice,

   it may be helpful to note that one of Linklaters many conclusions, is that:

   'There can be no question of a claim for consequential losses (by an SPMR)

                             Page 371 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   based simply on the recovery by the Post Office of losses (i.e. the amounts

   that POL believes were owing to it) if the losses were properly payable and

   the Post Office was entitled to the money."


829. Linklaters' Executive Summary advised that POL's potential liability was

     very limited (at page 4 of (POl00105529)):


   "In summary, we think that, absent proof that Horizon is malfunctioning

   (either generally or in the specific case) the Post Office has a right to

   recover losses from SPMRs, the SPMRs have no right to compensation for

   such losses and the circumstances in which there will be a consequential

   loss claim are limited to those in which inadequate notice of termination was

   given, will depend on their facts and should be limited."


830. As is clear from the POL Board's initial request for advice, the primary

     aim was to obtain a definitive opinion on the possible level of

     compensation and to understand the legal principles at a general level.

     We had already received advice on the individual cases, but we did not

     know, for example, whether consequential losses or damages for distress

     would be awarded (which, as Sir Anthony had noted in the meeting on 24

     February, could substantially change the overall sums). Given this, the

     advice we sought was at a more general level and looked at, for example,

     what followed from the contract.


831 . Because what we needed was an assessment of the applicable legal

     principles, the advice was provided subject to a key factual assumption:

     that Horizon was well-functioning. My understanding is that this was a

     working assumption which was made to allow Linklaters to focus on the
                           Page 372 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     general principles. This assumption was very clearly identified in their

     advice (at page 5 of (POL00105529)):


    "We note that there is, so far as we understand it, no objective report which

    describes and addresses the use and reliability of Horizon. We do think that

   such a report would be helpful, though there is a decision to be made about

   how broad and/or thorough it needs to be."


832. We discussed this advice at the POL Board meeting on 26 March 2014

     and Christa Band attended from Linklaters to present the work. As they

     were managing the project, Chris, Belinda, and Angela also joined the

     meeting for this part of the discussion (POL00006564).


833. As with every POL Board meeting, there was a significant amount of pre-

     reading and, although I do not specifically now recall reading the report

     itself in advance of the meeting, I am confident that I would have

     familiarised myself with it. The volume of reading meant that it was not

     usually possible for me to have digested every detail of every item, but I

     would always try and ensure that I was well versed enough to provide

     useful input through questions and challenges.


834. I vaguely recall that others had not had the chance to really engage with

     the report in advance. I remember Alice Perkins introducing Christa Band

     and asking her to walk the POL Board through the work for the benefit of

     those who had not yet had the opportunity to digest it fully. My

     understanding would have been shaped by her presentation as well as

     by reading the report and Chris' summary.


                            Page 373 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




835. I do not recall much of this meeting beyond what is recorded in the

     minutes. Ms Band presented the executive summary discussed above

     and criticised Second Sight's work as lacking hard evidence to back up

     their conclusions. She also advised us on the contractual relationship

     between POL and SPMs, telling the POL Board that under the terms of

     the contract POL would not be required to pay compensation. The

     minutes record that she advised that there was no entitlement under

     English law for damages for distress in this situation (at page 2 of

     (POl00021523)). Although I did not (and do not) have the legal expertise

     to evaluate the accuracy of this advice, it fits with my broad recollection

     that our legal position was strong.


836. After Ms Band left, the POL Board discussed further work. They agreed

     to (i) set up the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee; and (ii) commission a

     piece of work to complement the work undertaken by Linklaters "to give

     them and those concerned outside the Business, comfort about the

     Horizon system". The POL Board requested that the work cover (at pages

     to 2 to 3 of (POl00006564) ):


   "The work undertaken by Angela Van Den Bogerd explaining how the

   system works


   A review of the data integrity aspects of the system


   A reference to all audits and tests carried out on the system


   A response to the most significant thematic issues raised by Second Sight."




                            Page 374 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




837. Linklaters had provided advice on the applicable legal principles and a

      view on POL's financial exposure if Horizon was well-functioning. At the

      time we certainly thought that it was and so we anticipated that this work

      would show this. We also hoped that it would help with the mediation

      process: I do not recall any intention at this stage that the work be made

      public or published widely, but I believe we thought it would help in

      understanding the unresolved issues in the individual cases.


838. The POL Board directed that Linklaters be provided with the terms of

      reference for this further work so that they could advise on whether it

      would play the complementary function envisaged. The terms of

      reference were then to be agreed by the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee.

      As the minutes and Board Action Log shows, Chris was tasked with taking

      this work forward (at pages 3 and 11 of (POL00006564)).


839. Although I was not involved in this, I can see that Linklaters provided a

      draft advice dated 28 March 2014 which commented on the proposed

      scope of the further work (POL00022093). It is unclear to me from this

      document whether Linklaters were provided with draft terms of reference

      in a separate document and, if they were, which document that is. I have

      no recollection of seeing any draft terms of reference myself.


840. I do not think I saw this advice, but Linklaters explain that the further work

      could potentially be useful in lots of ways including by reassuring SPMs,

      countering criticisms of Horizon, and showing that POL were taking the

      allegations seriously. To do some of those things the work would need to

      be disclosed more widely. Linklaters note that one option would be to

                             Page 375 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




           make the final report (or an edited version of it) public. They suggest,

           amongst other things, that the report be prepared by an expert who is

           independent of POL and Fujitsu and advise that the expert consider all

           existing assurance work on Horizon to avoid needless duplication of work.

           I did not see this advice and was not involved in deciding how it should

           feed into the further work to be done: Chris handled this.


      841. I exchanged emails with David Oliver on 28 March 2014. He updated the

           Sparrow team on a further delay in the Second Sight reports and said he

           intended to convene a meeting of the Sparrow group the next week (at

           pages 1 to 2 of (POL00027800)). My response characterises my role

           more generally: I said I would like David to walk me through a draft plan

           which should already include input from senior managers/directors

           because "/ will add most value where I can iterate and challenge the

           options, ie., not as part of a working meeting" (at page 1 of

           (POL00027800) ).


      842. Although today, I wish I had been much more closely involved, as CEO I

           was handling so many projects concurrently that it simply was not viable

           for me to have useful input at working level. However, I did see it as my

           role to challenge at a stage where initial thinking had been done and to

           ensure that the project was on track. There were senior people

           responsible for managing this work, chiefly Chris (as GC) and Belinda (as

           the Project Director), and I trusted them to do this.


Deloitte



                                  Page 376 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




843. The documents suggest that Rodric Williams finalised the formal request

     for advice with Gareth James at Deloitte. On 2 April 2014 at 18:58,

     apparently having had a telephone call with him that day, Rodric emailed

     Gareth James, cc'ing in Belinda, Chris, and Lesley. He described the

     broad scope of the work as being that POL "wants to demonstrate that

     the Horizon system is robust, fit for purpose, and/or operates within an

     appropriate control framework'). He enclosed five documents "to

     determine whether or not Deloittes (sic) can help us in this regard" in

     advance of a further call due to take place the next day (at page 3 of

     (POL00108396)).


844. At 12:17 on 4 April 2014, Rodric emailed Gareth James again, referring

     to a meeting on 3 April 2014, and providing six additional documents.

     Gareth James replied to both Rodric and Belinda at 17:20, thanking

     Rodric for the material and confirming that Deloitte had started drafting a

     letter of engagement. He described the Part 1 timetable as "quite

     challenging" so Deloitte would limit the scope "to the key areas we

     discussed," with Part 2 remaining a deeper dive (at pages 1 to 3 of

     (POL00108396)).


845. I was not involved in these discussions and do not know what the "key

     areas" were. These emails suggest that the scope of the instructions was

     informed by meetings between POL's legal team and Deloitte and

     depended, at least in part, on factors such as how quickly the work could

     be done. We were working to tight deadlines from the POL Board. The




                           Page 377 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




      decision to divide the work into two parts is likely to have been influenced

      by this point.


846. I can see that Belinda emailed Chris at 17:48 on 4 April 2014, referring to

      a conversation about who should agree and sign the letter of

      engagement. She suggests that Lesley lead on this (at page 1 of

      (POl00108396)). I have no first-hand knowledge of what followed, but

     the documents disclosed suggest that Chris, Belinda, and Rodric were all

      involved in deciding the final scope and specific instructions for Deloitte

      and, as suggested here, the original intention was for Lesley to sign them

      off.


847. On 7 April 2014, Belinda responded to Gareth James suggesting that

      Lesley sign the letter of engagement and asking for a copy of the draft

      letter (at page 1 of (POl00108399)). Around the same time on 7 April,

      Gareth James emailed Rodric asking him to confirm who the appointment

     was with (at page 2 of (POl00108404)). Having received Rodric's "out of

      office" reply, Gareth James forwarded his query to Belinda at 17:24,

      asking whether POL would want Deloitte to take into account the POL

      Board report prepared by Linklaters in March 2014 (which he seems

      aware of, but does not appear to have) (at pages 1 to 2 of

      (POl00108404)). At 18:19, Belinda responded saying "(w)e discussed

      this" and asking if he can speak to Lesley at 12:00 the next day (at page

      1 of (POl00108404)). Mr James replies at 18:49 (at page 1 of

      (POl00108405)).




                             Page 378 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




848. I am aware from the documents disclosed that a draft letter of

     engagement addressed to Chris Aujard and dated 7 April 2014 was

     provided by Deloitte (POL00108408). Chris appears to have provided

     comments on at least one draft of this letter. The version dated 9 April is

     described as "v6" (POL00108412). I was not involved in the process of

     drafting the letter of engagement and do not recall seeing these drafts or

     being consulted on them. As far as I can discern from the documents, the

     work of formulating the final letter of engagement was done by Chris,

     which is in line with my recollection of his role in the project.


849. From comparing the two drafts I can see that:


     a.   By 7 April 2014, the decision appears to have been made to divide

          the work into two parts with Part 1 being a summary of existing

          assurance work (I recall Chris Aujard describing this as a "desk-top"

          report) and Part 2 being additional work which may be completed at

          a later date depending on the outcome of Part 1 (at page 1 of

          (POL00108408) and at page 1 of (POL00108412)). I was not

          consulted on the division of the work into two phases, but I do recall

          that the work was divided into two parts.


     b.   Both drafts stipulate that, in completing Part 1, Deloitte was not

          required to comment on or test the quality of the existing assurance

          work or the integrity of the processing environment (at page 3 of

          (POL00108408) and page 3 of (POL00108412)).


     c.   Chris' amendments to the 9 April draft focus the work on the Horizon

          HNG-X system, as opposed to "Horizon" alone (POL00108412).
                             Page 379 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




d.   Chris' draft of 9 April appears to introduce a timeline for the work,

     including a proposal that Deloitte present their work at the April

     Board meeting (at page 5 of (POL00108412)).


e.   Both drafts record that some or all of Deloitte's work was likely to be

     subject to legal professional privilege and Rodric, as POL's litigation

     lawyer, is named as the person at POL who will facilitate wider the

     circulation of correspondence and preparatory material, if required

     (at page 2 of (POL00108408) and at page 2 of (POL00108412)).


f.   Both drafts record that, unless otherwise instructed, Deloitte will

     have no direct contact with any third parties other than the named

     Fujitsu contacts that POL provides (at page 7 of (POL00108408) and

     at page 8 of (POL00108412)). I do not know why this was included

     so these comments are necessarily speculative, but I recall that the

     Linklaters advice on the scope of this work (which I did not see at the

     time) emphasised the importance of independence from both POL

     and Fujitsu. It is also possible that time was a factor here as

     consulting Fujitsu would likely take longer.


g.   Both reports state that POL is unlikely to make any public reference

     to Deloitte's work and, if this changes, the wording of any public

     announcements will be agreed between the parties (at page 6 of

     (POL00108408) and at page 6 of (POL00108412)).


h.   Both reports state that the client team at POL is comprised of Lesley,

     Chris, Belinda, and Rodric, who will report to me as CEO (the latter

     draft also includes Julie George, who will deputise for Lesley if
                       Page 380 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




           absent) (at page 2 of (POl00108408) and at page 2 of

           (POl00108412)). I do not believe I was aware of this until reading

           these documents for this Inquiry and I do not recall having any

           specific oversight or reporting role in relation to this work at the time.


850. As far as I can discern from the documents, the final signed version of the

      letter of engagement is (POl00117611) which is dated 9 April 2014, but

      it was signed by Chris on 25 April 2014 (at pages 1 and 9 of

      (POl00117611) ). It appears to include Chris' proposed amendments and

      states that Deloitte will provide an Executive Summary of their findings to

     the POL Board on 30 April 2014 (at page 5 of (POl00117611)).


851. On 9 April 2014, I attended the inaugural meeting of the Project Sparrow

      Sub-Committee. The minutes record that I was present from item PS 14/3

      onwards (at page 1 of (POl00006565)). I do not recall any lengthy or

      significant discussion at this meeting.


852. Alice set out a range of issues (20 in total) relating to the nature and

      progress of the Mediation Scheme. I do not recall any lengthy discussion

      at this meeting but can see from the minutes that the Chair outlined a

      number of significant issues the committee should consider:


      a.   The so-called "expectations gap" between POL's anticipated liability

           if Horizon was functioning (now confirmed by Linklaters to be low)

           and the sums being claimed by applicants (at page 3 of

           (POl00006565) ).




                              Page 381 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




      b.    How, if at all, POL could communicate the essence of the Linklaters'

            advice to applicants without waiving legal privilege (at page 3 of

            (POL00006565) ).


      c.    The assurance work being considered by Deloitte (which was also

            said to be privileged) and how, if at all, that could be communicated

            to applicants (at page 3 of (POL00006565)):


           'The handling and sequencing of what would be a public message will

           be crucial and would need to take account of the position of key

           stakeholders, in particular, Tony Hooper, James Arbuthnot, and other

           MPs."


853. A preparatory paper setting out various options for the Mediation Scheme

     going forward seems to have been provided for this meeting (at pages 4

     to 5 of (POL00116439)), but I do not recall it being discussed. It seems

     more likely from the documents that the discussion on this paper took

     place at the meeting on 30 April 2014, as the minutes for that meeting

     record that we considered "a paper on the options for the closure of the

     Scheme and for the acceleration of its completion" (at page 3 of

     (POL00006566) ).


854. The options paper sets out several possible ways to resolve the cases in

     the Mediation Scheme. The final recommendation is expressed as being

     "(s)ubject to a satisfactory outcome from the Deloitte assurance

     assessmenf' (at page 9 of (POL00116439)). I think we hoped that this

     work could play a role in helping decide the future of the Mediation

     Scheme. At this time, we believed from the other assurance work that had
                             Page 382 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     been done that Horizon was working well and thought it likely that the

     Deloitte work would confirm this, which would be relevant to the issues in

     the Mediation Scheme.


855. At the meeting on 9 April 2014, the Sub-Committee also considered an

     update on the progress of the Deloitte assurance work (POL00006565).

     A one-page paper appears to have been provided for review (at page 16

     of (POL00116439)). I do not recall the discussion but the minutes record:


      a.   The Part 1 work is described as "a largely desk-based exercise to

           assess the control framework within which Horizon operates" which

           "will not consider the       integrity of the    Horizon    processing

           environment. That would form Part 2 of the work" (at page 4 of

           (POL00006565)). I note that this describes the work as concerning

           Horizon generally rather than just HNG-X. This seems in conflict with

           the terms of the engagement letter prepared by Chris, which

           narrowed the work to HNG-X.


      b.   The Part 2 work is described as being contingent upon the outcome

           of Part 1 and not essential. Part 1 was presented as sufficient in and

           of itself, regardless of whether the Part 2 work was also completed:

           "Although no system could be absolutely 'bullet proof', no issues had

           yet been identified through the cases being investigated or any other

           route that has called into question the integrity of Horizon on-line was

           implemented. These two points, along with the Part 1 work

           (depending on the results) should be sufficient to assure Post Office

           that Horizon is fit for purpose" (at pages 4 to 5 of (POL00006565)).

                             Page 383 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     c.   If commissioned, the Part 2 work would look at "the adequacy of

          Horizon at implementation, user acceptance testing etc, to determine

          whether the system was set up correctly. This would be a larger and

          more costly exercise and should not be undertaken unless deemed

          necessary based on the results of part 1" (at page 5 of

          (POL00116439) ).


     d.   Lesley was to attend the April POL Board meeting to present the

          findings of Part 1, and the next Project Sparrow Sub-Committee

          meeting was to provide a detailed update, including whether Part 2

          was required and, if so, how long it would take (at page 5 of

          (POL00116439) ).


856. A brief additional paper also seems to have been provided which

     addressed the Deloitte work. It explains (at page 16 of (POL00116439)):


   "Following the last Board meeting, discussions have been held with

   Deloittes (sic) with a view to commissioning a short, cost-effective, external

   'assurance' assessment of Horizon. Although the precise scope of this

   assessment is still under review, currently it is proposed to undertake it in

   two parts, with a summary of Part 1 ... being completed by the end of April

   in time for presentation to the Board."


857. This note summarises Part 1 as "primarily a desk-based exercise

     reviewing existing documentation" which will involve, amongst other

     things, "(s)ome limited testing of Horizon functionality and responses to

     themes identified by Second Sight." Part 2 is described as "non-essential

     at this stage" and consisting of more detailed forensic activity, which could
                            Page 384 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      include more comprehensive testing and analysis in a number of core

      system areas.


858. I do not recall these discussions although I do broadly recall that the work

      was ultimately divided into two parts. However, I do not think that

      understood it in the way these documents present it at the time.

      remember that Part 1 was desk based and would rely upon the assurance

      work which had previously been done. A lot of assurance work had

      already been done and we did not want to replicate work, but I thought

      that this review would assist by drawing together all that work to show

      that Horizon did what it was designed to do.


859. The understanding that I formed of the Part 2 work at the time was that it

      focused on the implementation of Legacy Horizon. My recollection is that

      the division came about because looking at this would require us to look

      at Legacy Horizon from 1995 onwards and one significant concern was

      that we may no longer have the data from this period. As such, we would

      need to attempt to reconstruct the architecture in place at the time, which

      might not be possible and would certainly be time-consuming and very

      costly. I remember Lesley emphasising that it might not be possible to do

      this and, even if it was possible, it would come at considerable cost. If the

      Part 1 work was sufficient to provide assurance - and we were told that it

      would be - then the business had to consider carefully whether it was

     justifiable to also undertake costly additional work with no obvious gain.


860. In relation to Fujitsu's involvement, I can see that Julie George appears

      to have asked Gareth Jenkins to attend a meeting with Gareth James of

                             Page 385 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     Deloitte, but he declined on 10 April 2014, seemingly on the instruction of

     James Davidson (POL00100513). I do not recall this so I cannot shed

     any further light on the decision making here.


861. Between 14 and 17 April 2014, I exchanged emails with Chris Aujard

     reflecting on the first Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting and he

     confirmed that the Deloitte assurance work was underway (at page 3 of

     (POL00108440)). I was on leave, but I said that "before I finally switch off,

     I want to be sure I am clear on next steps" and I challenged on the

     efficiency of attendees at the last Sub-Committee. This was followed by

     a further update on 17 April in which Chris noted that various workstreams

     were ongoing "that I am conscious are not particularly visible to you",

     including the Deloitte work (at page 1 of (POL00108440)). This fits with

     my recollection: although I was keen to keep track of progress, the

     updates I required to do this were high level and I was not involved in the

     detailed work.


862. On 30 April 2014, there was a POL Board meeting followed by a Project

     Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting. I attended both meetings but do not

     recall everything captured in the minutes.


863. The POL Board meeting took place in the morning and Gareth James of

     Deloitte attended to present the draft report. I can see from the minutes

     that Lesley and Chris also joined for that part of the meeting because they

     were so involved in the project (at page 6 of (POL00021524)). I cannot

     be certain, but the draft report provided by Deloitte appears likely to be



                            Page 386 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     the draft Executive Summary marked "For validation in advance of Board

     discussion on Wednesday 30 th Aprif' (POL00105635).


864. The minutes record that the Chair thanked Gareth James for his draft

     report and explained that there were a number of people who were

     sceptical about Horizon. She said that the POL Board was keen to know

     the truth about the reliability of the system, and the report needed to be

     accessible because it needed to be capable of persuading lay people (at

     page 6 of (POL00021524)).


865. Lesley then summarised the work, describing the objective of Part 1 as

     "to give assurance that the control framework, including the security and

     processes for changes in the system, were robust from an IT

     perspective." The minutes record that Gareth James reported that all

     Deloitte's work to date suggested that the system had strong areas of

     control and the testing and implementation was in line with best practice

     (at page 6 of (POL00021524 )). This minute fits with what little I do recall

     of this meeting: my lasting memory is that having heard from Gareth

     James, the mood was one of relief and reassurance. I remember feeling

     positive about the feedback he gave and thinking that this work should

     also be useful in helping us resolve the cases within the Mediation

     Scheme which, as ever, was a key concern for me.


866. The POL Board asked what assurance could be given pre-2010 when

     Legacy Horizon was in place. As mentioned above, I recall Lesley Sewell

     saying that the further work of examining Legacy Horizon would be much

     more costly and difficult, if it was even possible. There was a concern

                            Page 387 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     that the data required to do this work no longer existed, and so we would

     need to reconstruct it which would be time-consuming, expensive, and

     not necessarily reliable or authentic. Nonetheless, it was agreed that

     Gareth James would produce and cost a proposal to address this

     addition work for the POL Board to consider. As indicated by the minutes

     and the Board Action Log, Lesley and Chris were tasked with overseeing

     this (at pages 6 and 10 of (POL00021524))).


867. Later that day, the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee met. There was some

     overlap in attendance with those who attended the Board meeting: Alice

     Perkins, Chris Aujard, Alasdair Marnoch, Richard Callard, Alwen Lyons,

     Lesley Sewell, and I all attended some or all of both meetings.


868. The Sub-Committee meeting minutes record that we discussed Chris'

     paper dated 24 April 2014, which advised on the legal issues surrounding

     the potential dissemination of the Linklaters and Deloitte work. This was

     provided further to the request made by the Sub-Committee at the

     meeting on 9 April 2014. Chris Aujard's paper states that he sought

     additional advice from Linklaters on these issues. The paper looks at

     whether and, if so, to what extent, POL might share the Deloitte report

     and "the essence of the legal position from Linklaters." The potential

     audience for these seems to be chiefly limited to those involved in the

     Mediation Scheme: "advisors, applicants and MPs including action

     planning, comms and stakeholder engagement." As he notes here (and I

     recall this being a concern throughout) dissemination could result in POL




                           Page 388 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     inadvertently waiving legal privilege over privileged material which is

     something we wanted to avoid (at page 1 of (POL00022123)).


869. Chris advised that publishing a letter from Linklaters summarising POL's

     legal position to applicants was felt to be inappropriate as it may be

     portrayed as bullying. He also rejected the suggestion that the Chair might

     commission legal advice on this. Instead, Chris' advice at this stage was

     that an open letter be sent to the Chair of the Working Group summarising

     POL's legal position and the Deloitte report. The letter could then be

     disseminated to applicants and made available via POL's website. He

     flagged that this risked damaging POL's relationship with other members

     of the Working Group and expressed the view that the media reaction,

     combined with the dissemination of POL's legal position itself, was likely

     to be "severe," albeit he had been advised that it was nonetheless

     manageable (at page 2 of (POL00022123)). A first draft of this letter,

     prepared by Linklaters, is said to be annexed to this paper but I have been

     unable to locate it within the Inquiry's disclosure.


870. The minutes of the discussion record a concern that the Linklaters report

     was too long and not sufficiently clear to be understood by a lay person.

     The Sub-Committee agreed that neither the Linklaters advice, Linklaters

     draft summary, nor Deloitte report would be disseminated at this stage

     but that the Sub-Committee would reconsider dissemination at a later

     date (at page 2 of (POL00006566)).


871. At the POL Board meeting, Chris Aujard had explained to Gareth James

     that there were allegations of so-called "phantom transactions" and so

                            Page 389 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     assurance work by Deloitte on the integrity of the system record logs

     would be very valuable (at page 6 of (POL00021524). I do not recall much

     of the discussion on this at all. I vaguely remember that Chris had

     mentioned the idea of the transaction log in the POL Board meeting, but

     I think we had run out of time, which may be why he picked it up with

     Gareth James after the meeting.


872. By the time of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting later that day,

     Chris seems to have spoken to Gareth James and told him about the

     visibility of Transaction Corrections on the transaction log, which he said

     Gareth James thought might mean that assurance work on this could be

     completed more quickly. When Chris relayed this to the Sub-Committee,

     I can see that the Committee asked him to establish with Deloitte what

     level of assurance could be provided in one, two, or three weeks and at

     what cost (at page 2 of (POL00006566)). This would be additional work

     over and above the work requested by the POL Board, so the Committee

     would have wanted to know the time and cost implications before deciding

     whether or not to take it forward.


873. I can see from the Sub-Committee minutes that we also discussed the

     potential difficulties with conducting pre-2010 assurance work. As I

     explained above, my understanding was that the data for this was not

     available and so assurance work on Legacy Horizon would be a

     significant further step which, if possible at all, would be far more time

     consuming and costly. Although I cannot now recall, I think the reference

     to the Sub-Committee discussing "the use of the detailed logs provided


                            Page 390 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     for the Court cases as evidence for Deloitte" relates to this. I think the

     idea came from a question about whether the court files might contain

     records of data which we otherwise thought we no longer held (at page 2

     of (POl00006566)).


874. Further to the POL Board meeting, I can see that draft instructions (dated

     9 May 2014) to Deloitte were prepared (POl00031388). I do not recall

     seeing these at the time, but they include a request for assurance work

     on system records and transaction logs (presumably as a result of the

     "phantom transactions" issue discussed above) and confirmation of what

     assurance is available for both pre and post 2010 Horizon.


875. The Change Control Order for this amendment to the terms of

     engagement appears to be set out in (POl00117612), although the dates

     on this document are very unclear: the header is dated 9 April 2014, the

     letter is dated 6 May 2014 and Chris Aujard's signature is dated 15 April

     2014. The focus of the additional work was on the transparency and

     auditability of the records. I was not consulted about the scope of this

     change order, and do not recall seeing a copy of it at the time.


876. The POL Board met on 21 May 2014 and the minutes show that Chris

     and Belinda provided an update on Project Sparrow (at page 9 of

     (POl00027400)). The minutes refer to a draft executive summary of the

      Horizon Assurance Review prepared by Deloitte said to have been

     circulated in advance but it is not clear to me from the documents

     disclosed which document this is. The minutes note that the full Review

     should be available on 23 May 2014, but Chris is recorded as saying that

                            Page 391 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     he will circulate this to the POL Board "once he was satisfied with its

     drafting and the clarity of expression." The Chairman is recorded as

     emphasising the importance of the report being clearly written "so that it

     could be used to give assurance to a wider audience" (at page 9 of

     (POL00027400)).


877. There is a draft report dated 23 May 2014 which may be the version

     referred to above (POL00028062). I do not recall either myself or the POL

     Board being provided with copies of this, but I do have a vague memory

     of seeing someone else's hardcopy version (I do not recall who), weighing

     up whether I had time to read it there and then, and deciding that, given

     its length and level of detail, I did not. As CEO, there were countless

     demands on my time and it was not possible to read everything. I had to

     make judgments every day about where my time would be best spent and

     where I could add the most value. I have read the report since but, at the

     time, I think it likely that I relied upon the executive summary and the oral

     briefings provided by Gareth James and those working on the project,

     which I trusted to be accurate and sufficiently comprehensive.


878. I can see that on 28 May 2014 Rodric Williams sent Jonathan Swil and

     Christa Band at Linklaters a copy of POL's "Factfile" (which had originally

     been prepared to assist Second Sight and the Working Group) and a copy

     of Deloitte's draft Board Update, stating that they already have a copy of

     the full draft Deloitte report. It seems that Rodric Williams is seeking

     Linklaters' help in producing an accessible and understandable report. He

     comments that "(o)ur CEO is concerned about the time available to knock


                            Page 392 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     Deloitte's work into shape" and asks them to set out their preferred

     structure so that Deloitte can repackage their work accordingly

     (POL00006556).


879. As this comment indicates, there was a concern by this point about the

     length of time the work was taking. The POL Board had asked for the

     report some time ago. In general, if I promised a deliverable to the POL

     Board within a certain timeframe, I wanted to make good on that promise.

     I was of course able to and did ask the Board Chair for extensions to time,

     but timeliness for this report was also important because it was hoped

     that the work would inform other decisions that we had to make, most

     notably trying to resolve the SPM cases and decide the future of the

     Mediation Scheme. Everyone wanted to get this done. It was my role to

     try to help the team make that happen.


880. Chris appears to have spoken to Deloitte on 29 May 2014, after which

     Gareth James confirmed the structure of the work that would be provided

     (at pages 1 and 2 of (POL00031400)). Chris forwarded this to Martin

     Edwards, Alwen Lyons, Julie George, Rodric Williams, and me later that

     day apologising for the delay. He wrote that Deloitte were running

     significantly behind schedule and described the draft report as "opaque"

     and failing to answer the questions set. He was keen to stress that,

     although they were having to push Deloitte to finish the work, this was a

     result of Deloitte's internal review progress rather than because there

     were   concerns    about   the   substantive   issues   (at   page   1   at

     (POL00031400)):


                           Page 393 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




   "(T)here is no suggestion from Defoitte that there is somehow something

   'wrong' with the system, or that it is not fit for purpose, rather our experience

   is that their internal review partner approach is such that any positive (and

   helpful) statements that are made in early drafts are edited out before the

   draft is released to us."


881. I continued to track the progress of Deloitte's work and keep the Chair

     updated. In an email of 3 June 2014, I asked Chris whether Deloitte were

     on track to deliver their work by 4 June (his reply confirms that he thought

     they were). I asked whether he had made any progress in respect of

     Deloitte agreeing to be named in any disclosure of the report. He replied

     that Deloitte had not moved on that but that the Linklaters' advice was

     being "titivated by Rod'', so as to stand alone even without reference to

     the Deloitte work (POL00116581 ). We had been considering all options

     including publishing the report in the public domain. Although the desire

     to maintain legal privilege might always have prevented us from making

     the report public, it also became clear that Deloitte were opposed to this,

     perhaps because such reports were more usually produced as client

     internal documents, as this one too had initially been briefed.


882. Nevertheless, we had hoped that the work might provide reassurance to

     those outside of the business, including the Working Group, and to assist

     in resolving the cases in the Mediation Scheme. I recall a sense of

     frustration on the part of those more involved in the detail of the project at

     the way the final report was developing. The POL Board meeting with

     Gareth James had been overwhelmingly positive and reassuring but the


                               Page 394 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      report that then emerged from Deloitte's checking process was heavily

      caveated and increasingly complex and, because of this, less intelligible

      to a lay person. Deloitte appeared to be less and less willing to commit to

      anything unequivocal. We had hoped that the report might assist in

      resolving the cases under review, but an inaccessible, heavily caveated

      report could not do this: it would not serve to explain how Horizon worked

      and could not provide a clear view (reassuring or otherwise) on whether

      the system was well-functioning.


883. Deloitte   prepared    a   draft   Board   briefing   dated   4   June   2014

      (POL00030159), which I believe I did read at the time. My understanding

      was that Deloitte had conducted a desktop review based on previous

      assurance work and design and system documents and had concluded

      that, provided the system was implemented as designed, it ought to be

      well-functioning. However, there was still a significant amount of work to

      do to fill in the gaps, check the assumptions, and validate the information

      they had looked at.


884. My first impression was that this was a critical report which raised serious

      concerns. I needed to understand whether the caveats could be

      addressed. If they could not, it could have serious implications for whether

      we continued to use the system. While I recognise the limitations in this

      thinking now, I certainly felt at the time that I had some contextual

      reassurance that the system was working simply from the enormous

      number of successful transactions which were completed each day.

      However, it was clear that we needed to understand the gaps and caveats


                             Page 395 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     and whether they could be addressed. There were also parts of the report

     I did not understand. For example, I do not think I understood the

     reference to the exceptional balancing transaction incident in 2010.


885. I spoke to Lesley Sewell and my recollection is that she assured me that

     POL had more background documents which had not been taken into

     account, but which provided assurance with respect to the caveats. On

     the balancing transaction incident, I was told that it was an emergency

     measure and had only been used once, it was not about remote access,

     and that POL had documents showing that the SPM was aware of the

     incident. I trusted what I was told and, on the basis of that reassurance,

     felt able to put that issue aside.


886. The response given to me (and subsequently to the POL Board) was

     reassuring. We were told that a lot of the caveats within the report either

     had already been addressed in other work and POL had the material

     which would show this, or could be dealt with through further work. We

     initiated that further work and this is when I recall the name "Project

     Zebra" starting to be used, although it seems that the name had been

     used before this time.


887. My understanding was that POL had the material which would assuage

     many of these concerns and caveats, and, because of this, I recall a

     sense from the team that Deloitte had not really listened to them. I was

     told that the report painted too bleak a picture and Deloitte had not given

     sufficient regard to the assurance that POL was able to provide through

     documents which could have been provided if they had been requested.

                              Page 396 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     The team seemed to feel that the report protected Deloitte's position but

     at the cost of giving a clear picture.


888. After such a positive initial meeting with Gareth James, the negative tone

     of the report did come as a shock to me. The final report which emerged

     from the checking process seemed at odds with what we had initially been

     told. As CEO, I had to manage the disappointment and frustration of the

     project team and the concerns of the POL Board as well as ensuring that

     assurance work was conducted to address the caveats identified in the

     report.


889. I can see that Chris and Lesley circulated this briefing document

     alongside an update to the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee (myself

     included) at 19:26 on 4 June 2014. They explained that the report

     remained somewhat technical, and was heavily caveated. This was

     because it was a desktop review, based on currently available

     information, which did not include information relating to the original

     implementation of Horizon in 1995. They highlighted the limitations and

     assumptions which contextualised the work then summarised its key

     findings, emphasising the positives. They noted that there was unlikely to

     be time to discuss the briefing at the Sub-Committee meeting on Friday

     but expressed the hope that we could agree how to put the material to

     the Board (at pages 1 to 3 of (POL00029733)).


890. Prior to sending this email, at 18:42 on 4 June, Rodric Williams appears

     to have emailed me a draft of what Chris and Lesley proposed to say. I

     replied in a light-hearted way (with two smileys) saying "I'm getting out of

                             Page 397 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     the way! Chris can decide - I'm not checking ExCo emails!" (at page 1 of

     (POl00027797)). For the avoidance of doubt, what I was pointing out was

     that these were senior group executives who were more than capable of

     sending a short note to the POL Board - we all knew how difficult it was

     and the Chair was already in the loop and the note simply needed to be

     sent.


891. Although I did not comment on Chris and Lesley's covering email

     (POl00029733), reflecting on its tone now my sense is that they were

     attempting to bridge the gap between the POL Board's last exposure to

     this work- the very positive meeting with Gareth James in May- and the

     much more qualified and caveated report which they now had. The tone

     of the final report was much less reassuring than the POL Board might

     have expected from the previous meeting and I suspect they were trying

     to lay the groundwork and context to assist the Board in understanding

     what they were receiving and how we had got here.


892. Mark Davies and Chris subsequently prepared a paper for the Project

     Sparrow Sub-Committee dated 6 June 2014 which did address the

     assurance work being done, amongst other things (POl00027153).

     Although they noted that the Deloitte report should give comfort to the

     POL Board in respect of the designs for processing and storing

     transaction data, they did say that "it is highly unlikely that we will be able

     to extract any further comfort or assurance without their doing

     substantially more work" (at page 3 of (POl00027153)). As was noted in




                             Page 398 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     this paper at paragraph 5.4, Deloitte themselves were not recommending

     any further 'backward looking' work:


   "For the avoidance of doubt Deloitte are not recommending that any further

   'backward looking' review of the Horizon system would be appropriate. In

   fact they have said 'One could thus do a lot of work and not be any further

   forward'. They have however though [sic] gone on to say that, if Post Office

   were looking to gain a greater degree of assurance over the Horizon system

   there are approaches that could be considered ... "


893. The paper distinguished between two sets of issues: those relating to

     Project Sparrow and those relating to wider business learning (at page 3

     of POL00027153)). I do not recall discussing this and I am not sure what

     this relates to. The further assurance work would not be available in the

     short term so could not assist in resolving the issues in the Mediation

     Scheme (which may be what is meant by "Project Sparrow issues"). It is

     possible that is why longer-term work (which would be unlikely to be

     delivered in time to assist with the Scheme) would instead be managed

     by the ARC or RCC as wider business learning.


894. Chris and Mark's paper dated 6 June 2014 noted that Deloitte would not

     consent to the publication of their report, nor to the use of their name to

     publicly assert that the system was working with integrity unless they

     undertook specific testing (at page 3 of POL00027153)). Having only

     completed a desk-based exercise and recognising that they had not

     considered all of the available material, Deloitte would not stand behind

     an expression of support that strong. I can understand this position, given

                            Page 399 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     the limitations in the review to date. This was not to say that the system

     did not have integrity, it was simply a statement that they could not

     confirm it one way or the other based solely on the work that they had

     done.


895. Against the background of these findings, Chris and Mark advised that

     the public facing version of the Linklaters advice was being reworked to

     reflect this (at page 3 of (POl00027153)). The updated version of this

     paper dated 18 June 2014 records the "current thinking" in the following

     terms (at page 3 of (UKGI00002392)):


   "Public statement of legal position (as informed by Linklaters advice

   note). Current thinking is to inform the Working Group and applicants of the

   Post Office position in time and linked to individual cases. It is anticipated

   there will be an opportunity in the near term to advise the Working Group

   of our position on consequential loss in relation to the case with the largest

   claim (M001)."


896. I do not recall any conversations at this time about whether the report

     impacted on criminal prosecutions or fell within POL's duty of disclosure.

     Looking at it now, this seems surprising and I wish we had discussed this.

     Having said that, Chris had the report, as did a number of other legal

     individuals, including Linklaters and Rod Williams. I trusted and expected

     Chris, as GC, to have the legal expertise and professional integrity to

     identify any such issues and take whatever action was required.

     Disclosure was not a new issue. It was a topic which I understood our

     internal and external lawyers to be considering on an ongoing basis.

                            Page 400 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     Looking back, I regret that I did not ask more about these issues.

     However, especially in view of the ongoing reviews of criminal cases that

     were reported on at the Sub-Committee, I would have expected that if the

     report was disclosable, the legal team would identify this and act

     appropriately, without any additional prompting by me or the POL Board.


897. Chris and Mark concluded their paper by advising on the future of the

     Mediation Scheme. They stated that option one (maintaining the status

     quo) was no longer tenable. They advised that POL should either

     continue the Mediation Scheme but be proactive in controlling cost and

     timescales (option two) or complete the case investigations and move the

     governance and management of the Scheme in-house (option three) (at

     pages 3 to 4 of (POL00027153)).


898. This paper was provided for the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee on 6

     June 2014, which I attended. The Sub-Committee considered that option

     three was preferable, subject to an assessment of the level of ministerial

     support and probability of challenge by way of judicial review. Chris was

     tasked with obtaining advice on the latter (at pages 1 to 2 of

     (POL00006571 )). It was agreed that a recommendation would be made

     to the POL Board that option 1 (maintaining the status quo) was no longer

     tenable and directions were made for the further work required to decide

     between options 2 and 3 (at page 2 of (POL00006571 )).


899. It had been hoped that the assurance work would assist in deciding the

     future of the Scheme more than it in fact did. However, it was not the only

     factor which impacted this decision making. The challenges facing the

                            Page 401 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           Mediation Scheme still existed and, given the time which had passed,

           were arguably more pressing.


      900. I can see from the "Zebra Action Summary'' document signed off by Julie

           George on 12 June 2014 that a number of remediations were

           subsequently recommended to address the issues raised in the Deloitte

           report, particularly insofar as they related to governance, document

           management, and risk and assurance work (POL00027054).


      901. An undated paper prepared by Chris for the RCC entitled "Project Zebra

           - Horizon review by Defoitte" set out his summary of the Deloitte work, its

           findings, and recommendations along with an assessment of the

           prioritisation of these recommendations said to be informed by

           discussions by Legal, Risk, Information Security, Financial Service

           Centre and Internal Audit (POL00031410). He asked the RCC to note the

           work that had been conducted and to support the further work proposed.

           Although I do not specifically recall this paper or the discussions around

           it, I attended the RCC meeting on 21 July 2014 at which the committee

           approved the recommendations proposed in the paper (at page 5 of

           (POL00109004)). I have not been able to ascertain from the disclosure

           currently available what work was then undertaken following this.


99. Please consider UKGI00002213 (email from Alwen Lyons to you and others

on 11 March 2014), POL00107317 (linklaters' Report into Initial Complaint

Review and Mediation Scheme dated 20 March 2014), POL00021523 (minutes of

POL Board meeting on 26 March 2014), POL00105529 (Chris Aujard note of 19

March 2014 with attachments) and POL00022093 (outline of Linklaters report).

                                  Page 402 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




99.1. Please explain to what extent you were involved in instructing linklaters

to provide legal advice on Second Sight and the Mediation Scheme. In

particular, please address (a) why linklaters were only provided four spot

reviews and (b) why linklaters were not instructed to contact Fujitsu.


      902. I have set out a detailed narrative of my involvement in the instruction of

            Linklaters in response to question 98 above. As I explain, it was limited.

            As GC, Chris Aujard finalised the instructions based on the POL Board's

            request. He had the legal expertise, knowledge, and experience to do this

            and I trusted him to do it well. I had never been involved in deciding or

            giving instructions to external lawyers and did not do so here. It was not

            part of my role and would not have been an efficient use of my time or

            skills given that there were others better placed to do this work.


      903. I have been asked why Linklaters were only provided with four spot

            reviews. Having considered the Linklaters' report dated 20 March 2014,

            this question appears to be based on a false premise. The report states

            at paragraph 4.1.1 that Linklaters were provided with "10 spot reviews

            and 4 cases" which, for the purposes of their report, they assume "are

            indicative of the types of complaint that have been accepted into the

            Scheme" (at page 4 of (POL00107317)). I can only assume that the report

            is correct when it states that this was the material provided.


      904. In paragraphs 5.12.1-5.12.9 of their report, Linklaters set out the scope of

            the issues arising in those 10 spot reviews and four case reports,

            including (at pages 6 to 7 of (POL00107317)):


          "5. 12. 1. wrongful "loss recoveries" in respect of amounts reported by
                                   Page 403 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




Horizon as due to the Post Office, including in some cases, various

categories of consequential losses ...


5.12.2. Horizon-related customer payment malfunctions or lost cheques

and transaction corrections resulting in the loss of limited sums (in some

cases, under 100);


5.12.3. unauthorised foreign exchange transactions being entered into the

Horizon system without a SPMR's knowledge, but without any specific

allegation of loss incurred by the SPMR as a result;


5.12.4. printing of excess receipts in respect of a 67p postage transaction;


5.12.5. an inability of Horizon properly to account for GIRO payments and

SPMRs having to trust the Post Office about transaction corrections;


5. 12. 6. criminal charges: in circumstances where the SPMR has been

subject to criminal allegations of false accounting but where they say the

false accounting arises from cheques being lost in the mail or where they

have retracted an admission made under caution to the criminal conduct;


5. 12. 7. wrongful termination of SPMRs' contracts;


5. 12. 8. inadequate training given to SPMRs by the Post Office in respect of

Horizon; and


5.12.9. inadequate telephone or other day-to-day support services provided

by the Post Office to SPMRs."




                        Page 404 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




905. I was not involved in deciding what material would be given to Linklaters.

      I trusted Chris as GC and the legal team to provide sufficient material to

     enable Linklaters to provide legal advice on our general level of financial

     exposure. That is a judgment which requires legal knowledge and so was

     not one I was able to make.


906. With respect to the number of case reviews provided, there had been

     substantial delays by Second Sight in producing case reviews and there

     were very few complete at this time. I note that the minutes of the

     inaugural meeting of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee on 9 April 2014

     state that Post Office had passed around 20 cases to Second Sight for

     review, but Second Sight had only produced three case reviews, all of

     which had been rejected by the Working Group (at page 2 of

     (POL00006565)). I have been unable to confirm how many had been

     produced at the time of Linklaters being instructed and the documents do

     not give a clear picture on this, but it is clear that there were only a limited

     number of these reviews.


907. I have been asked why Linklaters were not instructed to contact Fujitsu.

     At paragraph 4.2.2 of their report dated 20 March 2014, it is said that "we

     have had no contact with Fujitsu, the company which designed, provided

     and supports the Horizon system" (at page 5 of (POL00107317)).


908. I was not involved in deciding the scope of the instructions and cannot

     say what, if any, instructions they were given in respect of their contact

     with Fujitsu. The report makes clear that Linklaters did not contact Fujitsu,

     but I do not know why this was. I assume that POL's legal team

                             Page 405 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            considered this question and had reasons for whatever instructions they

            gave on it.


      909. Because I was not involved, what follows is necessarily speculative, but I

            note that the primary purpose of the advice was to consider POL's legal

            exposure to claims rather than to establish whether Horizon was well-

           functioning. At the time, Second Sight were working to produce a report

           which described the functioning of Horizon (Linklaters discuss this work

            critically in paragraphs 5.30-5.39 of their report (at pages 8 to 10 of

            (POL00107317)) and we were keen to avoid replicating work. The focus

            of the advice is on POL's actions (for example, with respect to training

            and support) and relationship with SPMs, including through the contract.

            It is not clear to me that Fujitsu could usefully contribute. Finally, there

           was some time pressure throughout this time because we wanted to

            resolve the cases in the Mediation Scheme, this may have meant that the

            instructions were more focused and less wide ranging than they might

            otherwise have been. However, this is all post hoe speculation. I was not

            involved in determining the scope of the instructions and so I cannot say

           whether these factors were considered by the legal team when deciding

            their scope.


99.2 When did you first read, or be briefed on, the report prepared by Linklaters

(POL00107317)? What were your initial views on it?


      910. To the best of my recollection, I was given the report for the POL Board

            meeting on 26 March 2014. I have set out my recollection of this meeting

            in 827838response to Question 98.

                                   Page 406 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




      911. To the extent that I can recall my initial views on the report, I remember

           that the POL Board and I felt reassured by this work. Provided that

            Horizon was working as it should (and, as I have explained, we thought it

           was), POL's legal liability to SPMs was very limited. Further work would

           have to be done to confirm whether Horizon was well-functioning and so

           the POL Board commissioned that work.


      912. However, I do remember feeling slightly uncomfortable in this meeting.

           The discussions of legal liability felt very impersonal and obviously did not

           touch upon the human aspect of this and the impact on the people

           involved. We had not ruled out making payments as a matter of policy

           rather than because of legal obligations, but it felt difficult to talk about the

           legal issues in this black and white way.


      913. The advice given about the nature of the contractual relationship was

           obviously completely undermined in the litigation that followed and I wish

           that we had identified the flaws in it at this stage. However, I trusted and

           expected a firm as well established as Linklaters to give us sound and

           reliable legal advice and this was the advice that we were given. Although

            I had no legal expertise, this way of understanding the relationship also

           fitted   with   my   broad   understanding      of SPMs       as   independent

           businesspeople running small businesses. This was a consistent

           message and, to the extent that I thought about these issues, I thought of

           SPMs as agents and not employees.


99.3 Please consider paragraph 2.3 of the report, namely that "We note that

there is, so far as we understand it, no objective report which describes and

                                   Page 407 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




addresses the use and reliability of Horizon. We do think that such a report

would be helpful, though there is a decision to be made about how broad and/or

thorough it needs to be". Please explain what steps, if any, POL took to address

this suggestion.


      914. I am asked to consider paragraph 2.3 of the Linklaters report and the

            suggestion that it would be useful to have a further piece of work

            describing and addressing the use and reliability of Horizon, explaining

            what steps, if any, POL took to address this suggestion. I have set out the

            steps POL took to address this suggestion, including through the Deloitte

            work, in response to Question 98 above. I have nothing additional to add.


99.4 Please explain the basis on which you thought that lawyers could advise

on legal risk arising from the use of Horizon data in prosecutions without

examining the reliability of the Horizon IT system.


      915. I am asked on what basis I thought that lawyers could advise on the legal

            risk arising from the use of Horizon data in prosecutions without

            examining the reliability of the Horizon IT system. I understand why one

            might ask this question but, in the context of the Linklaters' advice (which

            I take to be what the question refers to), we did not ask Linklaters to

            provide us with an unqualified assessment of the legal risk of the claims.


      916. In my response to Question 98 above I have set out why the POL Board

            commissioned this advice. The primary aim was to obtain a clear view on

            the possible value of the claims if successful. My understanding is that it

            was not necessary to determine whether Horizon was or was not well-

            functioning to answer that question. We certainly appreciated that it had
                                   Page 408 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           not been answered by the Linklaters' advice because that is why we then

           commissioned the Deloitte work. It was always made clear that there was

           a key untested working assumption in the Linklaters' work and I think we

           all understood that.


      917. We did all think that Horizon was well-functioning and that there were

           good reasons for believing this. That was certainly my belief at the time.

           This belief seemed to be supported by the Second Sight investigations

           and the Interim Report as well as by the sheer number of transactions

           processed each day without apparent problems. However, to answer the

           question: I did not think that it was possible for Linklaters to advise on risk

           more generally without looking at the underlying reliability of Horizon.

           That was not what we asked Linklaters to do. The issue of whether

            Horizon was in fact well-functioning was a separate matter and we

           recognised this and commissioned the Deloitte work in response to this

           recognition.


99.5. Please set out your recollection of the Board meeting on 26 March 2014

minuted under Project Sparrow.


      918. I am asked to set out my recollection of the Board meeting on 26 March

           2014 minuted under Project Sparrow. I have described my recollection of

           this meeting in response to Question 98 above (at paragraphs 832 to 838

           above). There is nothing further I wish to add.


99.6. Did you advise the Mediation Scheme Working Group and / or Lord

Arbuthnot about the instruction of Linklaters and/ or Deloitte? If not, why not?


                                   Page 409 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




919. I do not recall whether I advised the Working Group or Lord Arbuthnot

     about the instruction of either Linklaters or Deloitte and cannot recall any

     discussions or decisions on it being made by the POL Board.


920. It would not have been my usual practice (or normal business practice

     more generally) to advise third parties of instructions from the POL Board

     or the contents of POL Board discussions and papers which, generally

     speaking, were assumed to be confidential. Equally, I was not a member

     of the Working Group and did not attend their meetings. If the information

     did need to be shared with the Working Group, I would have expected

     either Belinda Crowe or Chris Aujard (who were members of the Working

     Group and attended meetings on behalf of POL) to do this. As GC, Chris

     wou Id also have been the person to advise on whether sharing such

     information could waive legal privilege.


921. I met infrequently with Sir Anthony and Lord Arbuthnot. I can see that I

     discussed compensation with Sir Anthony at the meeting on 24 February

     2014 (although this was before Linklaters and Deloitte were instructed (at

     page 2 of (POl00100338)). Similarly, I recall discussing the so-called

     "expectations gap" with Lord Arbuthnot because the significant difference

     between    the   applicants'   and   POL's estimation    of the    possible

     compensation was an ongoing concern. However, I do not recall

     discussing the instructions at any of these meetings. In the absence of a

     reason to do so, I expect that the general expectation that POL Board

     matters were confidential would have meant the information was not

     shared.


                            Page 410 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




100. Please consider POL00117519 (email from Rodric Williams to Gareth

James on 2 April 2014), POL00021524 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 30

April 2014), POL00006566 (minutes of Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting

on 30 April 2014), POL00028062 (Deloitte report dated 23 May 2014) and

POL00028069 (Deloitte report dated 4 June 2014).


100.1. Why did POL initially only instruct Deloitte in respect of Horizon Online

and not legacy Horizon?


      922. I am asked why POL initially only instructed Deloitte in respect of Horizon

             Online and not Legacy Horizon. I have set out my understanding of how

             these instructions were finalised in response to Question 98 above (at

             paragraphs 838 to 850 above). There is nothing further I wish to add.


100.2. Please set out your recollection of Mr James presentation to the Board on

30 April 2014. In particular, please identify what, if anything, Mr James said

about (a) transaction corrections or (b) any other matter that called into

question the reliability of the Horizon IT System.


      923. I am asked for my recollection of Gareth James' presentation to the POL

             Board on 30 April 2014. I have set this out in at paragraphs 862 to 873

             above in response to Question 98. I have nothing further to add.


100.3. Please describe the discussion of Mr James' work in the Project Sparrow

Sub-Committee on the same day.


      924.    am asked to describe the discussion of Gareth James' work in the

             Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 30 April 2014. I have set out



                                   Page 411 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




            my recollection of this in paragraphs 862 to 873 above in response to

            Question 98. I have nothing further to add.


100.4. On what basis did you think it was appropriate not to disseminate either

the Deloitte or linklaters reports further?


      925. I am asked on what basis I thought it was appropriate not to disseminate

            either the Deloitte or Linklaters reports further. In paragraphs 894 to 901

            above, I have set out the discussions around dissemination and Chris

            Aujard's final advice of 18 June 2014.


      926. Essentially, we had hoped that the work might assist in resolving disputed

            issues in the Scheme cases so there was an ongoing discussion about

            what, if anything, could be shared with that aim in mind. However, the

            work also served as legal advice and we were repeatedly told that

            disseminating it to third parties could risk waiving legal privilege over the

            advice and, potentially, over other legal advice (see, for example, Chris

            Aujard's paper dated 24 April 2014 (POL00022123)). I am not a legal

            expert and cannot say whether this is correct but I trusted their

            assessment of our General Counsel and legal team.


      927. Even without the complications of privilege and Deloitte's consent to

            publication, we certainly would not have made these reports public in full

            lightly. We were acutely aware that negative press about POL and the

            business could undermine the public trust in every local Post Office up

            and down the country, regardless of whether that was fair or appropriate.

            Before we put anything into the public domain (or even shared it with the

            Working Group, given the risk that it would subsequently be leaked to the
                                 Page 412 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




           press) we had to give very careful thought as to whether it might cause

           damage in that way. Material which was caveated or unclear (which we

           thought the Deloitte report was) carried a clear risk of being

           misinterpreted and causing damage. It would be too easy for someone

           to read it and conclude that the system lacked integrity, which was not

           Deloitte's conclusion.


101. Please consider POl00116439 (agenda for Project Sparrow Sub Committee

meeting on 9 April 2014), POl00006565 (minutes of Project Sparrow Sub-

Committee meeting on 9 April 2019) and POl00006571 (minutes of Project

Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 6 June 2014).


101.1. Please explain the reasons for formalising Project Sparrow as a

subcommittee of the Board and its terms of reference.


      928. To the best of my knowledge, the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee was

           first proposed by Alice Perkins in her email of 09:49 on 10 March 2014.

           In that email, she set out a number of issues around the Mediation

           Scheme for substantive discussion at the March POL Board meeting

           including in relation to the possibility of legal challenge, costs, lessons

           learned for the Business, and the management of Second Sight's work.

           She finished by saying"/ am going to propose a Board sub-C'tee chaired

           by me with you and at least one other NED on if' (POL00105552).


      929. I replied at 12:21, although I did not address the suggestion of a Sub-

           Committee explicitly. I then forwarded Alice Perkins' email to Chris

           Aujard, copying in Belinda Crowe, Mark Davies, Martin Edwards, and

           Chris Day, noting "the suggestion of a Board Sub-Ctte is a good one. It
                                    Page 413 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     will help manage the comms., bring some reassurances to the NEDs, and

     help us - by having a smaller group to steer and shape rather than the

     whole Board" (POL00116321 ).


930. The ExCo met on 13 March 2014 and considered, amongst other things,

     an update on the allegations relating to the integrity of the Horizon system

     from Chris. He explained that the Initial Complaint and Mediation Scheme

     programme (known internally as Project Sparrow) had moved into a

     critical phase and was currently carrying a substantial level of risk (at

     page 4 of (POL00092172)).


931. The nature of these risks was summarised in Belinda's paper of 20

     February 2014, which was annexed to this update (at pages 12 to 15 of

     (POL00092172)). They included the slow progress of the Mediation

     Scheme, an increasing expectation gap, high cost, a risk of the scope

     being broadened yet further, stakeholder management challenges, and

     the impending generic Second Sight report.


932. Chris explained that further to discussions of these issues at the POL

     Board meeting on 26 February 2014 (POL00027337), three mitigations

     had   been    put   in   place:   (i)   CEO   participation   in   stakeholder

     communications, (ii) strengthening the POL resources available, and (iii)

     close POL Board involvement (at page 4 of (POL00092172)).


933. These documents essentially set out the background to the formation of

     the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee: the Mediation Scheme was entering

     a critical phase and was experiencing a number of issues which required

     management. The proposal was that this management would come from
                              Page 414 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           a Sub-Committee, of           which would provide closer oversight of, and

           involvement in, this process by the POL Board. The idea originated with

           Alice, and I supported her suggestion.


     934. At the POL Board meeting on 26 March 2014, the POL Board agreed to

           set up the Sub-Committee, chaired by Alice and involving myself, Alasdair

           Marnoch (being Chair of the ARC), and Richard Callard (ShEx NED). The

           minutes record that other NEDs were invited to join if they wished (at page

           2 of (POL00021523)). I can see from the updates surrounding this note

           that the concerns and issues around the Mediation Scheme were at the

           fore of the discussions.


     935. The inaugural meeting of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee took place

           on 9 April 2014. The terms of reference for the Sub-Committee, including

           its purpose, composition and governance, were discussed. The purpose,

           as   set   out   in   the    terms   of reference   paper was:   "to   make

           recommendations to the Board in respect of Project Sparrow and provide

           strategic oversight of the delivery of the project and the development of

           the Initial Complaints Review and Mediation Scheme" (at page 2 of

           (POL00116439)). Its primary duties and responsibilities were to (i) keep

           under review the progress of Project Sparrow, in particular the

           development of plans to restructure the Scheme; and (ii) to undertake any

           other oversight function delegated to the Committee by the full POL Board

           (at page 3 of (POL00116439)).


101.2. Why was the Sparrow Sub-Committee considering ending the Mediation

Scheme at this stage?

                                       Page 415 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




936. As was indicated in the terms of reference, one of the primary functions

     of the Sub-Committee was to review the development of plans to

     restructure the Mediation Scheme. At the very first meeting, the Sub-

     Committee considered a paper which set out several options for the future

     of the Mediation Scheme, including that it should be terminated (at pages

     4 to 15 of (POL00116439) ). The other options under consideration were

     maintaining the status quo, restructuring the Mediation Scheme, and

     devising a new alternative dispute resolution structure (at page 7 of

     (POL00116439)).


937. The reason that it was necessary to consider all options, including

     terminating the Mediation Scheme, was that the status quo was

     increasingly unsatisfactory. The reasons for this were set out in Belinda

     Crowe's   paper of 20     February 2014      (at pages    12 to   15 of

     (POL00092172)) and reiterated in the options paper : the Mediation

     Scheme aimed to provide a formal mechanism to resolve the complaints

     and allegations but it was increasingly costly and delayed; there were

     concerns about Second Sight's capacity to deliver the work required;

     there was a growing "expectation gap"; and the ongoing management of

     the Mediation Scheme was proving a significant drain on POL's

     resources, including in respect of senior management's time (at page 5

     of (POL00116439)).


938. POL still wanted to achieve resolution of these complaints - that was

     always the aim - but the current system seemed incapable of achieving

     this, so we were looking for other options. I can see from the minutes of


                           Page 416 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




          this meeting that the first discussions were wide-ranging and touched

          upon many of these issues and more. As I have set out at paragraph 852

          above, the Chair outlined a list of significant matters, which the Committee

          was to consider. This was a complex, evolving situation with many

          important matters to weigh (at pages 1 to 4 of (POL00006565)). It was a

          very difficult situation to manage and find a way through and these were

          not cold, impersonal decisions we were making. We wanted to find a

          resolution because it was in the best interests of both the SPMs and POL

          but, at times, the difficulties felt intractable.


101.3. What factors were taken         into account in deciding to terminate

Second Sight's engagement?


     939. Chris Aujard and Mark Davies prepared a further paper dated 3 June

          2014, which continued the exploration of options for the future of the

          Scheme and noted that "the rationale for change has been well

          articulated elsewhere and the urgency has not lessened since the Sub

          Committee last met" (at page 1 of (POL00027369)). Progress was still

          very slow and the concerns about Second Sight's capacity to deliver on

          their assignment were ongoing. Nonetheless it remained a very difficult

          situation, both in terms of how best to achieve resolution and in respect

          of stakeholder management.


     940. The same three broad options were still under consideration and the pros

          and cons in respect of each still required careful consideration, as the

          discussion in this paper shows. In the concluding section, Chris and Mark

          noted that the options had to balance the best interests of the business,

                                   Page 417 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




     its people and customers, as well as the applicants. Commercial factors,

     including the cost and management time being consumed by the

     Mediation Scheme, were relevant to this evaluation, as was stakeholder

     management and the need to retain the confidence of the Government.

     As this paper states: "This is an extremely challenging judgement call

     with a number of factors at play" (at page 7 of (POL00027369)).


941. Having weighed these options, the advice of Chris, as GC, and Mark, as

     Head of Communications, was that the third option - that of moving the

     Mediation Scheme in-house - was in the best interests of the business

     in a purely commercial sense. No business would look to retain external

     consultants indefinitely if the knowledge, experience, and work could be

     brought in-house. However, as is noted here, it was also a significant

     factor that POL considered that, despite two years of investigation,

     nothing had emerged which undermined the operation of the Horizon

     system (at page 7 of (POL00027369)).


942. Regardless of this assessment of what was in the best commercial

     interests of the business, the intention was to complete the review of

     SPM cases.      It was recognised that wider considerations, including

     stakeholder management, required POL to discuss any decisions

     regarding the future of the Mediation Scheme with ShEx. Regardless of

     which option was ultimately pursued, POL needed to take a more

     proactive role in the Working Group to ensure that Second Sight worked

     within the terms of reference set out (at page 7 of (POL00027369)).




                           Page 418 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      943. Having explored these options in detail, Chris and Mark recommended

           that option one - maintaining the status quo - was untenable and steps

           be taken to begin detailed planning of options two and three (at page 7

           of (POl00027369)).


      944. This paper appears to have been circulated by Alwen Lyons on 3 June

           2014 at 17:32 and I can see that Richard Callard and Mark had some

           initial discussion by email (UKGI00002358; UKGI00002359).


      945. The paper was discussed at the meeting of the Project Sparrow Sub-

           Committee on 6 June 2014. The minutes record that the Committee

           assessed the options against the fundamental principles agreed by the

           business for its approach to Project Sparrow (to gain a fuller

           understanding of the facts, to ensure a fair outcome and to highlight

           lessons learned, so that improvements could be made to Business

           processes). The Committee agreed that option three was its preferred

           option, subject to Ministerial support and a fuller understanding of legal

           risk. In the interim, planning for options two and three should proceed on

           a contingency basis (at pages 1 to 2 of (POl00006571 )).


Second Sight's thematic report


102. Please consider, POl00116416 (email from David Oliver to you dated 31

March 2014), POL00116417 (attachment to the prior email}, POL00004439

(Briefing Report Part 1 by Second Sight dated 25 July 2014), POl00030160

(Briefing Report Part 2 by Second Sight dated 21 August 2014) and

POL00002415 (POl's Reply to Second Sight's Briefing Report Part 2 dated 22

September 2014).
                                 Page 419 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




946. Before addressing the Inquiry's specific questions, I will set out my

     involvement with, and understanding of, Second Sight and their work at

     this time. Overall, I was concerned that they progress their work as this

     would enable a better understanding of the facts and hopefully lead to

     resolution. However, I did not work with Second Sight on a day-to-day

     basis and I was reliant on those who did to keep me informed. Given my

     role, my knowledge of their work was high level and I lacked the detailed

     technical knowledge to have any significant input on that front.


947. On 19 July 2013, Bond Dickinson produced a paper explaining the aims

     of the mediation process and setting out a flow chart proposal to progress

     cases through it (POL00117035). This proposal was made as a result of

     POL's very serious concerns about the lack of progress being made

     towards resolving the cases and the delay and cost of the work

     completed to date by Second Sight.


948. My overwhelming concern was to resolve these cases. This would be

     best for the SPMs and for POL. However, Second Sight appeared unable

     to achieve this. Their review was progressing extremely slowly, the work

     was over budget and delayed. The primary output to date was the Interim

     Report, which those working on the project at POL considered to be

     incomplete and, in places, inaccurate.


949. I can see from the minutes of a Working Group meeting on 3 January

     2014 that Second Sight were asked to produce "a generic report covering

     regularly occurring issues and a case specific report for each individual

     case" (at page 2 of (POL00026638)). I was not a member of the Working

                           Page 420 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     Group and did not attend this meeting, but my understanding is that this

     "generic" report is what ultimately came to be known as the thematic

     report. At this stage, consideration was still being given to whether this

     document would be a joint document prepared with POL.


950. An agenda for the meeting on 23 January 2014 records an update from

     Second Sight that they were a "(c)ouple of weeks away from being ready

     to release thematic report. A VDB raised joint report - Action Ron and

     AVDB to discuss" (at page 5 of (POL00026640)). Again, it is noted that

     discussions were ongoing in relation to whether this should be a joint

     report between Second Sight and POL (at page 7 of (POL00026640)).


951. I can see that on 27 January 2014, Ian Henderson emailed Janet Walker

     with an update for Lord Arbuthnot (at page 1 of (POL00100132)):


   "I think the Thematic Report (previously called the Mediators \(sic) Briefing

   Document), will be a good way of briefing MPs. However, we're probably

   2 or 3 weeks away from having something that is much more than an (sic)

   very early 1st draft."


952. The minutes of a Working Group meeting on 30 January 2014 (which I

     did not attend) record that there was discussion around the nature and

     content of the reports that Second Sight would provide, including the

     generic report. It was agreed that POL would provide Second Sight with

     the "Factfile" document at the earliest opportunity and consideration

     would be given as to whether it could be included in the generic report

     (at pages 2 to 3 of (POL00026641 )).


                            Page 421 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




953. At a Working Group meeting on 20 February 2014 (which I did not

     attend), I can see that Second Sight explained that only two individual

     reports would be ready by the deadline of 27 February and that the

     generic report was unlikely to be ready on time (at page 5 of

     (POL00026636)).


954. On 24 February 2014 I met with Second Sight. Later that day Chris

     Aujard and I met with Sir Anthony Hooper to discuss concerns about the

     progress of the Mediation Scheme, including in relation to delays and

     cost. By that date, the total cost was around 5,000,000 and we were not

     confident that Second Sight could handle the volume of material or

     produce reports within a meaningful timeframe. I can see that we

     explained that Second Sight had been unable to provide any assurance

     that they could complete their work by October 2014, which was the

     projected end date of the Scheme at that time (at page 1 of

     (POL00100338)).


955. Sir Anthony is recorded as agreeing: Second Sight were "resource

     challenged, and it would be difficult for them to meet the current

     timetable" albeit he recognised that they had a difficult role to play. I can

     see that we then discussed the different ways forward, including

     terminating the Mediation Scheme entirely (and allowing SPMs to pursue

     legal   remedies   through   the   courts   and   /   or paying    formulaic

     compensation), restructuring the Mediation Scheme, or supplementing

     the resourcing available to Second Sight. Sir Anthony contended that

     POL should do nothing until Second Sight had produced some case


                            Page 422 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     reports and POL had seen the thematic report, which he thought would

     be done within four weeks (at pages 1 to 2 of (POL00100338)).


956. The POL Board met on 26 February 2014. I can see that Belinda Crowe

     sent me an email to at 07:59 attaching a speaking note for that day's POL

     Board meeting. The speaking note summarises these meetings,

     including one with Second Sight at which they confirmed to me they

     would not hit the required timescales for any of their reports. The

     speaking notes confirm that we had accepted Sir Anthony's suggestion

     to wait for the reports before making further decisions (at page 2 of

     (POL00116313)).


957. I replied to Belinda's email noting that she had not mentioned the option

     that POL find a "face saving" exit for Second Sight, for example, at the

     conclusion of the thematic report. On this option, Second Sight would

     remain involved in the Working Group and POL would use a better

     resourced supplier to deal with the cases (at page 1 of (POL00116312)).

     The motivation for this, as was discussed with Sir Anthony, was that

     Second Sight were under-resourced and, given the delays, seemed

     unable to cope with the volume of cases within a reasonable time. As

     ever, my fundamental concern was that we had to find a way to resolve

     the outstanding cases which had already been delayed so long. Whilst

     critical of their output, I recognised and respected that Second Sight had

     worked with commitment; a face save was my suggestion.


958. At the POL Board meeting later that day (26 February 2014) I provided

     an update on the challenges facing the Mediation Scheme and explained

                            Page 423 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




      that I had met with both Sir Anthony and Second Sight to discuss these.

      I noted that Second Sight were yet to produce their first written report for

      the Scheme and flagged Sir Anthony's advice that POL should not act to

      change the Mediation Scheme yet (at pages 3 to 4 of (POL00021522)).


959. On 6 March 2014, I exchanged emails with Belinda. She informed me

      that Second Sight had raised the issue of making their thematic report

      available to MPs in advance of the meeting on 24 March 2014. Belinda

      asked if she could refer to previous discussions I had had with Lord

     Arbuthnot, in which he had accepted the view that Second Sight needed

      to keep matters internal (I believe this would be internal to the Working

      Group, as opposed to public) while the mediation was ongoing (at page

      1 of (POL00116320)).


960. I replied to Belinda indicating that I had no objections to her proposal to

      share the content of those discussions, but suggested we discuss the

      best approach:"/ think we should discuss: eg. Why is it unhelpful and see

      whether actually letting them publish could be helpful. And if not, have

      some good reasons that would resonate with TH and with JA" (at page 1

      of (POL00116320)).


961. On 7 March 2014, the Working Group met. I did not attend this meeting

      but I can see that they discussed the nature and progress of Second

      Sight's work,    including   on the thematic report (at page 5 of

      (POL00026656) ):


    "There was a discussion of the Second Sight generic/thematic report. It

    was noted that this would not cover the factual position of what Horizon did
                             Page 424 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




   and how it acted. The Working Group agreed that a document that clearly

   documented the role of Horizon and the Post Office was key to successful

   mediation and that this document could not be produced by one of the

   parties to mediation. Therefore the Working Group agreed that Second

   Sight would produce the factual Part One briefing document. It was agreed

   that case report work should be paused to allow Second Sight to focus on

   the production of the Part 1 and the thematic report (referred to as part 2).


   "It was agreed that the Working Group would return to reviewing the

   individual reports after they had looked at Part One and Part Two reports

   which would be circulated by close of business 26 March at the latest ... "


962. POL was tasked with providing Second Sight with a copy of the Factfile,

     which Second Sight were to review urgently and consider using as a

     basis for the Part One Report (also described as the "mediator briefing").

     Angela Van Den Bogerd and Second Sight were to liaise to discuss any

     outstanding issues or disagreement prior to the circulation of the Part

     One and Two reports (at page 5 of (POL00026656)). As this shows, it

     was always anticipated that POL would work with Second Sight in

     producing these and it was the Working Group who determined that POL

     should have that input.


963. On 9 March 2014, I can see that Belinda provided an update to Peter

     Batten at ShEx, explaining that the thematic report was now expected by

     26 March and Second Sight had been advised by the Working Group to

     stop work on the individual reports to meet this deadline (at page 2 of

     (POL00100387) ).

                            Page 425 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




964. On 13 March 2014, POL provided Second Sight with the Factfile.

     Working Group minutes for 20 March 2014 noted that the Factfile had

     been provided (at page 4 of (POL00026642)) and the minutes of 27

     March 2014 noted that this had been done on 13 March (at page 4 of

     (POL00026644) ).


965. On 18 March 2014, I had a telephone call with Lord Arbuthnot to discuss,

     amongst other things, what information could be communicated to MPs.

     I see from the note that both Second Sight and POL were concerned

     about what they could communicate, given Sir Anthony's direction to

     maintain confidentiality. The speaking note for this meeting records my

     ongoing concerns about the speed and quality of Second Sight's work,

     although we were working where possible with SPMs to resolve issues

     (at pages 3 to 5 of (POL00108346)).


966. At a meeting on 20 March 2014, the Working Group was assured that

     Second Sight was on track to provide the thematic report by 26 March

     2014 (at page 3 of (POL00026642)). These minutes record that Second

     Sight had provided POL with initial comments on the Factfile and would

     provide more detailed comments the next week (at page 4 of

     (POL00026642)).


967. On 24 March 2014, I attended a meeting with Lord Arbuthnot, several

     other   MPs    and   their   representatives,   Ron   Warmington,   and

     representatives for the JFSA (Alan Bates and Kay Linnell). The note of

     this meeting records Ron Warmington saying that the thematic report will

     be released on 26 March (at page 2 of (POL00105634)). I see that Mark

                           Page 426 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     Davies circulated "a note and overview'' of the meeting by email later that

     day, saying "I'd be grateful to colleagues who were in the meeting for any

     observations/corrections". I believe this is the note referred to in his email

     (POL00116388).


968. By way of a letter dated 26 March 2014, Lord Arbuthnot wrote to thank

     me for attending the meeting with MPs and to follow up on the question

     of what information could be given to MPs and when (POL00100474).


969. Second Sight did not produce their thematic report for the 26 March

     deadline. I see from the minutes of the POL Board meeting that day that

     I conveyed to the POL Board that Sir Anthony had challenged Second

     Sight on the quality of their work, but we did not dwell on this. The focus

     of that meeting was on other matters including the formation of the

     Project   Sparrow      Sub-Committee       and    the    Linklaters'   advice

     (POL00021523).


970. The minutes of the Working Group meeting of 27 March 2014 recorded

     that Second Sight's thematic report would not be available for discussion

     on 1 April 2014, nor would any further case reports be completed by that

     date. Second Sight are recorded as having provided comments to Angela

     on POL's Factfile, which she was directed to consider before uploading

     a revised version on 31 March (at page 4 of (POL00026644)). I do not

     think I ever saw a copy of the Factfile document. Angela, who was

     working closely with Second Sight throughout this time, was handling this

     matter.



                             Page 427 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




971. The continuing delays were a source of frustration to POL and to others.

     I can see that David Oliver provided an update for me and others

     following the meeting on 27 March and noted that Second Sight "came

     under a lot of pressure over their delivery - primarily from Tony Hooper

     and JFSA" (at page 1 of (POL00027800)). I replied "I guess not a surprise

     but serious and disappointing ... I'm concerned that we continue to pay for

     sub-standard work, could you think about what opportunities there might

     be to contain/carefully fire a shot across their bows?" (at page 1 of

     (POL00027800)). I shared the sense of frustration at these ongoing

     delays and agreed with David Oliver's suggestion that the team meet to

     discuss a way forward. I see that I instructed him to prepare a draft plan

     for this meeting, with input from senior managers and directors so that

     we could consider options and approaches. As I have commented above,

     this was not due to a lack of interest on my part but a desire to allow

     those closest and best informed to think through options first, so that

     together we could review, evaluate and, if necessary, change or improve.

     I realise that this rings hollow now but improvements were made,

     including keeping Second Sight in a genuine and not just a "face save"

     role. This reflects the division of work between those who were working

     closely with Second Sight and the Working Group on a day-to-day basis

     and me. I was handling this and many other matters from a higher-level

     perspective. As I say here, I added value by iterating and challenging the

     options presented to me by those who were more involved in the details

     of the work, and who had the best experience to think through options

     and draft plans.


                            Page 428 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




972. A partial draft thematic report appears to have been provided to POL on

      31 March 2014. I can see that David Oliver emailed me (cc'ing in Martin

      Edwards, Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard, and Mark Davies) on that date

      attaching a copy (POL00116417) and explaining (POL00116416):


   "ft is 15 pages long but includes large amounts of direct quotes from our

    instruction manuals. As with the individual case reports it contains a

    number of unsubstantiated assertions and Post Office's position is absent

    or poorly represented."


973. David Oliver also sent a copy to a wider group, including Rodric Williams,

     Angela Van Den Bogerd, Andy Holt, Lesley Sewell, and Andrew Parsons

      of Bond Dickinson. Andrew Parsons' reply was critical of this partial

      report (at page 1 of (POL00006552)):


   "In general, this report suffers the same problems as SS' previous reports

   - a lack of detail, evidence and justifications to back up some fairly

    sweeping conclusions. On the positive side, if this is the best points that

    SS can raise then there is little in here to concern POL. However, a report

    that is this poor will add very little, if anything, to the mediation process and

    may in fact confuse matters, making resolution more difficult."


974. In his email, Andrew Parsons also advised that he had considered

     whether the report would be opposed by Fujitsu, Camelot, or BOI but he

      did not think there was sufficient substance to concern them. This email

     was not sent to me, and I do not recall being told that we had sought or

      received legal advice on this issue.


                              Page 429 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




975. At 15:20 on 1 April 2014, Lord Arbuthnot circulated an update following

      the meeting on 24 March to recipients unknown, in which he expressed

      concern. He stated that the process was taking "much longer than

      anyone wants" and that there was no indication of when "any

      investigation might yield results, and what exactly we might be told about

      these results". I can see that Belinda forwarded his email to Sophie

      Bialaszewski, Mark Davies, Chris Aujard, and Martin Edwards, although

      it does not appear to have been sent directly to me (POL00100491 ).


976. The Working Group also met on 1 April 2014 and discussed the progress

      of the Second Sight reports. I did not attend this meeting but can see

      that, subject to resolving the factual comments still outstanding, Second

      Sight would take ownership and editorial control of the Part One Report.

      Nonetheless, they were to work closely with POL, through Angela, to

      complete the report "as soon as possible and certainly before the next

      Working Group" (at page 3 of (POL00026633)).


977. At that meeting, it was agreed that the Part Two Report (previously

      referred to as the thematic report) was too early in its development to be

      discussed by the Working Group "but completion of the Part Two report

      should not hold up the Part One report which was a priority (f)or individual

      case reports" (at page 3 of (POL00026633)). The Part Two report was

      then put on hold to enable Second Sight to focus on the completion of

      the Part One report and case reports.


978. On 11 April 2014, I wrote to Lord Arbuthnot, responding to his letter of 26

      March. I reiterated my support for a final report but explained that I did

                             Page 430 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     not support a further interim report, which I considered had the potential

     to damage the integrity of the Mediation Scheme (POL00100671 ).


979. My understanding is that Second Sight submitted a draft of their Part One

     Report on 29 April 2014. I was not included within this correspondence,

     but I can see that Andrew Parsons sent an email providing comment on

     the report to David Oliver, Angela Van Den Bogerd, Chris Aujard, Belinda

     Crowe, Rodric Williams and others at 15:09 on 29 April. He was critical

     of the draft Part One Report and considered that it contained opinions

     which were at odds with the neutral, factual nature of the Part One Report

     and which would be better placed in the thematic report, if they were to

     be included at all (at page 1 of (POL00006554)):


   "All the opinions are unsupported by either logical reasoning or evidence.

   Even if these opinions were set out in the Thematic Report, SS need to

   properly justify these views otherwise they should not be permitted to

   advance them in any form."


980. I can see from the minutes of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee

     meeting on 30 April 2014 (which I attended but do not recall) that Belinda

     explained that Second Sight had produced only one of the three reports

     they had committed to providing for the Working Group meeting on 1 May

     and their performance continued to be less than satisfactory. The

     Committee considered Chris Aujard's paper of 28 April and agreed that,

     provided that there was a satisfactory outcome from the Deloitte

     assurance work, some version of option two would be pursued. That is,

     to continue to investigate cases but to bring them in-house, with or

                            Page 431 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     without the support of an alternative professional provider to oversee the

     investigations (at pages 2 to 3 of (POL00006566)).


981. On 1 May 2014, Lord Arbuthnot responded to my letter of 11 April asking

     again about the possibility of providing a further interim report

     (POL00105466).


982. At a meeting on 6 May 2014, the Working Group appears to have

     discussed a copy of Second Sight's draft Part One Report. The minutes

     record POL's comments on this report including that it contained

     inaccuracies and, in other places, opinions, analysis, and conjecture, all

     of which should be in the Part Two Report (and, if made, supported by

     evidence). The minutes record that the document needed to be clarified

     on several issues and Second Sight were then tasked with producing a

     revised copy to the Working Group by 9 May 2014 (at pages 1 to 2 of

     (POL00043627)). Although I was not present at this meeting, I was aware

     of the broad nature of these criticisms from those who were working more

     closely on the project.


983. A revised copy of the draft Part One Report appears to have been

     considered at a further meeting of the Working Group on 20 May 2014.

     A number of amendments were agreed by the Working Group and

     Second Sight were tasked with providing a further draft copy by 22 May

     2014 (at page 1 of (POL00026659). The final version of the Part One

     Report appears to have been released on 25 July 2014 (POL00075178).


984. The Part Two Report was discussed at a Working Group teleconference

     on 26 June 2014. I was not in attendance but can see that Second Sight
                               Page 432 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     are recorded as saying that it should be ready for review by the Working

     Group by the week commencing 14 July, although 10 July was "an

     unrealistic deadline." The minutes again record that it was the Working

     Group's expectation that POL have input into this report, certainly insofar

     as it lay factual groundwork (at page 7 of (POl00026665)):


   "Post Office and SS agreed that the Part Two report must be factually

   correct and dialogue should take place between the two parties to ensure

   this is the case however SS stated that it is for them as editors of the report

   to determine the issues covered in the report."


985. This editorial control was reiterated at the Working Group meeting on 10

     July, although again, the Working Group emphasised that Second Sight

     should be working with POL to ensure accuracy. It is recorded in the

     minutes that the Working Group agreed that the draft should be shared

     with POL in advance to comment on its accuracy and there should be

     further discussions between Second Sight and POL on this issue.

     Throughout these meetings it is clear that the Working Group were in

     agreement that, despite the fundamental editorial control that Second

     Sight retained, POL should be given the opportunity to input into, and

     comment upon, the report (at page 11 of (POl00026672)). In short, it

     appears to have been agreed by all parties to the Working Group that it

     was perfectly legitimate - and indeed beneficial - for POL to be involved

     in the production of the report to that extent.


986. On 16 July 2014, Lord Arbuthnot provided an update on the progression

     of the Scheme noting that it "is progressing, but at a slower pace than

                            Page 433 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     any of us would have liked" and attaching a note I provided setting out

     what progress had been made since the last meeting with MPs (at pages

     157 to 158 and 160 of (POL00090358)).


987. On 1 August 2014, Belinda emailed Andrew Parsons, Angela Van Den

     Bogerd, Rodric Williams, David Oliver, Jessica Barker and Melanie

     Garfield a copy of the draft Part Two Report (POL00022149). She

     suggests that Rodric Williams provide a copy to Linklaters, which he

     appears to have done later that day (at page 5 of (POL00021814).


988. In his email response of 6 August 2014, Jonathan Swil of Linklaters was

     highly critical of the quality of Second Sight's draft report (he comments

     that this report alone would justify terminating their engagement) and

     advised that they had strayed beyond their expertise and the terms of

     their engagement. He described the report as "well below the standard

     we would expect of a firm of 'experienced accountants' engaged to

     prepare an independent, evidence-based reporf' and considered that the

     draft report failed to protect both POL and the applicants' interests (at

     pages 2 to 5, POL00021814). Mr Swil advised that POL approach the

     Chair of the Working Group to attempt to impose greater control on

     Second Sight and suggested that POL "make every effort to have the

     report sufficiently amended such that it is in a more acceptable form" (at

     page 3 of (POL00021814)).


989. On 6 August 2014, Belinda forwarded this response to Chris, Angela,

     and Andrew Parsons explaining that she would like to write to Second



                           Page 434 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     Sight and provide an initial response with a detailed response to follow,

     noting that (at page 1 of (POL00021814)):


   "SS have been engaged continuously by Post Office since 2012 and we

   would have expected that over that time they would have had sufficient

   opportunity to provide a more substantive analysis than contained in the

   report ... the challenge over lack of facts/evidence/context is one we have

   made a number of times. It is taking up considerable time and resource

   within Post Office to comment on and provide input into products we are

   paying SS to deliver."


990. On 8 August 2014, Belinda sent Chris Day and Martin Edwards an email

     to which she attached a draft of a letter to Second Sight (POL00305575).

     Belinda stated in her email that I had asked Chris Day to clear the letter

     to be sent to Second Sight if Chris Aujard was not able to do so (Chris

     Aujard was on holiday at this time). Belinda also went on to say that I was

     "generally supportive of a robust approach" to Second Sight. Although I

     had not been copied into Belinda's email on 6 August 2014 (from which

     I have quoted above), the concerns Belinda raised about Second Sight's

     work reflects what I recall being told by those working closely with

     Second Sight (Belinda, Angela Van Den Bogerd, Rodric Williams and

     Chris Aujard) .. The "robust approach" that Belinda said that I generally

     supported was that POL should raise with Second Sight its concerns

     about the quality their work and seek to find a way of working with Second

     Sight to ensure that their reports were accurate, sufficiently reasoned




                            Page 435 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     where they drew conclusions and of assistance to applicants and the

     mediation process.


991. On 15 August 2014 at 14:19 Gavin Lambert sent me a draft of an update

     to the POL Board .. It is clear from this just how many significant issues

     the business and I were managing at this time. On the Mediation

     Scheme, it is noted that a draft of the Part Two Report had been received

     "which we believe is of a very poor quality. It lacks evidence and analysis

     and is unhelpful to applicants and Post Office in terms of assisting a

     resolution of applications" (at page 2 of (POl00101176)). This reflects

     my recollection of what I was told by those working with Second Sight

     and I see also accords with the advice being given to POL by its external

     lawyers.


992. This update appears to have been sent to the Board by Alwen Lyons on

     16 August 2014 (UKGI00002436). The update sets out that POL sent a

     letter responding to Second Sight voicing their concerns over the quality

     of the work produced. Although I have not seen a draft of this letter, I can

     see that Belinda and David Oliver sought assistance from our external

     lawyers    at    both     Linklaters      (POl00022215;     POl00022212;

     POl00022213) and Bond Dickinson (POl00021814; POl00022186). I

     was not copied into this correspondence and do not think I saw a copy of

     this letter, although I was kept updated by Belinda on the broad actions

     being undertaken, as is clear from our correspondence on 15 August

     2014 (POl00101174).




                             Page 436 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




993. In that correspondence, Belinda provided me with "a very high level

     update" and an offer to discuss. She notes that Sir Anthony would not

     permit any further discussion at the Working Group prior to the report

     being released to applicants and so, regardless of POL's dissatisfaction

     with its quality, it would be circulated. Against that background, Belinda

     stated that she was considering three actions with Chris Day. First,

     writing to Second Sight about the quality of their work and reserving

     POL's legal position. Second, putting down a marker to the Working

     Group that POL does not agree with the Part Two Report or to it being

     issued to applicants in its current state. Third, completing POL's "rebuttaf'

     of the Part Two Report in a format that could go to applicants.


994. In my reply to Belinda, I said that what she told me was not unexpected

     and that POL was already preparing what I called our "complementary

     report". I stated that we would need to move straight to her third action.

     As I said my "single-minded ambition" now that most of the case reports

     were in was to move through them as quickly as possible .. As regards

     to Belinda's first and second actions, I stated that they looked right and

     that we should see what advice was given on those issues I went on to

     say two further points (at page 1 of POL00101174)):


   " ... I am happy for you and Chris to decide what the subsequent action

   should be. Keep Mark in the loop; and if you need someone more senior -

   Alice ...


   "My only other thought is as you have always done, that you keep BIS fully

   briefed but additionally, try to get a sense of what the minister's view is."

                            Page 437 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




995. This interaction reflects my general level of involvement and my concern

     that decisions were not taken in isolation from the Board and BIS. It was

     important that I had the right people in place and had oversight of their

     actions so that I could challenge and / or support. I asked Belinda and

     Chris to decide on next actions and to involve Mark Davies. I suggested

     that if they needed a more senior view, they should consult Alice. I

     advised too that they should keep BIS in the loop. This would indicate

     that I was going to be absent during the relevant period and wanted to

     be sure that they felt supported, that wider views were considered, and

     that stakeholders were in the loop.


996. On 19 August 2014, Belinda and Rodric appear to have received a draft

     letter to Second Sight from Mr Swil at Linklaters which he noted "is

     drafted in quite strong terms" (at page 1 of (POL00021800)). Belinda sent

     this on to David Oliver, Melanie Garfield, and Andrew Parsons. In an

     email of 21 August 2014, David Oliver summarised the work being done,

     including letters to both Second Sight and Sir Anthony. I can see that a

     draft letter was prepared on behalf of Chris (POL00040226) and what

     appears to be a subsequent draft in the name of Rodric (POL00040230).

     I can see from (POL00305792) that on 20 August 2014, Rodric emailed

     Sir Anthony about the Part Two Report. Rodric asked Sir Anthony to

     agree a short delay in sending the report to applicants. The purpose of

     the delay was to allow time for POL to raise its concerns about the report

     and how it intended to respond with the Working Group before the report

     was issued. I do not remember whether I was aware of this proposal at

     the time.

                           Page 438 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




997. Again, although I was not copied in correspondence on these letters or

     emails, I can see that the team managing the project received

     considerable support, advice, and assistance from POL's internal and

     external lawyers, which I consider to be appropriate. For example, on 26

     August 2014, Belinda sent a final draft of POL's letter to Second Sight to

     Chris, having received a further draft of this from Mr Swil on 21 August

     (POL00022237). Belinda noted in her covering email that "Chris Day and

     Paula were (understandably) keen to get something on the record about

     costs." She asked Chris to advise before she proceeded further on this

     work.


998. On 29 August 2014, Chris sent an email update to Neil Mccausland,

     Alasdair Marnoch, Richard Callard and me, providing an overview of the

     issues surrounding the Part Two Report and actions undertaken by the

     project team in response to it. Chris was critical of the quality and lack of

     objectivity in the report and explained that, despite POL's concerns, the

     final version (which I understand to be (POL00030160)) was sent to

     applicants on 26 August 2014. Chris explained that POL had written to

     the recipients of the report to flag that POL did not endorse or accept its

     findings and informed us that a detailed note setting out the areas of

     disagreement was being prepared. He highlighted that, despite the report

     being confidential, there was a risk that it could be leaked now that it had

     been circulated, so Mark Davies and his team had been briefed (at pages

     1 to 2 of (POL00116697)).




                            Page 439 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




999. It subsequently became clear that a copy of the report had been leaked

     and I can see that I received an email from Mark on 5 September 2014,

     confirming that he had been approached by a journalist who appeared to

     have seen a copy. As I say in my response to him, this was "[u]nhelpful

     but sadly not surprising" (POL00101301).


1000. Mark wrote to the POL Board at 17:33 on 9 September 2014, explaining

     that Radio 4 had broadcast a report on the leak (POL00101325), which

     he described as inaccurate. I can see that I clarified this with Mark and

     he explained that the reporting had suggested that POL accepted that

     there were issues with Horizon, something which the editor subsequently

     apologised for: see (POL00101365). Neil Mccausland responded at

     18: 10 asking if there was a way that POL could use the leak and the

     damage to reputation it would cause "to stop/alter the process that we

     are involved in. It's a long shot, but it would be great to find a faster/better

     way out of Sparrow." I replied, explaining to Neil that I had met with Chris

     that day and that "the team are pushing harder on all aspects, as we

     agreed with the Board. That said, this is a useful further challenge Neil -

     your point is well made (ie.,          capitalise the leak),      thank you."

     (POL00101325).


1001. On 11 September 2014, the Working Group met and discussed the leak.

     Chris proposed that, if it transpired that a professional advisor had leaked

     the material, then they should be reported to their professional regulator

     and receive no payment. If it transpired that an applicant had leaked it,

     their case should be reconsidered and potentially withdrawn from the


                             Page 440 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




     Mediation Scheme. The minutes record that the Working Group agreed

     with Chris's proposals. David Oliver confirmed that POL would release

     its response to the Part Two Report in time for the meeting next week (at

     page 6 of (POl00026680)).


1002. On 15 September 2014, Fujitsu provided a written response to the Part

     Two Report authored by Gareth Jenkins, James Davidson, Pete

     Newsome, and Mike Harvey. They considered that the report was largely

     unevidenced and "constitutes unsubstantiated subjective opinion which,

     in our opinion, is without merit or basis" (at page 1 of (POL00029944)).


1003. Chris and Belinda provided an update paper to the POL Board dated 17

     September 2014 which addressed the wider situation at that time

     (POl00027363). As was always the case, there were numerous issues

     which required my and the Board's attention beyond the Mediation

     Scheme. A sense of the breadth of ongoing concerns is provided by the

     "Lead Team Update" document prepared for my CEO report to the Board

     dated 12 September: these are Mark's notes for me setting out only the

     work being done by his team (POl00101364). His team was one of

     approximately ten teams, each of which produced similar updates.


1004. POL's formal response to the Part Two Report of 22 September 2014

     was developed over the course of around a month with input from several

     sources. I can see that, on 22 August 2014, Belinda sought input from

     several different teams which would then be fed into the draft being

     prepared by Andrew Pheasant and Andrew Parsons (POl00021853). I

     can see that there was extensive correspondence with senior managers

                           Page 441 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     asking for their input to this work, none of which I was party to (see, for

     example,       (POL00021853;          POL00021773;          POL00040246;

     POL00021883)).


1005.As above, it was not my role to be involved in the work at this level of

     detail: I did not have the day-to-day involvement in the project, nor did I

     have the technical or legal expertise to input usefully into this work. This

     work was, quite properly, completed by the project director manager,

     Belinda, with input from our technical and legal teams. The updates I did

     receive were at a much higher level: a representative example of which

     would be the update Alwen Lyons sent me on 29 August 2014 in advance

     of a briefing call. The actions relating to Project Sparrow were outlined at

     a high level, being only some of a very large number of issues which we

     needed to cover (POL00101244).


1006.1 understand that POL's formal Response to the Part Two Report dated

     22 September 2014 (POL00002415) was sent out under a covering letter

     from Angela (POL00006561 appears to be a draft of this). Alwen updated

     the POL Board on 24 September 2014 to confirm that the Response had

     been sent (POL00101390). I can see from the minutes of a POL Board

     meeting on 25 September 2014 (which I attended) that Belinda and Chris

     provided a brief update on the progress of the Mediation Scheme,

     although I note that the minutes of this meeting do not confirm whether

     the POL Board was provided with a copy of POL's Response

     (POL00021528). The Response is likely to have been uploaded to the

     Reading Room.


                            Page 442 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




102.1. Describe to what extent you were involved in seeking to influence the

final version of Second Sight's thematic report.


      1007.As the above indicates, I was not involved in influencing - or seeking to

            influence - the final version of Second Sight's thematic report. It was not

            part of my role as CEO to challenge the report on that level of detail and

             I did not seek to do so.


      1008. The task of determining which parts of the report should be challenged

            and seeking that those changes be made, fell to those working closely

            on the project, notably, Belinda Crowe, Angela Van Den Bogerd, and

            Chris Aujard. They were assisted in this work by a team from Fujitsu and

             POL's internal and external lawyers, who I can see they consulted

            regularly.


      1009. From my review of the documents, I would also like to make the following

            points:


      a.   The Working Group directed that POL should have input into the report

           because it was recognised that it would be beneficial for them to have this

           input. POL was directed to input into the report through the provision of the

           Factfile for Second Sight's Part One Report, through discussions at

           Working Group meetings, through meetings with Second Sight, and

           through the provision of comments on the draft. It is unclear to me whether

           these steps are what the Inquiry is referring to by the phrase "seeking to

           influence." If these are properly construed as attempts to influence the

           report then they seem to me to be appropriate forms of influence, aimed at

           producing a better, more accurate, more useful report. That they are
                                    Page 443 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           appropriate is suggested by the fact that they were actions which the Chair

           of the Working Group directed POL to undertake.


      b.   The parts of the report which POL sought to challenge were challenged

           because it was the view of those working closely on the project that they

           were inaccurate or inappropriate. Although I was not involved in this level

           of detail, I can see that the consistent view, shared by POL's internal and

           external legal teams, was that the Second Sight report was of poor quality,

           contained inaccuracies, contained opinion which was unsuitable for

           inclusion in a neutral factual report, and would be unhelpful both to POL

           and to applicants. To the extent that I was aware of the steps being taken

           to challenge and refine the report, those steps struck me as appropriate,

           given this assessment of the draft report.


      c.   The amendments made to the report appear to have been agreed by all

           parties to the Working Group following open discussions at Working Group

           meetings. These meetings were also attended by Sir Anthony Hooper,

           Second Sight, and the JFSA and those parties had every opportunity to

           object to the suggested amendments. If POL was successful in

           "influencing" the content of the final report, that appears to have been

           because all parties to the Working Group agreed that it needed to be

           changed. That the Working Group retained control over the final report is

           clear from the fact that the final report was published despite POL's

           continuing dissatisfaction with its contents.


102.2. Please describe your views at the time on the Second Sight reports and

set out any action you took as a result of the same. Please set out which aspects

                                    Page 444 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




of the reports you did not agree with. providing reasons for the same.


1010. Although I remember reading these reports at the time, I do not now recall my

      views of them with precision. I have read them several times since and my

      views now are necessarily clouded with hindsight. However, I do recall the

      following as areas which stood out to me at the time of reading the reports. In

      relation to the Briefing Report Part Two:


             a.   Paragraphs 1.6 and 1.8 contained unhelpful definitions of scale.


             b.   Paragraph 3.1 states that POL had accepted the need for a wide

                  definition of Horizon. However, in including contracts, audit, and

                  investigative processes without consulting POL, Second Sight had

                  gone outside of their brief ("scope creep" referred to in Board

                  minutes). POL had no choice but to accept and then challenge

                  where needed, through the review process.


             c.   Paragraph 4.5(h) states, regarding the statement that "(t)he

                  investigation division does NOT enquire into matters where crime is

                  not suspected''. This was inaccurate because this was not the role

                  of the investigation division. I understood that cases where crime

                  was not suspected were investigated elsewhere, usually starting in

                  Chesterfield. This unqualified statement about such a serious issue

                  was misleading.


             d.   Paragraph 5 onwards states that the way the report read was that

                  some of the issues complained about by SPMs were still current. I




                                    Page 445 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




                 was aware that POL had resolved several of the issues prior to

                 engaging Second Sight, for example Lottery Scratch cards.


1011. I did not take any specific actions myself, but those working closely on the

      project, assisted by POL's internal and external lawyers, drafted a formal

      Response to Second Sight's reports.


102.3. Have you views on these reports changed?


1012. My view of these reports today is fundamentally different from what it was then,

      having regard to the findings in the Common Issues trial, the Horizon Issues

      trial, the judgment of the Court of Appeal criminal division and having listened

      to the evidence in the Inquiry to date.


1013. I am in no doubt now that the Second Sight report was in principle right and

      POL's focus in its Response was wrong. The work undertaken by Second Sight

      formed the basis for the SPMs to be able to bring the Group Litigation. Without

      this they would not have been able to do so.


1014. I fully accept the findings of Fraser J in respect of BEDs and, insofar as POL's

      Response conflicts with those findings, I accept that it was incorrect. However,

      at the time, POL's Response matched my understanding and what I was being

      told by those I relied upon. I can also see from the documents that it was

      supported by the advice from POL's internal and external lawyers. I accept that

      the GLO Proceedings vindicated, for example, what Second Sight said about

      the nature of the contract but, at the time, POL was receiving legal advice which

      forcefully rejected their approach to this so I can understand why POL

      responded as it did.

                                   Page 446 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




102.4. Explain to what extent you. or anyone else in senior management. sought

to enquire into the potential effects of the Falkirk bug outside of the Castleton

and Misra branches.


1015. I do not recall directing any such enquiry myself and I do not know whether

      anyone else carried out such an enquiry during my time at POL. I first became

      aware of the Falkirk bug in 2013, when I was informed that the bug had

      occurred many years previously and had been fixed.


POL's change in approach to the Mediation Scheme


103. Please consider POL00027369 (Chris Auiard and Mark Davies' report on the

Mediation Scheme dated 3 June 2014), UKGI00002392 (Chris Aujard's update

report on the Mediation Scheme dated 18 June 2014), UKGI00002397 (Chris

Aujard's July Update Paper dated 7 July 2014) and POL00021528 (minutes of

POL Board meeting on 25 September 2014).


103.1 Please describe POL's approach to the SPMs' complaints relating to

Horizon and the Mediation Scheme thereafter and your involvement with the

same. Please explain to what extent you communicated information about such

complaints and POL's response to the same to the Board, ShEx/UKGI or BEIS.

The following paragraphs are not intended to limit your response to this request.


103.2 Please explain the basis on which it was thought appropriate not to

continue the Mediation Scheme in the form that it was initially designed.


1016. I have already set out POL's change in approach to the Mediation Scheme and

      explained why maintaining the status quo had           become increasingly

      unpalatable. The reasons for this had been articulated by Belinda Crowe as
                                 Page 447 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      early as February 2014 (at pages 12 to 15 of (POL00092172)) and only

      became more pressing as time went on. In outline: the Mediation Scheme was

      ever more delayed and costly, we had doubts about Second Sight's capacity

      to deliver the work that progress depended upon, there was a consistent gap

      between POL's valuation of the claims and what the applicants expected to

      recover (the "expectation gap"), and the ongoing management of the Mediation

      Scheme was a significant drain on POL's resources including in respect of

      senior management.


1017. These were longstanding concerns. I can see that the note of my meeting with

      Sir Anthony on 23 February 2014 records that we discussed restructuring the

      Scheme but he advised against this until POL had seen more of Second Sight's

      work (at pages 1 to 2 of (POL00100335)):


          "The various ways forward were discussed. These included a) terminating

          the scheme entirely and allowing SPMR's to pursue their legal remedies

          through the courts and/or paying out compensation to applicants in a

          formulaic manner (as per the email that PV had received from the A

          member of the Board earlier in the day) ; b) restructuring the scheme such

          that it is looked more like a more like a [sic] mediation scheme (with nothing

          being resolved until all the applicants CQRs had been received- this would

          have the effect of pushing out any settlement payments for many months);

          c) augmenting SS's resources with resources from one of the big

          accountancy firms, either by displacing them in their investigative role, or

          by placing resource alongside them; and d) reworking the process in the

          scheme and streamlining it.


                                   Page 448 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          "TH's strong contention was that POL should take no precipitous action

          until such time as SS had produced, say, 5 reports, and until we had seen

          their thematic report. He noted the adverse PR consequences of

          terminating the scheme and also offered to make himself available to talk

          to the Board to explain why he considered this approach appropriate,

          should that be necessary or desirable."


1018. Progress on the cases continued to be very slow and the work produced by

      Second Sight was, in the view of those working on the project, of poor quality.

      However, we were conscious that any decision to change our approach would

      be significant and could hinder our efforts to resolve the underlying SPM

      complaints or alienate stakeholders, including MPs. As was noted in the

      options paper prepared for the inaugural meeting of the Project Sparrow Sub-

      Committee on 9 April 2014 (discussed above), there was "no right answer" but

      the "most appropriate option for the business is one which 'does the right thing

      by SPMRs"' (at page 9 of (POL00116439) ). Finding a satisfactory resolution to

      the claims themselves remained a central concern: the fact that the Scheme

      was not achieving this was one reason it needed to change.


1019. Chris Aujard's and Mark Davies' options paper dated 3 June 2014

      (POL00027369) was prepared for the Sub-Committee meeting on 6 June. It

      discussed three options in detail.


            a.   The paper rejected Option 1 ("continuing with the Scheme as

                 currently configured and managed"). This would cost too much in

                 terms of time and money and could "end up with applicants and

                 stakeholders being more dissatisfied at the end of the Scheme

                                   Page 449 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




                (having had their expectations raised as a result of the value

                advisors are putting on their claims)."


           b.   Option 2 ("continuing with the Scheme but seeking to refine its work

                within the existing Terms of Reference") was acceptable and should

                be considered in detail. Although it "could place strain on the

                Working Group and may lead to one or more parties withdrawing

                from the Group", it "could, we believe, lead to the delivery of a

                Scheme which provides greater value for the business while still

                allowing for the prospect of a full investigation of all applicants'

                complaints under independent oversight."


           c.   Option 3 was the Sub-Committee's preferred option ("completing the

                Post Office investigation in each case and moving the governance

                and management of the Scheme in-house"). It resulted in the

                greatest cost saving, and would allow the Post Office to control the

                risks, such as adverse PR. It would require a commitment that POL

                would "investigate all cases and disclose the findings to the

                applicant and would mediate a substantial (but significantly reduced)

                number of cases."


1020. On 3 June 2014, Alice sent an email encouraging the Sub-Committee to

     consider appointing alternative investigators, noting they might be better and

     faster than Second Sight even if they were not cheaper (POL00116581 ).


1021. The Sub-Committee met on 6 June 2014 (POL00006571 ). The Sub-Committee

     preferred Option 3 but requested legal advice on the risk of judicial review (at

     page 4 of (POL00027153)). Paragraph 6.4 of their recommendation paper
                                  Page 450 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




          noted that "it would be imprudent to announce Option 3 in recess". Making the

          announcement during the Parliamentary recess would have been completely

          the wrong thing to do. It was important that POL announced this important

          change at a time when it would get attention, so there could be no accusation

          of trying to cover things up.


1022. Before the POL Board meeting on 10 June, Richard Callard expressed a

          preference, as the Government NED, for Option 3 (UKGI00002358).


1023. At the meeting on 10 June, the POL Board unanimously preferred Option 2:

          continuing the Scheme but seeking to refine its work within the existing terms

          of reference. The POL Board asked that the business (1) consider the best way

          to implement that course of action; (2) take legal advice on the risks inherent

          with the changes proposed; and (3) come back to the POL Board with a paper

          explaining the recommended next steps (POL00021526).


1024. Chris wrote an Update Paper dated 18 June 2014 which, amongst other things,

          confirmed that the risk of judicial review was low (UKGI00002392).The minutes

          of the POL Board meeting on 25 September 2014 (POL00021528) record that

          Chris and Belinda reported on this matter but I have been unable to locate a

          written update in the Inquiry disclosure.


1025. Drawing together all of the factors set out above, it was thought appropriate not

          to continue the Mediation Scheme in the form in which it was initially designed

          because:


     i.       POL wanted to achieve a case-by-case investigation of the complaints in

              a reasonable time and at a proportionate cost;

                                          Page 451 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




     ii.   Second Sight's work was of poor quality and delayed, suggesting they

           lacked the capacity to deliver this work;


    iii.   There remained a significant gap between some SPMs expectation of

           sizeable financial compensation and POL's view, based on the Linklaters'

           advice, that it had little exposure generally and none for consequential loss;


   iv.     That continuing with the Mediation Scheme, in its initial form in light of

           POL's view of the merits of many of the individual cases, could lead to

           greater dissatisfaction than making significant changes to the Mediation

           Scheme. There was a sense that more cases could be solved in a BAU

           process; that some should have been solved via 'BAU' in the past. It was

           thought that what was needed was investigation for all followed by a

           thoughtful and structured BAU conversation for some and mediation for

           others.


    v.     POL was reluctant to mediate cases with criminal convictions because

           there was a limit to what could be achieved; but POL would re-review and

           disclose any matters as per POL's disclosure obligations.


   vi.     POL had sufficient confidence that POL's case reviewers would look at

           cases impartially; despite the tensions, Second Sight had complimented

           the team on the quality of their work.


   vii.    POL had carried out a significant number of investigations by this stage,

           and two years of reviewing cases had found nothing.


104. Please explain your understanding of the reason for Susan Crichton's

departure from POL.
                                    Page 452 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1026. Whilst I cannot recall all of the details surrounding Susan Crichton's departure,

      my review of contemporaneous documents disclosed by the Inquiry has helped

      to refresh some of my memory of events taking place at that time.


1027. On 1 July 2013, the POL Board held a meeting by conference call

      (POL00021515). I recall that the POL Board, led by the Chair, was critical of

      the way in which the business had managed Second Sight's work. As POL's

      GC, Susan was responsible for this. She was sorry that it had turned out this

      way and was concerned that the POL Board was unhappy with her oversight

      and management of the work.


1028. I believe that Susan offered me her resignation between the date of the POL

      Board meeting on 1 July 2013 and 11 July 2013.


1029. From memory, the POL Board's reaction at the time of the Interim Report led

      to Susan's decision to resign. My recollection is that she felt she had let the

      business down. She had been the lead director for the Second Sight work and

      she felt responsible for that. Second Sight were about to publish a report that

      had the potential to create serious issues for POL: a report that was critical,

      lacking evidence, based on opinion, about areas in which its authors were not

      experts.


1030. My recollection is that whilst I agreed with the Board that Susan may not have

      managed Second Sight in the most effective way with as much oversight as

      was required, I did not think it was necessary for her to resign. I believe my

      view at the time was that with extra support from me and with more resources,

      this was an opportunity for Susan and for the business to learn and to prioritise

      resolving the SPM cases through good project management.
                                   Page 453 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1031. I can see that I was due to meet Susan for a face-to-face meeting on 12 July

      2013 (at page 4 of (POl00099223)). At 11 :33 on 13 July, Alice Perkins emailed

      to ask me to let her know what Susan had decided to do or whether she was

      reflecting over the weekend. I recall that I persuaded Susan that I thought she

      could turn things around with greater personal oversight. I recall suggesting

      that she talk it through with someone she trusted (I believe we discussed her

      speaking to a partner at Bond Dickinson whom we both knew and rated, I think

      that may have been Simon Richardson). My email to Alice on 14 July 2013 at

      10:38 (at page 1 of (POl00099223)) suggests Susan did share her concerns

      and talk things through with a lawyer, who told her that "she should get on with

      it!".


1032. I confirmed in the email to Alice that Susan had decided to stay (at page 1 of

      (POl00099223)). I noted that I had also mentioned to Susan we might bring

      forward a planned change to her role to remove HR duties that she had

      previously assumed, so that she could concentrate on and prioritise the

      Second Sight work.


1033. Alice's response to me on 14 July 2013 (14:50) (at page 1 of (POl00099223))

      reflects that she wanted to discuss this further with me in our next one-to-one

      meeting the following day. My recollection is there was some tension between

      Alice and Susan over the handling of Second Sight. Alice wanted to test my

      view that Susan was up to doing what was required to manage Second Sight's

      work more efficiently.


1034. The tension in the relationship between Alice and Susan can be seen from the

      email that I sent to Alice on 14 July (16:00) (at page 1 of (POl00099223)) in

                                  Page 454 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      which I noted: "I agree the two of you must restore the relationship; if not, it is

      not tenable for Susan to continue with this ... Susan shared her feelings with me

      in confidence at a time she was feeling very low about 'letting this happen to

      the business she worked for"'.


1035. Two days later, without notice, Alice decided to stand Susan down from a POL

      Board slot on 16 July 2013. Susan had been due to brief the POL Board on the

      Second Sight work. I explained to Alice that Susan would find it hard to take,

      as she had prepared her update for the POL Board; plus, there would

      undoubtedly be questions from the POL Board, which I may not be able to

      answer.


1036. I can see from an email which Alwen Lyons sent to me later in the day on 16

      July (POL00118494) that she told me she had spoken to Susan on the way

      over to a meeting that day at Bond Dickinson. Alwen noted in her email to me:


          "Spoke to Susan on the way over. She is very cross about not being invited

          into the Board today and not being able to explain the process going

          forward, including the criminal cases.


          I told her that it wasn't an easy session and that the Board were concerned

          about the way SS had been managed.


          She asked whether Alice had explained the background to their

          appointment, I didn't comment, but Susan is right that Alice was involved

          in the choice not to go with one of the Big 4 and that it had to be an

          independent report.




                                    Page 455 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          I didn't feel I could add any more Paula, so I didn't, but I think Susan will

          phone you tonight or tomorrow as she wants to understand her position

          following the Board meeting."


1037. From a file note I produced a few days later (POL00118496) I am reminded

      that Susan and I agreed to have a face-to-face meeting on 24 July 2013 to

      ensure we had time to revisit matters, and so that I could debrief her on the

      POL Board discussion. My file note records that the purpose of meeting with

      Susan was to make clear that she was accountable for the Second Sight work

      going forwards and I had asked Alasdair Marnoch to exercise a degree of

      oversight, since he was also the Chair of ARC. I explained to Susan that

      following two or three conversations with Alice, who whilst "still very concerned

      about the whole issue, was more reassured that we were taking the right

      approach, which included Susan seeing this through." I suggested that Susan

      should also meet Alice and she confirmed that she had already fixed a meeting

      with her for 31 July 2013.


1038. I recorded in my file note that Susan was "initially frosty in her manner" and I

      thought she was "feeling the pressure". From memory, I had to work hard to

      re-engage her; but I think we got there. I was concerned that Susan needed to

      be supported, which I was happy to do provided she remained committed and

      was prepared to do the work required. I seem to recall that we agreed to see

      how things went and I hoped that I had provided Susan with some reassurance

      during what was a very difficult situation for her and for all involved.


1039. As I was about to go on annual leave, I noted that I would review the position

      again in September.

                                    Page 456 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1040. I have been shown an email from Alice to POL Board members and others,

      including Susan, on 31 July 2013, which was while I was on annual leave

      (POL00116114). The email records that Alice and Susan had met that day to

      discuss a note for the POL Board on Horizon (which I assume was prepared

      by Susan). Alice noted three points that she wanted to put on the record - in

      relation to her thoughts about the way ahead.


1041. The first point which Alice made was that she wanted to cap Second Sight's

      involvement at reviewing the 47 cases which they were already to review. She

      added that it was "extremely important that we cap their involvement at that"

      and that "the moment they are involved in additional cases beyond these, we

      will have lost the ability to end the relationship with them - an outcome which I

      do not want to have to contemplate." The second point concerned Second

      Sight's costs. Alice was keen to pin down and cap their costs. Alice said that

      she understood that Susan has told them that she (Susan) was "expecting

      them to do the extra work pro bono but no deal has been done." The third point

      concerned the process for appointing the independent Chair of the working

      party. Alice ended by noting that she had asked Susan to keep the POL Board

      fully informed of future developments and to alert her "to anything which she is

      unable to resolve which could get in the way of getting the job done in the way

      it needs to be done. She will be seeking conversations about all this with all the

      NEDs on an individual basis and will be in touch with you to arrange these."


1042. On 1 August 2013, Alice sent my PA the file note of her meeting with Susan on

      31 July (at page 2 of (POL00108058)). I have not yet been able to locate a

      copy of this file note in the Inquiry's disclosure to date. Alice notes:


                                    Page 457 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           "Theresa,


           "Here is the document to which I was referring.


           "I should be grateful if you could make sure Paula sees it on her return (but

           no need for her to see during her holiday).


           "Please can you make sure that no-one else sees it?"


1043. Without sight of Alice's file note, I am afraid I cannot recall its contents. It is

      clear from an email that I sent on 2 August 2013 (16:52) to Alice that I had, by

      this time, reviewed her note (at page 1 of (POL00108058)). I said the note

      made me sad but did not come as a surprise.


1044. My email suggests I was sympathetic to Alice's views. Alice noted "how much

      Susan sees as 'beyond her control"'. I replied that this was for me to deal with

      on my return.


1045. Alice responded, also on 2 August (17:36) (at page 1 of (POL00108058)),

      commenting on Susan's performance in the following terms and presumably

      still referring to her file note:


           "Yes. It is the fact that she sees so much as beyond her control which made

           me most worried. It is her alibi. That is why I pushed back and also why I

           asked her to flag up if there was anything she needed which she couldn't

           get.


           I am concerned that she won't cap SS off at 47 because it's too difficult.

           And am also concerned about their costs and why we haven't nailed those.



                                          Page 458 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




          So I am sorry but I think you are right."


1046. On my return from annual leave, which was around 5 August 2013, I recall that

      Susan had been very unhappy that, while I had been away, Alice had set in

      motion a 'Lessons Learned' review into how the business had managed the

      last year's work with Second Sight. Susan regarded this as a further example

      of criticism of her.


1047. I cannot recall how matters developed after this in August 2013.


1048. In an email to me on 7 September 2013, Alasdair suggested that Alice and I

      meet with him to close off the Second Sight review discussions and agree the

      way forward, he added: "In the meanwhile I hope all goes ok with Susan on

      Monday." (at page 1 of (POL00116124)). My response on the same day noted:

      "Alasdair, thanks it won't be easy .... " (at page 1 of (POL00116124)). It appears

      that I was due to have what I expected would be a difficult conversation with

      Susan the following week. It seems that by this stage, I was going into the

      meeting with a view to Susan leaving. Without sight of further material relating

      to this time period, I cannot remember what had occurred, which seems to have

      resulted in my expectation that Susan would agree to leave the business.


1049. I have no recollection of my meeting with Susan, which based on the content

      of the emails above, must have been had at some point between 7 and 11

      September. However, we must have agreed that Susan would leave and that

      we would need to finalise her exit terms.


1050. I can see that on 24 and 25 September 2013, Chris Day, Alwen and I approved

      and signed the terms of Susan's "RemCo Severance Request" (at page 3 of

                                   Page 459 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      (POL00104258)). I can see from the terms of the agreement, signed by Fay

      Healey on 24 September 2013, that Susan would continue with her normal

      duties until 30 October 2013, after which time, she would be placed on garden

      leave from 1 November 2013 until the date of termination of her employment

      on 30 November 2013 (at page 4 of (POL00104258)).


1051. Whilst some of our conversations were difficult - especially for Susan, which

      distressed me too, I was sorry to see Susan leave POL. We had shared similar

      ambitions over the Mediation Scheme and I respected her as a colleague.


105. Please consider LCAS0001071 (letter from Greg Knight MP to you dated 14

November 2014). Why did the Post Office initially refuse to mediate cases such

as Mr Castleton's, which did not involve a criminal conviction?


1052. On 14 November 2014, the Rt Hon Sir Greg Knight MP wrote to me about Lee

      Castleton (LCAS0001071 ). The letter stated that Mr Castleton was Sir Greg's

      constituent, and inquired as to why POL was not willing to put Mr Castleton's

      case and other similar cases, forward to mediation, despite Second Sight's

      recommendation that this should be take place.


1053. The letter was acknowledged by a letter dated 20 November 2014 (at page 2

      of (POL00119548)).


1054. On 13 February 2015, Sir Greg wrote to me again, noting that he had not

      received a substantive response to his letter of 14 November 2014 (at page 1

      of (POL00119548)). In the following paragraphs, I explain the work which took

      place in response to the 14 November 2014 letter.




                                  Page 460 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1055. After the 20 November 2014 letter of acknowledgment, there followed a series

      of internal discussions. Of note, Gavin Lambert sent me an email on 25

      November 2014, in which he noted Sir Anthony Hooper's opinion that the

      Working Group was to decide whether any individual case should be mediated

      (POL00101581 ). The Working Group's decision would be "informed but not

      bound" by the recommendations of Second Sight. In the view of those advising

      me, this was "reasonably clear from the Scheme documentation, and certainly

      clear from the operation of the Scheme in practice".


1056. In early December 2014, draft responses to Sir Greg were circulated by email.

      The response that was sent did not come from me, but was similar in content

      to the early drafts. In preparing this witness statement I have seen, for example,

      an undated draft (POL00116840) and a draft dated 4 December 2014

      (POL00109724). I am not sure when each of those versions of the draft was

      circulated and by whom.


1057. I understand that a response was in fact sent to Sir Greg on 15 December 2014

      by Angela Van Den Bogerd (LCAS0000979). I can see (albeit that it is redacted

      on the version disclosed to me) that Angela signed this version, and it is on

      headed paper. Accordingly, the clear inference is that it was sent.


1058. The 15 December response includes this:


          "I would like to clarify that Post Office has never indicated that it would be

          willing to mediate in all cases where Second Sight recommended

          mediation. I can also confirm that Post Office has had no direct contact with

          Mr Castleton since he entered the Scheme either about mediation or any

          other matter."
                                   Page 461 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1059. Angela also said that she had forwarded Sir Greg's letter to Sir Anthony Hooper

      who may wish to respond. I do not know if Sir Anthony did so.


1060. I was not involved in deciding whether any case should go to mediation. I had

      no role in that process, formally or otherwise. Neither was I ever asked in any

      ad hoe way to express a view on whether Mr Castleton, or any other person,

      should be the subject of a case proceeding to mediation.


1061. The Project Sparrow Sub-Committee did not consider individual cases, nor

      decide whether those cases should progress to mediation. When individual

      cases did come up in discussion, they were generally anonymised (e.g. M001

      for Mr Castleton's case). Indeed, my recollection is that this was the case

      generally when the Sub-Committee or the POL Board discussed legal cases

      which concerned highly personal information.


1062. Specifically with regard to Mr Castleton, in preparing this witness statement I

      have seen a draft letter which was to be sent to him in February 2015

      (POL00077426) which was circulated by email amongst members of the

      Working Group on 2 February 2015 (POL00077425). The draft letter includes

      the following:


          "As you will know, Second Sight concluded that the question of who should

          bear responsibility for losses incurred in your branch was suitable for

          mediation and the Scheme's Working Group then recommended that this

          issue be mediated.


          I regret to inform you that, after careful consideration, Post Office takes a

          different view and has decided against proceeding to mediation ...

                                   Page 462 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




             Post Office considers that the question of responsibility of the losses

             suffered in your branch has been conclusively determined through the High

             Courl judgment of His Honour Richard Ha very QC on 22 January 2007. It

             remains Post Office's view that his determination remains entirely correct

             and nothing in our own re-investigation, nor in the Review of your case by

             Second Sight, represents a challenge to that position."


1063. Patrick Bourke noted in his email that "we are refusing to mediate 3 cases

         which the last Working Group deemed suitable for mediation", two of which

         involved an applicant with a criminal conviction (the exception being Mr

         Castleton). In preparing this witness statement, I have not yet been able to

         identify a final version of this letter being sent.


106. Please consider POl00101477 (email from lord Arbuthnot to Alice Perkins

on 23 October 2014), POl00101484 (briefing on call with lord Arbuthnot) and

POl00117030 (note of call between you and James Arbuthnot on 28 October

2014).


106.1 Please explain what your view was of lord Arbuthnot's stance in relation

to the Mediation Scheme. Did you think it was justified?


1064. Lord Arbuthnot sent an email to Alice Perkins on 23 October 2014

         (POl00101477). He said that he was "becoming increasingly worried about

         how the sub-Postmasters mediation process is working" and that he perceived

         that POL was treating the matter like a "legal battlefield". He said this had the

         potential "to call ... into question" whether POL would carry through the

         Mediation Scheme in good faith. Lord Arbuthnot said that he intended to

         accede to requests to talk to the media, but wished to speak with me first.
                                        Page 463 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1065. On 26 October 2014, a briefing note was drafted for me by Patrick Bourke in

      advance of my call with Lord Arbuthnot (POL00101484).


1066. I had a telephone call with Lord Arbuthnot on 28 October 2014 at 15:30. A note

      was taken summarising the call (POL00117030). Lord Arbuthnot told me that

      he could not currently support the Mediation Scheme for various reasons.

      These included reports that POL was not prepared to enter into mediation, and

      his concern that POL was taking an overly legalistic approach to the Mediation

      Scheme.


1067. I cannot now recall this conversation. From the documents I have seen, Lord

      Arbuthnot was clearly justified in raising these concerns. However, his position

      was in many ways at odds with the information and advice which I had received

      from my colleagues at POL.


106.2 Did you agree with the following statement in your briefing: "PO is entitled

to take the view that in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the presumption

must be that the system is working as it ought to. To start from a contrary

position, whereby PO must prove the system's reliability, goes against common

sense and established practice. Bluntly, it is not PO's job to prove that Horizon

did not cause the losses incurred by Applicants to the Scheme, but for

Applicants to provide evidence that it did"? If so, please address the following:


106.2.1 How that position was justified in circumstances where POL were aware

of BEDs in the Horizon System?


106.2.2 How were SPMs supposed to provide evidence of system faults?




                                   Page 464 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




1068. I have been asked by the Inquiry to comment specifically on paragraph 9 of the

      briefing note (POL00101484).


1069. I have no recollection now of how I understood this paragraph at the time.

      However, I am able to describe how I believe I would have reacted. In short, I

      would have treated this entire document (including paragraph 9) as advice from

      my team and trusted that factual matters were accurately described. Paragraph

      9 is framed in a very "matteroffacf' way and I would have accepted that. I note

      now that there is a strong correlation between paragraph 9 and the advice

      which Linklaters had given POL on 20 March 2014, which states at paragraph

      1.8:


      "In summary, we think that, absent proof that Horizon is malfunctioning (either

      generally or in the specific case) the Post Office has a right to recover losses

      from SPMRs, the SPMRs have no right to compensation for such losses and

      the circumstances in which there will be a consequential loss claim are limited

      to those in which inadequate notice of termination was given, will depend on

      their facts and should be limited."


1070. Notwithstanding that I would have taken paragraph 9 in my briefing note as

      accurate, that does not mean that I would have agreed with the phrasing, nor

      would I have adopted that phrasing or tone of voice when speaking to Lord

      Arbuthnot or publicly. Paragraph 9 is in the context of a briefing note: it is blunt

      (paragraph 9 actually using the word "bluntly" to describe the advice), factual

      and precise.




                                    Page 465 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1071. More   generally,   the   briefing   note   (POL00101484) contained    various

     recommendations for points I should make on the telephone call including that

     I should:


     a.   Reassert POL's support for the original aims of the Mediation Scheme;


     b.   Firmly rebut the charge of lack of good faith, underlining the unusual

          lengths to which POL has gone to respond to the concerns of the JFSA,

          MPs and Applicants;


     c.   Place on record POL's own concerns including over the effect of the

          JFSA's refusal to participate fully in the business of the Working Group;

          and


     d.   Emphasise that POL remains committed to a thorough investigation but

          should not have to accept criticism where it is not at fault.


1072. I have been asked to comment whether a presumption that Horizon was

     working as it should was appropriate in circumstances where POL was aware

     of BEDs in the Horizon system. I do not recall focussing on this part of the

     briefing. It was my belief at the time that POL was thoroughly investigating

     every case in the Mediation Scheme. The information I was given (and which

     was set out in paragraphs 6 and 8 of the briefing (POL0010484)) was that POL

     had now completed its investigations into 80 of the cases in the Mediation

     Scheme and that in not one of the cases investigated so far had a fault with the

     Horizon system been established. Paragraph 8 of the briefing went on to say

     that POL was not complacent about this issue and would apply the same rigour

     in investigating the remaining cases as it had done to date. I knew about the

                                    Page 466 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      Suspense Account bug and the Receipts & Payments Mismatch bug by this

      stage and about the Legacy Horizon Falkirk bug (fixed I believed, nearly a

      decade earlier). My understanding was that they had not affected any

      Mediation Scheme cases, and that they had been identified by POL and Fujitsu

      and rectified without any loss to the affected SPMs. I accept that this

      information was incorrect and understated the defects in the Horizon system.

      However, my understanding at the time was that the results of the investigation

      indicated that the Horizon system was working properly.


1073. I have also been asked to comment on how SPMs in the Mediation Scheme

      could have been expected to provide evidence of system faults. Although I was

      not close to the details of how the ongoing investigation were conducted, I

      understood that POL obtained and analysed the transaction records and liaised

      with Fujitsu to understand any shortfalls or transaction anomalies reported by

      SPMs in the Mediation Scheme. I can see this way of working was set out in a

      briefing on the Interim Report I was sent on 2 July 2013: see paragraph 4 on

      page 1 and Annex 1 at page 7 of (POl00113369). I believed that, in this way,

      any system defect which affected a SPM in the Mediation Scheme would be

      identified.


107. Please consider POl00022610 (instructions to counsel) and POl00022611

(note titled Post Office Complaints and Mediation Scheme dated 24 November




107.1 Please explain your recollection of the background to these instructions

and your involvement with the same


107.2 Please explain the basis for POl's instruction to counsel that "Candidly,
                                  Page 467 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




almost all cases point pretty conclusively (or beyond any reasonable doubt) to

the complacency, incompetence and/ or dishonesty of Applicants as the cause

of the losses incurred in the relevant post offices". On reflection c:lo you think

this position could be justified?


107.3 Please describe the advice POL received from leading counsel further to

these instructions


108.   Please   cons icier POL00101578       (statement from   lord   Arbuthnot},

POL00101586 (email chain between 18 - 20 November 2014), POL00026741

(email from lord Arbuthnot elated 26 November 2014), POL00101596 (letter from

you to lord Arbuthnot c:latec:128 November 2014), POL00101738 (email exchange

between you and Mark Davies on 9 December 2014), POL00101700 (letter from

lord Arbuthnot to you elated 8 December 2014) and POL00101690 (letter from

lord Arbuthnot to you elated 22 January 2015).


108.1 Please describe the meeting(s) on 17 November 2014 and your concerns

arising from the same.


108.2 Please expand on "this is iust to confirm what I said last night - that I

want a board sub- ctte to debate next steps". What issues c:lic:I you envisage the

sub-committee debating?


108.3 Please explain the process for drafting your letter of 28 November 2014

and describe any legal advice you received on the same. What was Post Office's

opposition to a presumption in favour of mediation at this stage?


108.4 On reflection, c:lo you consider that lord Arbuthnot and other MPs'

concerns about POL's approach to the Mediation Scheme was justified?
                                    Page 468 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




108.5 Please describe the action you and others in senior management took in

relation to the Mediation Scheme following Lord Arbuthnot's letter of 8

December 2014.


109. Please consider POL00116824 (note titled Update for Board/Alice) and

POL00021530 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 26 November 2014). Please

describe the update you gave to the Board in respect of Project Sparrow on 26

November 2014.


1074. I have been asked by the Inquiry to explain the background to the instructions

      to Leading Counsel to advise in conference which were prepared in late

      November 2014 (POL00022610). Those instructions were headed "In the

      matter of the Post Office Limited Complaints and Mediation Scheme". On 25

      September 2014, the POL Board met. Page seven of the minutes records the

      update on Project Sparrow (POL00021528). Chris Aujard and Belinda Crowe

      joined the meeting for this part of the discussion. It is noted at section (d) that:


          "The Board was encouraged by the recent progress and the fact that all

          the Post Office investigations should be finished by December. The Board

          members understood that the next few weeks could be controversial as the

          Business was about to refuse to put cases involving criminal convictions

          into mediation."


1075. On 14 October 2014, I wrote to Jo Swinson MP "regarding the recent media

      attention relating to the Mediation Scheme" (POL00109487). I enclosed with

      that letter "a note prepared by Post Office's General Counsel, our lead member

      on the Working Group" in an effort to provide "further background as well as a

      brief update on the Scheme".
                                    Page 469 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1076. On 17 October 2014, Lord Arbuthnot wrote to me, inviting me to meet with him,

      Oliver Letwin MP, Mike Wood MP and Andrew Bridgen MP to discuss progress

      of the Mediation Scheme (POL00105464). He proposed four possible dates,

      between 27 October and 17 November 2014. The meeting did subsequently

      take place on 17 November 2014.


1077. This letter was just less than a week before Lord Arbuthnot wrote to Alice

      Perkins by email expressing his increasing concern about how the Mediation

      Scheme was working (POL00116734 ).


1078. On 17 November 2014, I met with Lord Arbuthnot, Oliver Letwin MP, Andrew

      Bridgen MP, Mike Wood MP and Alan Bates. The meeting was also attended

      by some of my colleagues, including Angela Van Den Bogerd. Angela took a

      significant role in addressing the MPs' queries. See the note of the meeting

      entitled "Update for Board/Alice" speaking note (POL00116824).


1079. I have seen an email sent on Lord Arbuthnot's behalf to his parliamentary

      colleagues in which he summarised the 17 November 2014 meeting. He

      described the meeting as "not an easy meeting from anyone's point of view".

      MPs had expressed concerns about POL challenging too many issues before

      cases went to mediation. He proposed that there should be a presumption in

      favour of mediation, where mediation had been recommended by Second

      Sight. Lord Arbuthnot recorded that I had said that I would take that proposal

      to the POL Board and give it consideration.


1080. Lord Arbuthnot was right that it was "not an easy meeting". Although I cannot

      now, nine years later, recall the detail of the discussion, I do continue to recall

      clearly how I felt during and after the meeting. I was accused of things, by the
                                    Page 470 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      MPs, which were simply not true. I do recall that I remained professional and

      ensured I continued to act in the way in which I wanted my POL colleagues,

      who were present, to act.


1081. Between 18 November and 20 November 2014, I exchanged emails with Mark

      Davies and Alwen Lyons (POL00101578) with the subject line "Sparrow sub-

      ctte". In my first email, I said:


          "Hi this is just to confirm what I said last night- that I want a board sub-ctte

          to debate next steps. I am about to flag that to Alice."


1082. I do not recall now with confidence which issues I wanted to be debated.

      However, I believe it would have been two matters. First, given how challenging

      the MPs had been about how POL was dealing with issues and how involved

      and complex those issues were, I wanted a conversation with my team, with

      the Board Sub-Committee. Second, I believe I wanted the Sub-Committee to

      meet, to discuss the proposal of Oliver Letwin MP (for a presumption in favour

      of POL following any recommendation made by Second Sight as to which

      cases should go to mediation) and to ensure that no angle was missed.


1083. Alwen responded to say that Alice did not want to call a Sparrow Sub-

      Committee next week "as she thinks the process is working and we should

      continue as is", however she noted that Sparrow was on the ExCo agenda for

      20 November 2014.


1084. I noted in response that "/ hadn't anticipated we would change our approach"

      but that nonetheless I had wanted to have that conversation with the POL

      Board. My email exchange with Alwen continued the following day with me

                                      Page 471 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      saying "presumably we need to go back to James et al with a decision that the

      Board wants to continue the approach we have. le. Not adopt Oliver's

      proposition of a general undertaking that (with a few exceptions), we would

      mediate if SS recommended it. So we do need a discussion."


1085. I was absent from the 20 November 2014 ExCo meeting. Mark reported the

      outcome to me on 20 November 2014 in the email chain at (POL00101578).

      He reported that there had been "a frank and detailed discussion" about Sir

      Oliver's proposal. The ExCo had concluded "that we should resist the

      suggestion from the MPs on the grounds that it would effectively render the

      working group meaningless, and put us in a very difficult position legally in

      relation to cases which have been through the courts."


1086. Mark went on to report:


          "We came to the view that in terms of the Board, it would make sense for

          you to refer to the meeting with MPs as you present your CEO report, and

          to report the nature of the MPs' proposal, but to say that having consulted

          with Exco and relevant colleagues you do not intend to change course.


          Assuming this is not challenged by the Board, we then recommend a letter

          to the MPs which sets out our position and which stays true to the

          confidentiality of the Scheme but which also sets out our over-arching

          position - that having set up the inquiry and the Scheme - and paid for

          both - we are determined to see it through. We will further say that as the

          MPs made much of the media requests they had received, we would be

          content for them to release the letter to the media. This allows us a vehicle

          to get our position out there, strongly."
                                   Page 472 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1087. In preparing this witness statement, as mentioned above, I have seen a two-

      page document headed "Update for Board/Alice", which I understand to be

      dated 25 November 2014 (POL00116824). It is a speaking note for me to use

      when updating the POL Board about the 17 November meeting. Looking at an

      email chain to which it was attached, it appears that the note was written by

      Mark (POL00116815). I have no reason to question its accuracy.


1088. The Inquiry has disclosed two versions of the speaking note. Neither document

      has a date on its face, so it is not entirely clear which came first, or who made

      changes. The second version is at (POL00116816). I think it is likely that the

      changes were made by Gavin Lambert, and that the version which I used was

      (POL00116824).


1089. In respect of the proposal that we should have a presumption that Second

      Sight's recommendations be adopted, the speaking note included this:


          "- the team has considered the position, and has come to the conclusion

          that we should not agree to the 'general assumption'


          "- there are several reasons for this. It would make the working group,

          which was set up with TOR agreed by the JFSA, redundant as it would

          simply be waving cases through. This would be outwith the balancing

          nature of the working group, which was set up with a central role to decide

          on whether any given case (ought) to be mediated


          "- It would also undermine the Chair's stated position (in the decision on a

          specific case) that 'the decision as to whether a case should go forward to




                                   Page 473 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




          mediation is entrusted to the WG', with the necessary independence of the

          group achieved by giving the Chair the casting vote


          "- 'Pre-agreeing' would also force us to mediate in criminal cases where the

          legal processes have not been exhausted. We have strong legal advice

          suggesting we should not take this course.


          "- this will clearly be unwelcome for the MPs so we are preparing for every

          eventuality. We could expect media coverage, probably at a low level, but

          are well prepared for this. We are also proposing that our letter setting out

          our position to the MPs be drafted so that it can be released to the media,

          given the MPs point about media pressure. This gives us a chance to set

          out our position and meet the "Clapham Omnibus" test.


          "- the chair has previously expressed his discomfort at being deprived of

          JFSA 's   views   on   those   cases    where    POL    disagrees    with   the

          recommendation made by SS, since it leaves him as the dominant voice in

          all cases (thanks to his casting vote). Maintaining our line on existing

          position to review each case continues this discomfort, however we assess

          the risk of the Chair epising [sic] this publically [sic] to be very low (he is

          bound by a confidentially agreement and we believe he will want to

          minimise any adverse publicity associated with the working group) we are

          also making contact separately with Oliver Letwin to impress upon him the

          nature of our position. We have a number of channels open to us here."


1090. That final paragraph above is not in the other version (POL00116816). I think

      it is likely that this paragraph was added by Gavin Lambert in response to

      feedback which I gave that we should test the argument about making the
                                   Page 474 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      Working Group redundant if we were to agree a general presumption of

      mediation where mediation was the recommendation of Second Sight

      (POL00116823).


1091. In respect of the Mediation Scheme more generally, the speaking note said:


          "-given the potential collapse of the working group, we have also taken the

          precaution of seeking further legal advice from a leading QC at Blackstone

          Chambers. While we know that as a public body, we are susceptible for

          judicial review, we wanted to test the position further around the nature of

          the Scheme and the cases submitted to it


          "- this is important since there have been significant developments since

          the summer, not least the refusal of JFSA to take part in the bulk of the

          Working Group's business. We are now in a situation where the Scheme

          could collapse through the actions of others, who might then seek JR


          "- the view is that withdrawing the Scheme in its current form does not

          expose POL to any significant JR risk. While POL is susceptible to JR when

          it acts in a public law capacity, the Scheme and the cases in it, together

          with any decisions associated with or taken during process, are private law

          in nature and are not, therefore, susceptible to JR


          "- It is worth noting that Leading Counsel expressed this view robustly"


1092. More generally, (POL00116823) includes an email from Mark in which he

      quotes an email sent to him by Patrick Bourke. In turn, Patrick's email quotes

      something said by Sir Anthony Hooper in the Working Group, following



                                  Page 475 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      submissions which he invited from both POL and JFSA on the question of the

      Working Group's role in deciding whether or not a case should go to mediation:


          "In my view this document (Overview of the Initial Complaints and

          Mediation Scheme) makes it clear in a passage under the heading "Will my

          case definitely be referred to mediation?" that the decision as to whether a

          case should go forward to mediation is entrusted to the WG.


          The JFSA stresses the need for independence and the role of SS. In my

          view, the necessary independence is achieved by giving to the Chair of the

          WG the casting vote.


          I exercise my casting vote in favour of the proposition that the WG decides

          whether a case is suitable for mediation."


1093. A POL Board meeting took place on 26 November 2014. The minutes include

      this (at page 2 of (POl00021530)):


          "7. The CEO recounted her meeting with four MPs to discuss the Sparrow

          mediation scheme. She explained that the Business intended to write to

          the MPs to explain the Business' position on denying mediation for criminal

          cases, and that this letter may become public. The Business had taken

          further advice on the likelihood of a Judicial Review, if JFSA withdrew from

          the process, and the QC's advice was that the likelihood was low. The

          Board asked for an update on where cases were in the scheme."


1094. I note that the inclusion of these matters in my CEO report was consistent with

      the steer that I had received from Mark following the 20 November 2014 ExCo

      meeting. I had received a speaking note (POl00158173) from Gavin Lambert
                                  Page 476 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      on 25 November at 16:47 (POL00158172) which would have informed my

      update to the POL Board on 26 November. I also note that Gavin sent me a

      further email at 16:56 on 25 November in which he provided me with further

      background on Sparrow (POL00101581) to supplement a note that Mark

      Davies had sent me that morning (POL00116815; POL00116816).


1095. I have also been shown a document headed "Post Office Complaints and

      Mediation Scheme" dated 24 November 2014 which I understand to be legal

      advice relevant to this decision (POL00022611 ). Reading that document with

      (POL00022609) I believe that the legal advice document is the document

      referred to as "Tom Weisse/burg's notes from the above ca//"which took place

      on 24 November. I do not recall whether I saw any written legal advice.


1096. In emails on 26 and 27 November 2014, a proposed draft of a letter to Lord

      Arbuthnot was worked up for me by Mark Davies and others. On 26 November

      2014 (POL00101587), Mark made changes to a draft and said, "in view of the

      timing, we need to get this to Paula now."


1097. I was provided with a draft letter for consideration / approval by email on 27

      November 2014 by Patrick Bourke (POL00101589). I can see that by 16:50

      that day, the letter had been shown to Leading Counsel, Tom Weisselburg QC,

      who had made some suggestions in tracked changes. That was sent to me an

      hour later. I responded thanking the team "for the thought and rework" which

      indicates that I may have had some comments on the draft I had seen earlier

      that day (POL00116833) and / or I was referring to the input from Mr

      Weisselburg QC. I can also see from that email that I was aware that Leading

      Counsel had advised on the letter.

                                  Page 477 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1098. By the afternoon of 28 November 2014, Patrick and I had settled on a final

      version to be sent (POL00109684).


1099. I sent the letter on 28 November to Lord Arbuthnot (POL00101596). I thanked

      him for the meeting on 17 November and set out POL's position on the

      proposition put forward by Sir Oliver that there should be a general presumption

      that POL would agree, save in a few exceptional cases, to mediate all cases

      where that was the recommendation of Second Sight, regardless of their merits

      and specific circumstances.


1100. I said as follows:


           "Having considered the proposition carefully and having discussed it as

           promised with my Board, I have concluded that I cannot agree to it.


           "In my letter of 5 November, I set out in some detail the steps Post Office

           has taken to address the concerns you raised with me in early 2012. That

           letter made clear my belief that Post Office has done, at least as much, if

           not considerably more, than might reasonably be expected to address

           those concerns.


           "To summarise, Post Office Limited, established the Scheme in good faith;

           Second Sight and JFSA were principal drivers of its design, the

           establishing of the Working Group and the recommendation for the

           appointment of its independent Chair; Post Office Limited committed to a

           comprehensive re-investigation of each and every case in the Scheme;

           and it pays not only for the administration of the Scheme as a whole but




                                    Page 478 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          also provides Applicants with funding to enable them to engage

          professional advisers to support them in all relevant stages of the process.


          "To agree to a presumption that all cases should be mediated prior to any

          proper consideration of their merits would deprive the Working Group,

          which was set up so rigorously and carefully by ourselves, JFSA and

          Second Sight, of its most important role. It is difficult to see, in such

          circumstances, how it could continue.


          "I would point out that Post Office has not prevented any case from

          progressing through the Scheme as it was designed. Instead, as a

          minimum, all cases will have the benefit of a thorough re-investigation and

          an independent review by Second Sight. A discussion at the Working

          Group about the resulting findings cannot be seen as an unreasonable

          requirement. You will also be aware that, by its very nature, mediation is a

          voluntary and consensual process and, accordingly, neither Applicants nor

          Post Office Limited are bound to proceed to mediation even where it is the

          Working Group's view that mediation is appropriate."


1101. I continued that it was my view that the Mediation Scheme and its processes

      were operating as they were designed to do and that the scope of the Mediation

      Scheme should not be broadened. I also noted that "no fault with the system

      has been identified in any of the now 119 cases that have been

      comprehensively re-investigated by Post Office or as part of Second Sight's

      general work".


1102. I see now that the letter does not make reference to POL's pre-existing decision

      not to go to mediation in cases in which there was a criminal conviction. It was
                                   Page 479 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      an unfortunate omission but was not an intentional one on my part. It should

      have been included for clarity. The Working Group was aware, as was lord

      Arbuthnot, who raised the matter a week later with Alice. But with hindsight, POL

      should have communicated the very strong legal advice it had received.


1103. After Lord Arbuthnot had received the letter, but before he had had the chance

      to respond to it, Alice set out her account of their conversation in an email which

      she sent to me and others on 1 December 2014 (POL00101604). Alice told

      Lord Arbuthnot that POL would not allow him to have access to Second Sight

      because "we couldn't have people second guessing an independent process

      which they had agreed to".


1104. Alice also recorded in her email:


          "He then argued that the process was flawed. We should be willing to

          mediate cases where people had been convicted. I said no; they were

          matters to be settled through the courts. He moved on to people who had

          pleaded 'guilty under duress' but who were in fact, innocent. I said we were

          investigating every case and there was no evidence for that assertion.


          He then said he thought Paula and I genuinely believed what we were

          saying - the implication being that we were being hoodwinked by others -

          a somewhat backhanded compliment if it was intended as such .... "


1105. Alice ended her email by saying "I can't predict what he will do next."


1106. On 8 December 2014,           Lord Arbuthnot responded to me in writing

      (POL00101700). Lord Arbuthnot disagreed with my assessment that the


                                    Page 480 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      Mediation Scheme was working as it should. He also disagreed that POL, and

      I, were sticking to the "agreement that those who had pleaded guilty would be

      able to take advantage of the Mediation Scheme".


1107. Lord Arbuthnot recorded a particularly pointed criticism in paragraph 17:


          "You put forward these arguments in secret, and when MPs asked you in

          July how the mediation was going, you pleaded, in the interests of "the

          integrity of the Mediation Scheme", confidentiality. So, for example, despite

          your knowing that I and other MPs had agreed to the Mediation Scheme

          only on the basis that it would be available to those who had pleaded guilty,

          you did not tell me, nor so far as I am aware any other MP, that the Post

          Office was arguing that a plea of guilty should debar the SPMR from

          mediation."


1108. Lord Arbuthnot asked whether I would agree to MPs meeting Second Sight to

      "hear their take on the matter".


1109. That same day, a press release from the House of Commons stated that MPs

      had lost faith in POL's Mediation Scheme (POL00101690). The press release

      included quotations from MPs and included as attachments my letter of 28

      November 2014 and Lord Arbuthnot's letter in response dated 8 December

      2014. Putting aside the business aspects, which seemed ever more difficult to

      reconcile, I remember feeling a personal sadness when I read Lord Arbuthnot's

      letter. I had been as determined as he was to get to the truth of the individual

      cases. The failure of that commitment and the breakdown of the relationship

      weighed heavily. I was sorry at the time and remain so today. Lord Arbuthnot's

      instinct was right. I fully accept my focus was misguided and wrong.
                                   Page 481 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




110. Please consider POL00101796 (email chain on 10 December 2014) and

POL00101801 (email chain on 10 December 2014).


110.1 What was your view of Mr McCormack's email of 10 December2014?


110.2 Did you agree with his statement that "You have no personal knowledge

of operating Horizon nor probably any in depth technical knowledge"? If so,

please set out any steps you took to improve your personal knowledge of the

operation of Horizon.


110.3 On reflection, do you consider that you did enough to investigate the

concerns raised regarding systemic and/ or intermittent errors in the Horizon

IT system?


1110. I have been asked by the Inquiry to consider two email chains with Tim

      McCormack on 10 December 2014: (POL00101796) and (POL00101801). Mr

      McCormack spoke about system errors and intermittent errors, saying that

      POL was looking at the wrong problem and it was in fact intermittent errors

      which caused financial problems for SPMs when they occur.


1111. I always took input seriously, no matter from whom it came. This was especially

      true in respect of SPMs, Unions and the NFSP.


1112. I do not now remember the specifics of this series of emails. However, I do

      remember emails with Mr McCormack more generally. He was a fairly frequent

      communicator with people at POL. I have tried to remember whether I ever met

      Mr McCormack, because reading his emails now they have a certain familiarity

      to them which suggests that we had met; however, I cannot remember.



                                  Page 482 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1113. Whenever Mr McCormack emailed me, I would always approach it in a similar

      way, which was to ensure that the concerns were seen and considered by the

      right people. I would make clear to colleagues, as with any person offering

      outside input, that we must not dismiss it out of hand.


1114. I am asked by the Inquiry whether I agree with this statement "You have no

      personal knowledge of operating Horizon nor probably any in depth technical

      knowledge". The full paragraph in the email is this:


          "Paula, as I keep saying, you are surrounded by people in your office that

          tell you all is well. You have no personal knowledge of operating Horizon

          nor probably any in depth technical knowledge. What if the people that are

          telling you all is well have the same attributes?"


1115. I do not recall reading the specific words at the time, however I agree with Mr

      McCormack's second sentence. I fully accept that I did not have any in depth

      technical knowledge, nor previous experience of managing a large IT system.

      I was not an IT expert and nor would it have been appropriate for me to attempt

      to become one. I took advice from the relevant teams on technical matters, and

      looked to those with appropriate practical knowledge and expertise to explain

      matters to me where I did not have expertise myself. For example, I relied on

      Lesley Sewell's technical knowledge or Angela Van Den Bogerd's in-depth

      operational understanding of the Horizon system.


1116. This is reflected in a draft email that I proposed to send in response to Mr

      McCormack at 09:10 on 10 December 2014 (POL00101796), putting him in

      touch with various subject matter experts whom I trusted to do so. I believe that


                                   Page 483 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




       Mark Davies amended this email before it was sent on my behalf "I expect to

      get to the bottom of it. And who I trust to do so".


1117. In preparing this witness statement, I have looked at the documents disclosed

       by the Inquiry which indicate how this particular correspondence from Mr

       McCormack was dealt with. I am aware that Angela had "a pleasant discussion

      albeit a long one" with him on 11 December 2014. Angela produced a helpful

       note of that conversation which was forwarded to me by Gavin Lambert. In that

       note, Angela noted that (POL00101852): "We discussed many Horizon related

       topics most of which I was familiar with and able to discuss in great detail - I

       think this helped the conversation as Tim realised I knew what I was talking

      about. In bringing the conversation to a close I asked Tim what he was looking

      for in contacting Paula. His response was that whilst he fully accepts that there

      are no systemic problems with Horizon he wants us to acknowledge that there

      are intermittent problems with Horizon and that these could cause Spmrs

       discrepancies."


1118. She had conceded to Mr McCormack that "there are intermittent issues such

      as loss of power or loss of connectivity''. She explained that "the Horizon

       system has a recovery process in place to deaf with such instances. And as

      long as Spmrs follow the recovery screens and answer the screen prompts

       correctly they would not suffer any discrepancy as a result."


1119. At the time, I felt that I had taken the right steps to ensure that the right people

      were investigating the concerns. In particular, Gavin Lambert my chief of staff

      was tasked with seeing this through. Whilst I see that Angela spent time making

       sure that Mr McCormack's concerns were understood, with hindsight,              we

                                     Page 484 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      clearly did not get to the bottom of the concerns raised regarding systemic and

      / or intermittent errors in the Horizon system.


One Show documentary


1120. One matter about which I have not been asked in the Request but which I want

     to address head on is an email which I sent to senior colleagues on 17 December

     2014, after the One Show documentary aired that evening (POL00109806). I

     described the reporting as "unhelpful and inaccurate" and thoroughly regret

     saying that "/ was more bored than outraged" at the programme. There is no

     excuse for what I wrote, and I am embarrassed by the words I used. Those

     words do not reflect the example I hoped to set for my colleagues or my attitude

     to the issues we were working on at the time. I was working hard to find a way

     through. The difficulties of dealing with what seemed such an imperative yet

     intractable problem to solve got the better of me that evening. I am sorry.


111. Please consider POL00022612 (instructions to counsel).


111.1 Please explain your recollection of the background to these instructions

and your involvement with the same.


111.2 Why was POL "keen to dispense with Second Sight's services at the

earliest opportunity"? Was POL seeking legal advice to find a route to terminate

Second Sight's engagement?


111.3 Please describe the advice that POL received in response to these

instructions.




                                   Page 485 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1121. In mid to late December 2014, Tom Weisselberg QC was instructed by POL to

      give advice in consultation further to the advice he had given at the end of

      November 2014. He was provided with copies, in addition to previous papers,

      of:


      a.    Recent correspondence between Lord Arbuthnot and me (letters of 28

            November 2014 and 8 December 2014);


      b.    Lord Arbuthnot's press release 8 December 2014;


      c.    The transcript of the Today Programme and Radio 5 Live broadcasts of 9

            December 2014; and


      d.    Letter to the BBC from Cameron McKenna on behalf of POL dated 9

            December 2014.


1122. The instructions (POl00022612) set out the "recent developments" in the

      matter at paragraph 4 and 5:


            "4. In the event, something close to the second of these two scenarios has

            materialised in that the relevant MPs, led by James Arbuthnot, have

            withdrawn their support for the Scheme and expressed a complete loss of

            confidence in the POL Board's determination to get to the bottom of the

            issues first raised with it in 2012. Mr Arbuthnot communicated this to POL

            by publishing both Paula Venne/ls' letter to him, and his in response,

            together with a press release on 8 December 2014


            5. However, this does fall somewhere short of scenario 2 in two respects.

            First, it is unclear what JFSA intend to do in the light of these

                                    Page 486 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          developments. Second, it is clear that Mr Arbuthnot intends that this matter

          be pursued, though presumably through a different route, by Parliamentary

          colleagues. Indeed, he has gone as far as handing the baton to Kevan

          Jones MP (North Durham, Labour) while recusing himself from any further

          involvement on the basis of his loss of confidence in POL and his decision

          not to contest the next General Election."


1123. The "desired outcome" for POL was described in these terms:


          "9. However, while POL remains keen to act fairly, it is keen to capitalise

          as fully as possible on the opportunity Mr Arbuthnot' s letter potentially

          provides it with and, in particular, wishes to be free of the apparatus

          currently supporting the Scheme, move its governance and management

          in-house and dissolve the Working Group. Leading Counsel will recall that

          the Working Group is already hampered in its work by the refusal of JFSA

          to discuss any case which is not automatically waived through to mediation.


          10. POL is also keen to dispense with Second Sight's services at the

          earliest opportunity. We are mindful, however, that we may be constrained

          in doing so because of the potential need for them to complete their review

          of all cases and as a result of the Ministerial commitment given about their

          ongoing role in the process. While POL is prepared to entertain the

          possibility of a limited independent oversight element in the successor

          process to the Scheme (but is by no means wedded to it), its position in

          relation to the retention of Second Sight has hardened.


          11. POL wishes to explore the options available to it for managing this

          departure from current arrangements in such a manner so as to minimise
                                  Page 487 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




          the risk of its decisions in this regard being the subject of a Judicial Review

          challenge. It also wishes to discuss the ramifications that a move away

          from current arrangement may have on any litigation of the claims

          underpinning the Applicants' cases in the Scheme, not least as to the

          determination of costs."


1124. He was asked to advise on five topics:


          "a) In the light of Leading Counsel's previous advice that the Scheme and

          the decisions taken in relation to it, as well as those taken in respect of

          individual cases, should more properly be seen as matters of private law

          and therefore unlikely to be susceptible to challenge by Judicial Review,

          does it follow that POL is largely unconstrained in this respect as to what it

          does next in relation to the Scheme;


          b) Does Counsel share POL's preliminary view that the practical effect of

          Mr Arbuthnot's letter, exacerbating as it does an already difficult situation,

          could be said to be forcing POL to deparl from current arrangements;


          c) What is Leading Counsel's assessment of any residual JR risk and what

          advice might Leading Counsel have in relation to any steps POL might

          reasonably take to mitigate those;


          d) Since POL expects that a number of Applicants with cases in the

          Scheme may now seek redress through the Courts, what is Leading

          Counsel's assessment of the impact, if any, of the decisions to move the

          Scheme in-house may have on that litigation, including on possible cost

          orders;

                                     Page 488 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




          e) What, if anything, does Leading Counsel recommend that POL do in

          respect of the obvious breaches of confidence in this matter bearing in

          mind POL 's wish to kill this 'story' as rapidly as possible;


          f) How POL might best reply to Mr Arbuthnot informal terms, noting that

          POL 's current view is that an extremely brief letter which simply

          acknowledges his, expresses disappointment, and records, but does not

          address, the fact of the inaccuracies in his letter may well suffice; and


          g) More generally."


1125. I have set out much of the background to these matters in answer to Questions

      107 and 108 above. Part of the background is set out in the instructions

      themselves.


1126. I am asked specifically to comment on the first sentence of paragraph 10 of the

      instructions, which concerns POL wishing to end its relationship with Second

      Sight. From the early days of Second Sight being appointed, it was always the

      intention to finish their work and then bring their skills in house. By this time in

      late 2014, POL had concerns with the speed, cost and inaccuracy of Second

      Sight's work and thought that they were spending too much time concentrating

      on generalised themes rather than completing the individual case reviews

      which POL believed to be more significant and pressing.


1127. Finally, on this topic, I am asked to describe the advice received by POL in

      response to these instructions. In short, I have no recollection of the advice and

      at the time of drafting this statement I have been unable to locate either a




                                    Page 489 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      written advice or a summary of oral advice in documents disclosed by the

      Inquiry.


112. Please consider POL00102064 (email from Patrick Bourke to you on 26

January 2015) and POL00102065 (attachment to prior email).


112.1 What were your views of the sentence "it is difficult to escape the

conclusion that the Scheme no longer serves as an expedient and fair way to

explore and. where possible. resolve a small number of individuals' complaints

but. instead. acts as a lightning rod for a campaign against Post Office as an

organisation".


112.2 Did you agree that "Second Sight's impartiality [was] a fiction"? If so,

please explain the basis for that belief.


1128. The comments about which I have been asked were Patrick Bourke's. I believe

      that they represented the view of the team working with the Working Group.

      That was how they perceived matters to be. Patrick and the POL members of

      the Working Group dealt with related matters on a daily basis.


1129. My own view was that Second Sight had not given sufficient time to exploring

      individual cases and getting to the bottom of issues. Whilst I may have used

      different phrasing, I understood Patrick's challenge and had also been frank

      about my own concerns in the past about Second Sight having had their own

      agenda (see email 26 March 2013 to Alwen Lyons at (POL00097879)).


1130. My views on these comments are set out in an email that I sent in response to

      Patrick's   email   and   paper on    26 January 2015     (emphasis   added)

      (POL00117054):
                                   Page 490 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




"Hi Patrick, thanks for the work on this and do please excuse my notes

below in haste - I hope they might be of some use. Numbering refers to the

paras in the doc.


Overall, this is exactly the format I was hoping for. Thank you. And of

course, we might develop an option, which is a permutation of those you

helpfully set out: worth flagging that as a potential outcome. A watch out:

the paper clearly points to a conclusion. If that is the team's view, and I'm

sure you have considered many variations, many times(!), fine ...


But let's be open to debate tomorrow.


Some more detailed comments:


 3. didn't think it was possible to bring a 'group action'? This was Chris'

view to the S/Ctte.


 4. I can see that there is truth in it. but worded as it is. this para leads to

a conclusion of disbanding the scheme, before you have 'gamed' the

options. More balance at this stage in the paper?


 5. can the summary of options be more balanced? Or offer pros and

cons? Again. this leads to a conclusion. Alasdair is looking to debate the

options first.


 5. "SS's impartiality is a fiction": this is too strong. I read a number of their

reports over the weekend, they are mostly balanced and factual because

they draw extensively on the PO investigation reports; where they lose

independence is around recommendations to mediate, though not all.

                          Page 491 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           Thanks again.


          Paula"


1131. Mark Davies responded that evening saying that he thought in fact that

      Patrick's "description of Second Sight is about right given their behaviour in

      recent weeks". I asked Mark "how many of the SS reports have you personally

      read?". He responded to Patrick and Tom Wechsler, but not to me, saying "I'm

      going into the breach here. If I have gone too far please say now".


113. Please consider POL00102069 (briefing for meeting with Sir Anthony

Hooper on 27 January 2015). Please describe your meeting with Sir Anthony

Hooper and set out what you said to him regarding your views on the future of

the Mediation Scheme.


1132. On 27 January 2015 I met with Sir Anthony Hooper to discuss the Mediation

      Scheme. It was the first time I had met him since the Working Group started its

      work. A briefing note was written for me (POL00102069).


1133. I do not now recall what Sir Anthony and I discussed. I anticipate that I shared

      concerns and options, but not in any detail as discussions had not yet taken

      place with the POL Board.


1134. The briefing note lists a key point to raise, and then a series of other points I

      might choose to raise. The key point was to ask Sir Anthony to provide updated

      statistics on the cases in the Mediation Scheme. POL wished to provide the

      statistics to the Select Committee.


114. Please consider POL00021531 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 28

                                   Page 492 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




January 2015). Please describe the discussion that occurred under the

headings "Sparrow". In particular, what was discussed regarding the CCRC's

letter?


1135. The POL Board met on 28 January 2015 and, at POLB 15/12, discussed

       Project Sparrow (POl00021531 ). I have reviewed the minutes. I do not

       remember this meeting.


1136. I note the email which Mark Davies sent to various colleagues after the POL

       Board meeting: "Paula and I have briefed the Board today ... It was fine: more

       information sharing than anything else" (POL00117072).


115. Please consider POl00006575 (minutes of Sparrow Sub-Committee on 12

January 2015).


115.1 Please describe to what extent, if at all, any members of the Project

Sparrow Sub- Committee were considering termination the Mediation Scheme

at this point.


115.2 Please consider "The Committee discussed Second Sight and their 'Part

Two' report due to be finalised in April. The Committee agreed that the Business

was unlikely to be able to stop this report from being produced but should press

Second Sight to complete the individual case reviews by the end of March i.e.

giving the cases priority". Please set out the discussion that led to this minute.

In particular please address:


115.2.1 Whether the committee wished to stop Second Sight finishing their Part

2 review, and if so, on what basis that was thought to be appropriate.


                                   Page 493 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




115.2.2How the committee sought Second Sight to prioritise individual cases.


115.3 Please explain what "robust response" was envisaged to allegations in

the media.


115.4 In what circumstances did POL consider it appropriate to write to BBC

lawyers? What was the purpose of such communication?


1137. I cannot remember anything about the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee

      meeting on 12 January 2015. I can only go on what the documentation says

      about this meeting.


1138. (POL00006575) are the minutes of the meeting. The Sub-Committee decided

      that POL would "continue to take a robust approach at the Working Group,

      focussing on the agreed TOR in an attempt to set the Scheme back on track,

      but with no presumption regarding the next steps for the Scheme". The Sub-

      Committee also wanted POL to "consider the most effective options to draw a

      line under the Scheme for consideration at a future Sparrow Sub-Committee".


      1139. The minute continues:


          "The Committee discussed Second Sight and their 'Part Two' report due to

          be finalised in April. The Committee agreed that the Business was unlikely

          to be able to stop this report from being produced but should press Second

             Sight to complete the individual case reviews by the end of March i.e. giving

          the cases priority."


1140. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the discussion which led to this minute.

      I do not recall the discussion at the Sub-Committee meeting. However, in an


                                      Page 494 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      email that I sent to Gavin Lambert on 26 January 2015 (POl00117046), I

      stated that, while Mark Davies and some of the team thought that POL should

      try to stop the Part Two Report, Alice and I believed that this would be unhelpful

      and play into a false narrative about secrecy.


1141. The Sub-Committee wished to focus on the individual case reviews. Second

      Sight were directed to complete the individual case reviews by the end of March

      2015.


1142. The Sub-Committee asked that a robust response be provided to allegations

      in the media, including writing to BBC lawyers where appropriate and engaging

      at a senior level with programme editors. I had an understanding that the BBC

      as public broadcaster was required to comply with a broadcasting code. POL

      would have taken advice on whether it was appropriate to raise compliance

      with the code with the BBC's lawyers. One example of POL's external lawyers

      writing to the BBC is at (POl00101715).


116. Please consider POl00040911 (Jane Macleod and Mark Davies report dated

11 February 2015) POl00102167 (email from Tom Wechsler on 17 February

2015), POL00102168 (attachment to prior email}, POL00102169 (attachment to

prior email}, POl00006574 (minutes of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee on

18 February 2015).


116.1 Please explain the basis for POl's change in approach to a presumption

in favour of mediation.


116.2 Please describe the discussion on POl's engagement with the CCRC. To

what extent, if at all, was there any resistance to providing information to the

                                   Page 495 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




CCRC?


1143. (POl00102152) is an "UPDATE AND OPTIONS" paper dated simply

      "February 2015", which was prepared for the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee

      for two purposes:


      a.    To update the Sub-Committee on Project Sparrow following the

            Parliamentary Select Committee meeting on 3 February 2015; and


      b.    To seek authority from the Sub-Committee to implement changes to our

            approach for handling this issue.


1144. I see that in the minutes of the Sub-Committee meeting held on 18 February

      2015, the opening substantive paragraph notes that: "The Committee received

      an update on Project Sparrow following the Parliamentary Select Committee

      meeting on the 3rd February. JM explained the background to the paper, which

      was asking the Committee to authorise changes to the approach for managing

      the issue" (POl00006574). The minutes go on to record: "The Committee

      supported the proposal in principle and asked the Business work at speed... ".


1145. I have little memory of this discussion. I will set out matters as I now understand

      them by reference to documents.


1146. The "UPDATE AND OPTIONS" paper states its proposal at paragraph 3:


           "3. 1. We propose a fundamental change to our approach based on the

           presumption that we will offer to mediate in all non-criminal cases, except

           in the most exceptional circumstances (eg where Second Sight have not




                                    Page 496 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




recommended mediation or there is a significant judgement against the

applicant through the Civil Courts).


3.2. This would mean we would meet our commitment to applicants at the

outset of the Scheme: providing them with a thorough re-investigation of

their case by Post Office, the opportunity of an independent review by

Second Sight and, where appropriate, mediation.


3.3. Our proposal in detail is that we:


- Adopt a presumption that Post Office will offer to mediate all non-criminal

cases in the Scheme


- Make clear that we do not intend to mediate criminal cases, except to the

extent there are areas in a case which do not relate to those which led to

the conviction. (Thus far we have seen no cases where the applicant has

a criminal conviction where mediation has been considered appropriate).

However, should we receive advice that it is safe to do so, we would also

offer "structured discussion" to applicants with criminal convictions, the

purpose of which would be to explain to the applicant.


- Refease Second Sight from their engagement with Post Office, but make

clear that Post Office will meet its commitment to any applicant wishing to

avail themselves of a review by Second Sight of their case by providing the

necessary funding to do so on an individual case by case basis


- Continue to engage with Second Sight pro tem on issues relating to

individual cases: including issues such as suspense accounts where they

relate directly to individual cases.
                          Page 497 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          - Publish an end of term report - facts and figures - on the operation of the

          Scheme and the branch support programme. The impact of this approach

          would serve to make the role of the Working Group redundant because its

          primary function is to decide on whether or not cases move to mediation,

          a point that JFSA has forcefully contested.


          3.4. Implementing this approach would require a careful handling strategy,

          on which timing and stakeholder management will be key considerations.

          A draft narrative is at Annex xx"


1147. Pages seven and eight discuss the pros and cons of the various options. These

      are a clear indication of the factors which the Sub-Committee (and

      subsequently the Board) took into account in the decision to make changes to

      the Mediation Scheme.


1148. In respect of the option which was adopted, the paper said this:


          "This is our preferred option. It makes a significant concession to JFSA and

          MPs, and reduces the number of applicants for whom mediation is unlikely

          to be available.


          "The risks are as above: some cases will be incapable of resolution at

          mediation, while the criminal cases are those around which most publicity

          is taking [sic]


          "Post Office has already declined to mediate 1 non-criminal case where

          place there was a 13 page High Courtjudgement against the applicant-we

          would advocate maintaining that flexibility at the margin.



                                   Page 498 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          "This option does however have the potential to ease stakeholder and

          media handling [though there is an associated risk around a perceived 'u-

          turn' which could be portrayed as a weakness in our position]


          "Second Sight role continues in relation to individual cases through a

          renewed engagement letter - which could restrict production of 'part two'

          report


          "Our position on criminal cases is strengthened by our dialogue with the

          Criminal Cases Review Commission, the independent public body

          established to review possible miscarriages of justice, with which Post

          Office is now engaged in correspondence."


1149. At the Sub-Committee meeting on 18 February 2015 (POL00006574), the

      attendees and I "discussed the proposal in detail as set out in paragraph 3.3 of

      the paper" (quoted in full above at paragraph 1146 of the document). The Sub-

      Committee agreed with the proposal. The minutes did not record any further

      reasons which went beyond the paper. I have no recollection of the discussion

      itself so I can add nothing in addition to the reasons recorded in the documents

      themselves, which shed light on the approach adopted towards mediation at

      this time.


1150. The minutes at (b), record that:


          "The Committee discussed the Criminal Cases in the scheme and

          supported the proposition that these should not be put forward for

          mediation. The Committee received an update on the discussion with the

          Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) and asked the Business to

                                   Page 499 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




          consider how it could engage constructively with the CCRC and under what

          circumstances it might share the report written by Brain [sic] Altman QC."


1151. This is also mentioned at paragraph 2.8 of the "UPDATE AND OPTIONS"

      paper:


          "We have also been contacted by the Criminal Cases Review Commission

          with a broad request for information based on Sir Brian Altman QC's review

          of our procedures in relation to prosecutions."


1152. I have no recollection of the discussion in respect of POL's engagement with,

      and the provision of information to, the CCRC on this occasion or in respect of

      that specific request. However, speaking more generally, I do not recall any

      resistance on the part of POL to providing information to the CCRC. To the

      extent that I recall this issue being raised it was quite the reverse: every time I

      asked Rodric Williams for an update on their work, I was told that we were

      waiting for a response from the CCRC. He always told me that we were

      responding to the CCRCs requests and that we were waiting for a response

      rather than the other way around.


117. Please consider POl00006366 (Brian Altman KC's advice of 8 March 2015).

Please explain why POL instructed Mr Altman to provide this advice and what,

if anything, it did in response. Did you brief the Board on the content of this

advice?


1153. The advice discusses the offences of theft and false accounting, and then

      considers the terms of a letter sent by POL to Second Sight on 24 February

      2015.

                                   Page 500 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




1154. To the best of my knowledge, I did not see the letter to Second Sight on 24

      February 2015 at the time.


1155. Neither do I have any recollection of being involved in Brian Altman QC being

      asked to advise, nor of seeing the advice which was produced. I am asked if I

      briefed the POL Board on the content of the advice; the answer is that I have

      no recollection of doing so and have not (to date) seen any documents to

      suggest I did.


118. Please consider UKGI00003789 (your letter to Jo Swinson MP dated 9

March 2015) and UKGI00003615 (Alwen Lyons' email on 9 March 2015).


118.1 Please explain what you saw to be the reasons for terminating the

Working Group.


118.2 Please explain what you saw as the reasons for terminating Second

Sight's instruction.


118.3 To what extent, if at all, was the timing of this decision influenced by the

impending General Election?


118.4 To what extent, if at all, did POL rely on legal advice in making either

decision?


118.5 Would you accept that the effect of this decision was to remove

independent and centralised oversight of the mediation scheme as a whole?


118.6 Did Post Office intend to mediate the outstanding cases without further

investigation into alleged BEDs in the Horizon IT System?



                                   Page 501 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




118.7 Was the termination of Second Sight's engagement and the Working

Group a missed opportunity (a) to uncover BEDs in the Horizon IT System and

(b) to refer the cases of convicted SPMs to the relevant appellate court to quash

unsafe convictions?


1156. On 2 March 2015, Alwen Lyons sent a number of documents for the POL Board

      by email (UKGI00003467). I was one of the recipients. The attachments were

      a suite of documents concerning the recommendation of the Project Sparrow

      Sub-Committee, including the minutes of 18 February, the "UPDATE AND

      OPTIONS" paper, which was prepared for that Sub-Committee meeting and

      the additional grids.


1157. Alwen ended her email to the POL Board asking "Would you please let me

      know if you are happy to supporl the proposal'.


1158. Tim Franklin, Richard Callard and Alasdair Marnoch sent brief emails signalling

      their support for this position (UKGI00003501 ).


1159. Al Cameron responded the next day to say (UKGI00003467):


          "[t]here is no risk free solution and the way we have to manage it today is

          unattractive. I supporl the proposal because it allows us to get a bit on the

          front foot and demonstrate our very positive intent to be fair to all

          concerned. It also allows us to make a step towards an end game. Of

          course, that could trigger a reaction, in parliament, the media or the courls

          but if it does, it is probably only hastening the inevitable."


1160. Making a decision by email to adopt a recommendation was exceptional. It

      would only occur when something particularly important and time-sensitive fell
                                    Page 502 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      between two POL Board meetings. It was an option we had, to agree

      something by email. But it would require some reason for this to be appropriate,

      such as a tight deadline. In this instance, the next POL Board meeting did not

      occur until 25 March 2015.


1161. Without seeing any documents to indicate that the POL Board had concerns

      about particular stages of the Sub-Committee's reasoning in making its

      recommendation, my understanding from the documents disclosed by the

      Inquiry is that the POL Board made its decision for the reasons contained in

      the Sub-Committee's minutes and the "UPDATE AND OPTIONS" paper, which

      the Sub-Committee had considered.


1162. I considered that the Working Group was no longer functioning properly. This

      was in the context of Second Sight's previous conclusions being undermined

      by factual responses compiled by POL's Sparrow team and there being no

      evidence arising from individual cases as to systemic problems with the

      Horizon system. By ending the Working Group and terminating the relationship

      with Second Sight, POL was able to bring the investigation of applicants' cases

      back into business as usual. I believed that the Working Group could be closed

      and the relationship with Second Sight terminated, whilst still keeping the

      applicants at the forefront of our work. This was not a decision that I or the POL

      Board took lightly but I was very sorry, and still am, that the relationship had

      broken down.


1163. I did not think that the nature of the investigation would change when POL took

      it "in house". I had no reason to think that any investigation would cease to

      consider the issues with Horizon about which the applicants had complained.

                                   Page 503 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1164. The Inquiry has asked about the extent to which POL took legal advice in

      making this decision. I have no memory of what legal advice was taken on this

      matter.


1165. I have been asked by the Inquiry whether the timing of the decision and

      announcement was influenced by the timing of the General Election. I do not

      recall the POL Board having any discussions to that effect.


1166. On 8 March 2015, I sent an email commenting on a draft letter to Jo Swinson

      MP. I had made some amendments and noted particularly that I wanted us to

      "avoid a class action" (POL00117187). The final version of that letter was sent

      on 9 March 2015 (POL00119795). In this letter, informing Jo Swinson MP of

      the decision, I summarised it in this way:


          "Post Office has now decided to put forward for mediation all cases

          remaining in the Scheme except those that have been subject to a previous

          Court ruling... This will accelerate the conclusion of the Scheme in the

          interests of Applicants and ensure that we will fulfil the commitments we

          made to them at the outset.




          "For those applicants who have been the subject of court rulings, two

          important points need to be drawn out. Firstly, we will continue to consider

          each of these cases carefully, on a case by case basis, even though

          mediation cannot overturn a Court's ruling. Secondly, as prosecutor, Post

          Office has a continuing duty after a prosecution has concluded to disclose




                                   Page 504 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          immediately any information that subsequently comes to light which might

          undermine its prosecution case or support the case of the defendant.




          "One of the consequences of our presumption in favour of mediating in as

          many cases as possible is that it brings to an end the role of the Working

          Group which recommends whether a case is suitable to go to mediation or

          not. I have informed the Chairman of the Working Group, Sir Anthony

          Hooper, and thanked him for his important contribution to this process."


1167. The next day, Jane Macleod wrote to Second Sight to give notice of the end

      of their contract, that notice period being one calendar month (POL00000219).


1168. The Inquiry has asked whether I accept that the effect of the decision to end

      the Working Group and terminate Second Sight was to remove independent

      and centralised oversight from the Mediation Scheme. I do not agree with this

      statement. First, given that there was to be a presumption that cases would be

      put into the Mediation Scheme, there was no longer a succession of decisions

      for which oversight was needed. Second, SPMs had the opportunity, funded

      by POL, to have their cases reviewed by Second Sight. Third, all mediation

      was to be conducted by the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution ("CEDR")

      and from what I understood, trained mediators would be independent of POL

      and SPMs.


1169. I am asked the following question by the Inquiry:


          "Was the termination of Second Sight's engagement and the Working

          Group a missed opportunity (a) to uncover BEDs in the Horizon IT System
                                  Page 505 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          and (b) to refer the cases of convicted SPMs to the relevant appellate court

          to quash unsafe convictions?"


1170. I simply cannot say what would have happened if Second Sight's engagement

      had not been terminated, and if the Working Group had continued to function.

      I note though, that the Working Group and Second Sight's work were brought

      to an end for good reason, because neither was producing the results which it

      should have done at the time. These were very difficult decisions I felt

      uncomfortable about, but I was personally sorry that the Mediation Scheme

      had not worked out as planned.


119. Please consider POL00027279 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 25 March

2015). Please describe what the Board discussed in respect of the Sparrow

Update on 25 March 2015 (see POLB 15/32).


1171. A POL     Board meeting took place on 25 March 2015,               minuted at

      (POL00027279). In respect of the Mediation Scheme, it is recorded at POLB

      15/32:


         "SPARROW UPDATE (VERBAL)


          (a) The Board welcomed Mark Davies, Director of Communications and

          Corporate Affairs, to the meeting and received a verbal update from him

          and the General Counsel on Project Sparrow.


          (b) The Board thanked the Executive for progress being made and noted

          the verbal update on Project Sparrow.


          (c)Mark Davies left the meeting."


                                  Page 506 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1172. The Inquiry has asked me to describe what the POL Board discussed. I have

      no current recollection of this specific discussion.


120. Please consider POl00102397 (email between you, Roger Gale and others

on 12/13 April 2015), POl00041076 (draft of Briefing Report Part - Two by

Second Sight) and POL00040957 (draft of Post Office Response to Second

Sight's Briefing Report Part 2).


120.1. Please describe to what extent you were involved in seeking to influence

the final version of Second Sight's thematic report.


1173. I do not recall having any involvement in seeking to influence the final version

     of Second Sight's thematic report.


1174. It was my understanding, POL's input was sought and provided because this

     was a formal part of the production of the report as directed for by the Chair and

     agreed to by the parties to the Working Group (see, for example, the Chair's

     direction on 14 November 2014 for POL to assist by responding to questions

     posed by Second Sight (at pages 2 and 3 of (POL00043630)).


      1175. This input was provided by the team who worked on the project day-to-

            day, acting in accordance with the advice of POL's internal and external

            lawyers (see, for example, page 1 of (POl00040498), in which Bond

            Dickinson advise on the questions described above). I did not attend

            Working Group meetings and was not involved in the detailed work on

            this project so did not assist with this, but I trusted that the team working

            on the project had the knowledge and expertise to do this.


1176. As a member of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee, I was kept abreast of the
                                   Page 507 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




     progress of the report's preparation in broad terms and had a sense of the team's

     views on it. Using the questions discussed above as an example, I recall that

     the team had ongoing concerns that Second Sight were straying beyond the

     terms of reference. This appears to be the thrust of Chris Aujard's draft response

     to Second Sight (POL00040499) which itself echoes the advice of POL's

     external lawyers (at page 1 of (POL00040498)). I can see from the documents

     that the Chair agreed that the scope of some questions was too wide and

     directed Second Sight to narrow them at the January meeting of the Working

     Group (at pages 3 and 4 of (POL00043633)).


1177. This example is illustrative: although I was aware of the broad concern, I do

     not recall my involvement extending to seeing the questions, POL's response to

     them, the legal advice received, or the response of the Chair. My work was

     higher-level and strategic. For example, when this concern was raised at the

     Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 12 January 2015 (which I attended)

     the minutes record that we agreed that the business "continue to take a robust

     approach at the Working Group, focussing on the agreed TOR in an attempt to

     set the Scheme back on track" (at page 2 of (POL00006575)).


1178. As these minutes show, there was also concern about the lack of progress

     being made on the individual cases. Some took the view that the production of

     the report was preventing Second Sight from making progress on the cases and

     so proposed that POL attempt to stop the report. As my email of 26 January

     2015 to Gavin Lambert shows, this was not a view I shared (at page 2 of

     (POL00117052) ):




                                   Page 508 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




            "Could you make sure the above has a bullet on the SS Reporl and how

            we plan to welcome, respond, comment, use it to show the progress we

            have made on the themes it will cover, etc. At the last discussion, Mark

            and some of the team were of the view that we should try and stop it.

            Both Alice and I believe that would be unhelpful and play into the (false)

            narrative about secrecy etc."


1179. On 12 February 2015, I attended a meeting of the ExCo, which considered a

    paper dated 12 February 2015 which set out POL's response to the Second

    Sight thematic issues (at pages 39 to 41 of (POL00027313)). The report

    explained that, of the thematic issues identified, nine were due to user error, two

    were due to fraud, four were due to lack of awareness by the SPM or their staff,

    and one lacked evidence entirely. It then set out the training and improvements

    which had been put in place to address these issues (at page 40 of

    (POL00027313) ).


1180. At the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee meeting on 18 February 2015 (which I

    attended), the Committee discussed the Second Sight Briefing Report - Part

    Two/Thematic Report and agreed that the business would publish its own

    response to set out the facts and figures on the operation of the Scheme and

    the Branch Support Programme, to be released alongside any announcement

    of changes to the Scheme and prior to the release of the Second Sight report

    (POL0000657 4).


1181. At the Board meeting on 25 March 2015 (which I attended), we received an

    oral update from Mark Davies and Chris on Project Sparrow (at page 8 of

    (POL00027279)). My draft speaking note for that meeting describes the draft

                                  Page 509 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




     report as "poor quality as anticipated, containing a number of misleading and

     inaccurate statements some of which fall outside the scope of the Scheme and

     Second Sight's expertise" (at page 1 of (POL00117283)). My CEO report (also

     discussed at this meeting) describes the report as "inaccurate and inflammatory"

     (at page 4 of (POL00027308)). The text for my CEO reports was drafted by the

     senior managers involved and I do not believe I wrote the speaking note.

     However, these are strong words and I do not think I would have permitted them

     to be included unless I agreed that they were appropriate.


1182. In summary, as a member of the Project Sparrow Sub-Committee I contributed

     to decisions of POL's high-level strategy in dealing with Second Sight, but had

     no involvement in the detail of the report or any attempts to influence that. To

     the extent that I was required to adopt a higher-level stance towards the

     Thematic Report, it was to advise against any effort to prevent its publication.


1183. Although I did not share the views of those who wanted to prevent the

     publication of the report, I understood the very significant concerns that

     motivated it. We were duty-bound to consider the wider reputation of Post

     Offices as well as POL as a business because criticism of POL threatened to

     undermine public trust in individual Post Offices nationwide. It was vitally

     important to me that we did not undermine this trust.


1184. In my capacity as CEO, I also provided updates to the Board on the progress

     of the report and conveyed my understanding of its contents. As I was not

     involved in the detailed work, that understanding necessarily relied in large part

     on what I was told by the team working on the project. I trusted and supported

     their judgment but was not afraid to challenge where I was familiar with the

                                   Page 510 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




     material (for example, having read some of Second Sight's case reports I

     challenged the contention that Second Sight's impartiality was "a fiction" (at page

     3 of (POL00117056) ).


1185. Given my role I could not have personal knowledge at that level of detail as a

     matter of course. Where I could not, I conveyed the consistent message of those

     working on the project which was that the report contained factual inaccuracies

     which could be corrected. I supported the provision of evidence where it could

     help correct demonstrably inaccurate factual statements but, ultimately, Second

     Sight retained editorial control of their report and POL had no power to dictate

     its contents.


120.2. Please describe your views at the time on the Second Sight reports and

set out any action you took as a result of the same. Please set out which aspects

of the reports you did not agree with, providing reasons for the same.


1186. I understood that the team working on the project took the following actions in

     response to the report:


            a.       Produced a report rebutting the perceived inaccuracies which was

                     to be sent to applicants alongside the thematic report: see Mark

                     Davies email to me on 12 April in which he describes the thematic

                     report    as     containing     "significant   inaccuracies      and

                     misunderstandings" (POL00102397).


            b.       Provided an update to the Board including a view on the detail of the

                     report: see Mark's email, circulated by Al Cameron on 16 April,




                                      Page 511 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




                which states that the Second Sight Report "remains inaccurate and

                contains a number of unsubstantiated assertions" (POL00102401 ).


           c.   Provided a copy of Second Sight's report to BIS: see Tom

                Wechsler's email of 16 April (POL00103765).


           d.   Issued a press statement dated 19 April 2015 addressing the

                release of the Report and confirming POL's commitment to

                mediating the remaining cases (albeit those where there had been

                a previous court ruling would be considered on a case-by-case

                basis) (CWU00000007). I provided comments on the draft on 20

                April 2015, noting that it needed to address other aspects of the

                reporting and copying in Angela Van Den Bogerd and Rodric

                Williams because they were "the experts on the detail' (at pages 1

                and 2 of (POL00091399)).


           e.   Prepared a draft communication to the POL network on 24 April

                2015 to provide reassurance in the face of the ongoing media

                coverage. Mark circulated his draft for comment to Jane Macleod,

                Tom Wechsler, Patrick Bourke, Rodric Williams, Melanie Garfield,

                and Angela Van Den Bogerd. He then forwarded it to Kevin Gilliland

                and to me, suggesting that Kevin would be best placed to send it

                (POL00027751 ).


1187. Save for the comment provided on the draft press statement, although I was

    aware that the team were taking these actions, I was not involved in the detail

    of them.


                                  Page 512 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1188. I do not recall whether I read the reports at the time and so cannot say what

     my views on them were, beyond the impression I have set out above. Given my

     role, this impression was largely formed on the basis of the information given to

     me by the wider team.


120.3. Have you views on these reports changed?


1189. As was the case with the earlier Second Sight reports, although I do not recall

     my views at the time with precision, the events which have taken place since

     these reports were produced have radically changed my impression of them.

     The findings of the Common Issues trial, the Horizon Issues trial, the judgment

     of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), and the evidence which has come to

     light in this Inquiry have demonstrated their fundamental value and legitimacy.


1190. My views at the time were formed in good faith and I had no reason to doubt

     the complaints made of the quality of Second Sight's work or the accuracy of

     POL's Response. The feedback I received on this was consistent and, I now

     see, was firmly aligned with the advice of our internal and external lawyers. The

     legal advice POL received on the nature of the contract between POL and SPMs

     remains the biggest area of disappointment for me and, with hindsight, this is

     where Second Sight had the greatest insight.


1191. I supported the POL Response at the time, although I was disappointed that

     we had been unable again to work together to achieve the end result we all

     wanted: to resolve the individual cases to the benefit of all involved. However, I

     accept now that the Response was wrong. In light of what I now know, the value

     and importance of the Second Sight reports are beyond doubt.


                                   Page 513 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




121. Please consider POL00027309 and POL00027310 (Board meeting on 2 July

2015). Please explain to what extent, if at all, decisions in relation to POL's

position on mediating SPMs claims and / or challenges to the integrity of

Horizon were influenced by the need to extend the contract to supply IT services

with Fujitsu.


1192. The background to the POL Board meeting on 2 July 2015 is indicated by the

      minutes of the meeting on 21 May, which I attended. I can see from the minutes

      that my CEO report addressed, amongst other things, the relationship with

      Fujitsu. The minutes record that "the volatility in the relationship with Fujitsu

      was an area of concern, because of the impact it could have on the IT

      programme and value for money if the Fujitsu contract needed to be extended"

      (at page 2 of (POL00021532)). Lesley Sewell joined the meeting to set out

      more detail on the options and costs of extending their contract and explained

      that it was not clear that Fujitsu wanted to sign the contract extension (at page

      7 of (POL00021532)).


1193. I can see that a memo dated 29 June 2015 from Al Cameron and Lesley to the

      POL Board provides a further update on the negotiations and seeks the POL

      Board's approval to extend the contract by one year to protect the continuity of

      operational services from an otherwise unacceptable risk of disruption

      (POL00027309). This request was approved by the POL Board at its meeting

      on 2 July 2015 (POL00027310).


1194. Although I do not recall this discussion, I do not consider that the decisions

      relating to POL's position on mediating the claims and challenges to the

      integrity of Horizon were influenced by the need to extend the contract to supply

                                   Page 514 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      IT services with Fujitsu at all. Regardless of the issues arising in Project

      Sparrow, there was an obvious need to ensure that any changes to the IT

      arrangements did not result in unacceptable disruption to the operation of the

      system. Given that this could not be assured without extending the contract,

      the extension requested by Lesley and Alasdair was a sensible precaution.


122. Please consider POL00102438 (your email to Jane Macleod and others on

3 August 2015).


122.1. Please consider "our priority is to protect the business and the

thousands who operated under the same rules and didn't get into difficulties".

Does this accurately reflect your main priority in dealing with challenges

brought by SPMs to the Horizon IT System?


1195. In my email of 3 August 2015 to Jane Macleod, Mark Davies, and Al Cameron

      I sought input for a meeting due to take place with Baroness Neville-Rolfe,

      explaining that (at page 1 of (POL00102438)):


          '10Jur priority is to protect the business and the thousands who operated

          under the same rules and didn't get into difficulties; the points and queries

          below are not to reopen anything but to ensure that we are well briefed for

          Thursday."


1196. The points and queries referred to address a range of issues I anticipated we

      may discuss, and they illustrate the breadth of the issues being raised

      throughout this time.


1197. It was always a fundamental concern to me that the work being undertaken

      should address and resolve the complaints and allegations made by SPMs. I
                                   Page 515 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      believed that this was best for them and also best for the business. I had

      repeatedly emphasised how important it was that these cases be resolved in a

      way which both sides could be satisfied with.


1198. However, as I have set out above, I also felt a deep responsibility to protect

      both the business itself (which, as CEO, I was duty-bound to do), and the

      interests of the vast numbers of SPMs running Post Offices up and down the

      country, who did not appear to be experiencing difficulties with the system, but

      whose livelihoods would inevitably be impacted by any depreciation in trust in

      POL, the business. It was vital that we did not needlessly destabilise the

      business (understood as the individual Post Offices themselves), staff, and

      customers. A loss of trust in POL would inevitably result in a loss of trust for

      them and for their customers, whether that was fair or not.


1199. This was an acutely difficult balancing act because both interests were valid

      and important. On both sides there were people who could suffer through no

      fault of their own. I consider the desire to protect the business and the

      businesses of SPMs up and down the country to be a perfectly legitimate aim,

      and I do not think that this aim compromised POL's desire to achieve resolution

      for those SPMs who did enter into the Mediation Scheme. Despite the adverse

      publicity in doing so and without the benefit of hindsight, my understanding

      from all the briefings, papers and discussions was that we had listened to the

      SPMs' complaints and were trying to respond. We had put the Mediation

      Scheme in place, advertised it broadly, and put in vast resources to support it.

      I, the Board, the GE and colleagues working with Second Sight and the

      Working Group thought that we were doing everything we could and should do.


                                  Page 516 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




122.2. Do you accept that POL's priority ought to have been to investigate

whether there was a real possibility that a conviction it had secured based on

data produced by the Horizon IT System was unsafe?


1200. I agree that this should have been a priority and my understanding was that it

      was. I am not a lawyer, and I did not have the expertise to assess the work we

      were doing myself. However, my understanding was that we were doing what

      we needed to do.


123. Please consider POL00021683 (Jane Macleod's letter to Second Sight

dated 4 August 2015). Why did POL send this letter?


1201. Jane Macleod's letter of 4 August 2015 refers to a letter sent to Second Sight

      on 27 July 2015 (POL00113697), which she describes as setting out the

      confidentiality and publicity restrictions under their terms of engagement letter

      dated 1 July 2014 and the extension of services agreement dated 15 April 2015

      (at page 2 of (POL00021683)).


1202. I can see that Jane emailed me on 2 August 2015, while I was away on holiday,

      to provide me with an update on developments relating to Project Sparrow

      (POL00102433). In this update, she refers to her letter of 27 July 2015 and

      states that she has written to Second Sight "advising that as their work had

      concluded, they should return all documentation to us in accordance with the

      terms of the confidentiality undertakings contained in their Engagement fetter"

      (at page 3 of (POL00102433)).


1203. In her update, I can see that Jane informed me that, following receipt of that

      letter (at page 3 of (POL00102433)):

                                   Page 517 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




          "Second Sight (in breach of their confidentiality undertakings) ensured that

          Andrew Bridgend [sic] was immediately aware of our instruction to

          return/destroy materials, and he then complained to the Minister that we

          were destroying materials. As a result, I wrote to the Minister on

          Wednesday and have given her an undertaking that any materials returned

          to us by SS would be held by Bond Dickinson. This undertaking was (mis)-

          reported in the Sunday Telegraph today ... "


1204. The replies to Jane's update email from Al Cameron and Mark Davies (on 3

      August 2015) indicate that thought was given to how to handle these issues,

      including by counter-briefing the press (at pages 1 to 3 of (POL00102433)). In

      my reply of 3 August, I asked the team to explore the pros and cons of all

      options ready for consideration on my return (at page 1 of (POL00102433)). At

      this time, as ever, managing press reporting and the expectations of MPs was

      a critical (and difficult) task. It would certainly be a source of concern if Second

      Sight had released confidential information in breach of their confidentiality

      undertakings.


1205. In my reply to Jane, I explained that I had a number of questions/requests

      which I would send in due course. I believe I set these out in the email I sent

      later that day at 15:26 to Jane, Mark Davies, Al Cameron, Tom Wechsler,

      Avene O'Farrell, and Alwen Lyons (POL00065478). As I said there, these were

      not all new questions and we had answered many of them before. However, I

      was seeking a full briefing on all relevant issues, set out in clear terms, which I

      could use at my meeting with Baroness Neville-Rolfe due to take place that

      Thursday. We were dealing with sensitive and difficult issues, so it was


                                    Page 518 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      important to me that ExCo was challenged in its thinking as well as supported.

      I can see that I wanted to be sure that the Board was fully behind the content

      of the ministerial briefing, as I say that if we decided to change anything 'we

      would need to go back to the Board' and I wanted to know that the interim

      Chairman Neil Mccausland was in the loop.


1206. In relation to preserving material (and the suggestion that POL might seek to

      destroy material) I can see that I asked (at page 2 of (POL00065478)):


          "Why did they think we would be destroying data? Clearly we wouldn't; so

          what is so sensitive that they thought we might/or wanted to be sure data

          was protected. (And if the data destruction point is just a red herring, then

          it comes back to 2) ... "


1207. Point 2 (as referred to in this question) asks why Second Sight believed POL

      should pay compensation and why they were supporting the JFSA.


1208. At 19:52 on 3 August 2015, Mark Underwood emailed Jane Macleod and

      Rodric Williams (cc'ing Mark Davies and Melanie Garfield) explaining that he

      had made a start on compiling the material and information I had requested (at

      page 1 of (POL00065478)). I believe the attached document referred to is a

      draft Q&A document which addressed, amongst other things, the letter of 27

      July. In this draft, Mark Underwood explained that POL made a request for

      securing confidential documents, described as "standard practice" at the end

      of engagement. As POL would retain all documents provided by Second Sight

      and Second Sight would only destroy duplicates, his understanding is that no

      information would be lost as a result of Second Sight complying with this

      request (at page 2 of (POL00119489)).
                                      Page 519 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




1209. There is no additional explanation within this material of why Jane sent her

      letter of 4 August 2015 and I have no independent recollection which would

      shed further light on this. The only explanations I appear to have received are

      set out in her email update of 2 August 2015 and in the letter itself. From these,

      Jane wrote to seek an explanation from Second Sight of their actions, which

      appeared to be in breach of the duty of confidentiality they owed under the

      terms of their engagement.


1210. If the actions allegedly undertaken by Second Sight were true (and, as GC, I

      am sure Jane would have checked her facts before sending a letter such as

      this),   this   behaviour would    have    been   seen    as   unacceptable     and

      unprofessional.


124. Please consider FUJ00083379 (presentation on the Branch Outreach Issue

dated 10 December 2015).


1211. The Inquiry has asked me to consider (FUJ00083379) which is a printed

      presentation prepared by Fujitsu on 10 December 2015 "for Post Office's

      internal purposes" describing their initial findings in respect of the Dalmellington

      / Branch Outreach bug.


124.1 When did you first become aware of the Dalmellington/Branch Outreach

bug? Did you review this presentation?


1212. On 1 July 2016, I sent an email to Al Cameron and Rob Houghton, cc'ing Tom

      Wechsler and Jane Macleod with the subject line "The Dalmellington Error in

      Horizon". I opened the email saying "(t)his needs looking into please" and

      included a link to the Wordpress biog ProblemsWithPol and a particular article

                                    Page 520 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      with the name which I included as my email subject (POL00029971 ). This was

      a biog maintained by Tim McCormack.


1213. Regarding the online article, I asked that "a report takes the points in order and

      explains them". I wanted to understand what was being alleged by Mr

      McCormack and understand how we and Fujitsu had "rectified all the issues

      raised, if they happened as Tim explains" since I was concerned that "we/our

      suppliers appear to be very lax at handling 24k". I regarded the issue as

      potentially very important; I told my colleagues that we "must take him seriously

      and professionally" and I made no assumptions about whether or not the

      allegations were accurate or, if they were, where the blame lay. I genuinely

      wanted to understand what had happened and, perhaps just as importantly,

      whether steps had been taken to make sure it did not happen again.


1214. I believe that was the first time I became aware of the Dalmellington Outreach

      Bug.


1215. Rob wrote to Sharon Gilkes and Katie Mulligan (cc'ing Angela) that afternoon

      asking for "an urgent review and mini <taskforce> on this one" and Angela

      responded asking to see Mr McCormack's email (POL00026913). Then, within

      the hour, Rob emailed those same people saying "Can you stand down on this

      please? Jane has just talked to me and its very sensitive and in control! Any

      specific actions and I will revert. My apologies" (POL00029980). Sharon replied

      "will do Rob".


1216. Putting this together with another email chain, I can see that Jane emailed Al

      and Rob at 12:30 on 1 July 2016 saying (POL00030012), in an email to which

      I was copied:
                                    Page 521 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           "We are on top of this. Mr McCormack regularly writes to us in unpleasant

          terms and unfortunately he also posts very unpleasant biogs. All the

          matters of which he complains are the subject of review by the CCRC."


1217. I presume that this is the reason that Rob told his team to stand down.


124.2 Please consider "Audit found 112 occurrences of Duplicate Pouch IDs

over the past 5 years ... 108 items corrected at the time ... 4 items still to be

confirmed." Please explain your reaction to the disclosure that Fujitsu identified

a bug with the potential to cause discrepancies in branch accounts that had

been live for five years concern you. Did it cause you to consider POL's

approach to SPMs' complaints about Horizon?


1218. Rodric Williams then sent the Fujitsu presentation to Rob Houghton on 7 July

      2016. I was not copied into this. Rodric asked whether Fujitsu had implemented

      a fix. Rob asked Gavin Bell, at Fujitsu. Gavin provided a summary of Fujitsu's

      measures taken regarding this bug on 11 July. This summary covered the

      history of the matter, the "problem identification" and the "problem correction".

      Gavin noted "since the fix has been five no further incidents have been seen

      and the active monitoring for this has now been stopped".


1219. Gavin described that Fujitsu had identified 112 instances of this error occurring

      in previous transaction logs, but all had previously either been corrected by the

      SPM or with the help of the support desk. This "112" statistic was the same

      figure which was quoted in the Fujitsu presentation at page 3, with the extra

      information that they had occurred over five years. That presentation stated

      more specifically that 108 items had been corrected at the time, but four still

      required confirmation because there were no correction records.
                                   Page 522 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1220. On 9 August 2016, Rodric emailed Rob to say that I had received another email

      from Mr McCormack which described that the Dalmellington Error had just

      happened again at another branch. Rob asked Sharon Gilkes to "pick this up

      please" and sought some time with her to discuss it. This is a reference to Mr

      McCormack's email on 9 August 2016 (at page 2 of (POL00119584)).


1221. Avene Regan had sought the advice of Rod, less than 25 minutes after Mr

      McCormack's email arrived, as to how (or if) POL should respond. Rodric was

      "not inclined to reply" but the following week reflected and said he would "like

      to go back to Mr McCormack with a short response, for no other reason than

      to ensure he can't allege that we don't respond when issues with Horizon are

      flagged to us". Avene approved the draft response and agreed that Rodric

      should send it.


1222. I have very little recollection of the Dalmellington bug and I do not know if I

      knew it by name at the time. I recall a conversation with Rob Houghton about

      this issue although I cannot say when this occurred. However, it must have

      been after I sent the email about Tim McCormack. Rob came to see me and

      had a document with him. I think this may have been the Fujitsu presentation

      but cannot be certain. Looking at it today, it triggers a memory that Rob referred

      to an issue with the "stack", which I see is a word used on the second page of

      the presentation. I do not now remember anything further about the

      conversation, except that I have a vague memory of asking for a copy of the

      document which Rob had in hard copy. I cannot recall if I asked Rob directly or

      if I asked Avene to obtain a copy.




                                   Page 523 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1223. After speaking to Rob and obtaining a copy of the document from which he was

      speaking, I would have had an understanding of the issues raised in Mr

      McCormack's email.


1224. The Inquiry has asked whether my knowledge of the Dalmellington bug caused

      me to consider POL's approach to SPMs' complaints. While I do not recall

      receiving it, Jane Macleod's email to me and others on 1 July 2016

      (POl00029976) stated that "we are on top of this" and that the matters which

      Mr McCormack had complained about were the subject of the review by the

      CCRC. I believe I was reassured by this that the legal team were alive to all

      legal issues arising from the bug and were dealing with them appropriately.




125. Please consider POl00117722 (letter from Tim Parker to Baroness Neville

Rolfe dated 30 September 2015), POl00024913 (email from Jane Mcleod to you

and others on 1 October 2015), POl00027126 (email from Tom Wechsler to you

on 27 January 2016), POl00103110 (letter from Tim Parker to Baroness Neville-

Rolfe dated 4 March 2016), POl00103111 (Annex A), POl00027128 (email from

Jane Macleod to you dated 22 January 2016) and POl00006355 (the Swift

review).


125.1 Please explain the background to Mr Parker's review of Sparrow and

Horizon.


1225. My understanding is that the origin of Tim Parker's review of Sparrow and

      Horizon ("the Parker Review" or "Jonathan Swift QC's report") can be traced

      to a ShEx / BIS meeting on 4 August 2015 attended by Baroness Neville-Rolfe


                                  Page 524 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      and various Government advisers and civil servants. A note which I have seen

      of that meeting states as an action (UKGI00005297):


          "Baroness Neville-Rolfe to speak with incoming Post Office Limited

          Chairman Tim Parker, to encourage him to take a fresh look at these issues

          and engage with those who are still raising concerns."


1226. Later that week I met with Baroness Neville-Rolfe, with Jane Macleod and

      Mark Davies, on 6 August 2015 (UKGI00000035). This is a meeting which was

      arranged at Baroness Neville-Rolfe's instigation, and which Jane had told me

      about a few days before (POL00065471 ).


1227. The purpose of the meeting on 6 August was recorded, in an internal briefing

      note for Baroness Neville-Rolfe which I have seen as part of the Inquiry's

      disclosure (UKGI00005297), as:


              "Post Office will want to set out the steps they have taken to ensure

               the mediation scheme is open, fair and independently assured.


              "Post Office may also want to discuss Second Sight and the reports

               (in Sunday's Telegraph) that they have written to Ministers claiming

               that Horizon is flawed


              "You may like to ask Post Office what more they can do to help the

               mediation scheme continue, and how they can increase their

               engagement with individuals




                                  Page 525 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




               "You may like to ask Post Office about their wider strategy for

                communicating their messages about this issue and how they can

                make it more effective"


1228. This briefing note for Baroness Neville-Rolfe included "Explain that you are

      speaking to Tim Parker shortly and will emphasise the imporlance Government

      places on him taking ownership of this issue."


1229. On 6 August 2015, Alwen Lyons and Richard Callard exchanged emails (which

      I was copied into). Alwen said "Paula and I are consider[ing] how and when it

      is best to brief Tim on Panorama" and said that we would prefer to do it "after"

      Baroness Neville-Rolfe had spoken to him (at page 2 of (UKGI00005323)). Tim

      Parker had not yet joined POL and Neil Mccausland was Acting Chair at this

      time. He was in the loop on Panorama. Richard said that Baroness Neville-

      Rolfe and Tim were due to speak that day at 14:45. Richard also indicated that

      Tim, as the new Chair, was happy for Baroness Neville-Rolfe to tell

      Parliamentary colleagues that "the new chair will of course take a critical and

      independent look at the issue" of Sparrow.


1230. On 10 September 2015, Baroness Neville-Rolfe wrote to Tim (POL00102551)

      "ahead of your taking up the role of Post Office Limited Chairman to confirm

      our conversation last month regarding Post Office Horizon system". I shall

      quote from it in detail:


          "The Government takes seriously the concerns raised by individuals and

          MPs regarding the Post Office Horizon system and the suggestion that

          there may have been miscarriages of justice as a result of issues with

          Horizon. The Government also recognises the commitment that Post Office
                                  Page 526 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          Limited have demonstrated to resolving those issues, including through

          creating a mediation scheme and appointing independent investigators to

          scrutinise the system.


          "As you will be aware, there have been some three years of scrutiny of

          Horizon and the Criminal Cases Review Commission is considering a

          number of cases which have been brought to it by individuals, and the

          Government cannot intervene in that independent process.


          "As the sole shareholder of Post Office Limited, the Government wants to

          make sure that the Post Office network is successful and sustainable

          across the country. We recognise that the Post Office is a commercial

          business and we allow it to operate as such, but of course, we expect it to

          behave fairly and responsibly in doing so. I am therefore requesting that,

          on assuming your role as Chair, you give this matter your earliest attention

          and, if you determine that any further action is necessary, will take steps to

          ensure that happens."


1231. Baroness Neville-Rolfe told Tim that she was copying the letter to me. I do not

      recall receiving the letter but I do not doubt that I did.


1232. The next day, Baroness Neville-Rolfe received a briefing note from her ShEx

      team (UKGI00000058). This was in advance of a meeting arranged for 17

      September 2015 with Lord Arbuthnot. Baroness Neville-Rolfe was briefed that

      she should tell Lord Arbuthnot that she had written to Tim who would "look at

      this with a fresh pair of eyes".




                                     Page 527 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1233. On 11 August 2015, Alwen Lyons sent an email to Tim Parker (POL00174396)

      attaching a note from me entitled "note for Tim Parker re Panorama". I have

      been unable to find a final version of this note, however I have been shown a

      draft document at (POL00319092) which looks like it is probably an earlier draft

      of the note which went to Tim Parker. It would appear from (POL00168301)

      that this had been prepared for me by Mark Davies who had had input from

      Jane Macleod, Alwen and Andrew Parsons from Bond Dickinson.


1234. On 14 September 2015, Baroness Neville-Rolfe's letter of 10 September 2015

      was provided to Tim by Jane.


1235. A Board meeting took place on 22 September 2015 (POL00021538). Tim was

      not yet in post, and so Neil Mccausland attended as the interim Chairman. I

      presented my report and the minutes record that I said:


          " ... the Minister had asked the new Chairman for his independent review of

          Sparrow. The Minister had also met Lord Arbuthnot who informed the

          Minister that he would use Sparrow as the focus of his maiden speech in

          the House of Lords."


1236. Tim wrote to Baroness Neville-Rolfe on 30 September 2015 (POL00117722).

      He had been "considering how to fulfil the commitment [he] gave [the Minister]

      to take a fresh look at the Post Office's handling of the complaints raised with

      it in connection with its Horizon electronic point of sale and accounting system".

      Tim had decided:


          "To this end, and to promote the independence of the exercise, I proposed

          to instruct a QC to advise me as to the appropriate scope of my

                                   Page 528 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




          investigation, how I might best conduct the necessary enquiries, and to

          assist me in considering both how to present and, as necessary, act on my

          findings."


1237. Tim said that he would share a timetable for the Parker Review with Baroness

      Neville-Rolfe shortly after 12 October 2015.


1238. On 1 October 2015, Jane shared with me an email that she had sent to Tim,

      providing the CVs of "two leading QCs" who "would in [her] opinion be suitable

      to advise you having regard to the nature of the issues raised by Project

      Sparrow'' (POL00027126).


1239. Other emails, which I was not copied into at the time, make it clear that

      Jonathan Swift QC was advising Tim directly, taking instructions from Tim and

      reporting to Tim. For example, Jane emailed Tim on 22 October 2015 saying

      "I trust you found the meeting with Jonathan useful and believe that he will be

      able to support you appropriately?" (POL00102619).


1240. On 9 October 2015, I had a pre-arranged telephone call with Baroness Neville-

      Rolfe which was proposed by POL (UKGI00006142). Tom Wechsler gave me

      a list of "key handling points" by email on 8 October 2015 (POL00117511 ):


              "Whilst we do not believe there is a case for BNR to meet SSISAH (at

               all) we need to respect her decision in principle


              "So we should not ask her to change her decision and tell JA etc that

               she won't meet them




                                  Page 529 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




              "What we are asking for is time ie leave the decision open for now.

               Two reasons:


               o     "Having asked Tim Parker to review our approach, he has

                     appointed a QC to assist him and is very likely to meet SSISAH.

                     He is aiming to have completed this by Christmas. For BNR to

                     meet them at the same time risks undermining Tim's work before

                     it has begun.


               o     "To roughly the same timescale we will have completed the

                     majority of the mediations.


              "We believe that an earlier meeting would be used by JFSA as

               evidence of an impending Government intervention and a catalyst for

               applicants to withdraw from mediation - entirely to their detriment.


              "If BNR still wishes to meet them at a later date then so be it, but she

               would be better off having had the benefit of Tim's review, and

               applicants would be better off for having gone to mediation."


1241. I was also sent a one-page aide memoire. I thanked Tom and said that the note

      should be sent to Tim before my call. Later that day, Jane told me by email that

      Tim had had a conference with Jonathan Swift QC that afternoon, who had

      "agreed that the Chairman would need to meet both [Second Sight and Sir

      Anthony]" (POl00117506).


1242. I was not copied into the correspondence instructing Jonathan Swift QC, nor

      consulted on the terms of the instructions. Neither should I have been - it was

      Tim, and not me, taking advice. I have now seen the instructions to leading
                                     Page 530 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      counsel as part of the Inquiry's disclosure. I am aware that Christopher Knight,

      a junior barrister, was also instructed. I have not seen, even as part of the

      Inquiry's disclosure, the instructions which were sent to him at the beginning of

      his involvement in the matter.


1243. At some time when the Parker Review was being set up, although I do not

      recall precisely when, I spoke with Jane who told me that I would intentionally

      be out of the loop to ensure that Tim's review was independent. That was

      appropriate. I occasionally asked Jane and others about the progress of the

      Parker Review and was reassured that it was progressing well.


1244. In respect of Horizon, ShEx made the following note of the "main points" of

      discussion after the call (which I did not see at the time):


              "POL wanted to flag their concerns around the Minister meeting

                Second Sight. They felt that doing so would risk undermining her

                independence and distance from the situation, and were also

                concerned that if news of the meeting were to leak to the media, it

                could risk individuals withdrawing from the mediation process (after

                considerable efforts by POL to get these in the diary). Paula was also

                concerned that the Minister's meeting might conflict with any meeting

                Tim Parker decided to have with SS.


               "BNR noted Paula's views but felt it important to make the offer of a

                meeting to Second Sight and inform Mr Arbuthnot that she was doing

                so. She suggested that the offer should be of a private meeting, and

                should happen quite soon, so that it would take place before Tim

                Parker invites them to meet. It would be a short meeting.
                                    Page 531 of 861
                                                                                          WITN01020100




               "After the call, we agreed that we would need to update Oliver Letwin's

                office on the process, before offering a meeting and replying to Mr

                Arbuthnot. The Minister also felt she should write to Mr Bridgen,

                possibly after she had met Second Sight.


               'The Minister agreed that the meeting with Sir Anthony Hooper was

                less important, and that it would be best to wait until Tim Parker had

                met Sir Anthony and then decide whether she should meet him."


1245. I had a one-to-one meeting with Tim on 12 October 2015. A briefing note was

      prepared for me by Tom Wechsler (POl00027115) noting that this was my first

      "1-2-1 with Tim since he officially began at Post Office". In respect of the Parker

      Review, the briefing note stated that "Jane and team have met with the QC

      supporting TP to provide information and answer questions. I am sure it is all

      in hand, but you may wish to encourage TP to raise any concerns about eg

      information I support with you at any points that he has them."


1246. I am now aware that on 19 October 2015, Baroness Neville-Rolfe met with

      Second Sight. I have seen a briefing note prepared for her for that meeting

      (UKGI00000044). It is noted there that Baroness Neville-Rolfe has "asked Tim

      Parker, who started as Chair this month, to look at the matter with a fresh pair

      of eyes, and he will take a serious and thorough look at this."


1247. I have seen a document (POl00027129) headed "Project Sparrow - 05

      January 2016" which was sent to me by Tom Wechsler (POl00110344). I do

      not recall it from the time. I am not sure if it was written for me, or if I saw it at

      the time. It states that Tim was to meet the barristers "to finalise the report,

      likely in the second half of this month" (POL00027129). Tom told me the same
                                     Page 532 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




       day that "the QC's review is due to complete in the next week or so for Tim's

       consideration" (POL00110344 ).


1248. I had a further meeting with Tim on 12 January 2016. My briefing document is

       (POL00027124). That briefing note states:


           "Yesterday, Tim Parker received the draft report into the adequacy of the

           Scheme's processes from Jonathan Swift QC. Though we have not had

           sight of the report, Jane MacLeod has a meeting with Tim this afternoon at

           4pm, during which I would expect it to be discussed."


1249. On 22 January, Tim and Jane had a call with Jonathan Swift QC and discussed

       his recommendations. I was aware of this call at the time, and the email

       summarising    the   recommendations    was    forwarded    to   me   by   Jane

       (POL00103110). The document attached to that email is (POL00103111 ). This

       is a table summarising the eight recommendations which Jonathan Swift QC

       and Christopher Knight made, with "POL's proposals for addressing"them.


1250. I met with Jane on 27 January 2016. Tom suggested that I might want to

       discuss Sparrow, and informed me that "the plan is to work with Jonathan Swift

       to complete the final report" (POL00027128).


1251. I see now that the final review written by Jonathan Swift QC and Christopher

       Knight is dated 8 February 2016 (POL00006355). I did not see it at the time.


125.2 Please set out whether you read Jonathan Swift QC's (as he then was)

report. If so, please describe your views on the same and the actions you took

as a result of it.


                                   Page 533 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




1252. I had no involvement with the Parker Review written by Jonathan Swift QC,

      and I have no recollection of seeing it at the time. Nor have I been able to

      identify any documents disclosed by the Inquiry which show that I saw, or had,

      a copy of the report. I do not think other members of the POL Board had a copy

      either.


1253. The POL Board, and I, did see the eight recommendations which Mr Swift QC

      gave at the end of his report. We saw those in a different format, transferred

      into a table (POL00103111 ).


1254. In respect of the eight recommendations, nothing caused me particular alarm,

      I was realistic that work needed to be done and I was open to this happening.

      I believed that POL should deal with the recommendations professionally and

      respond to each of them.


1255. I am aware that actions which were taken by POL as a result of those

      recommendations were taken by a team which reported directly to Tim. I was

      not part of that process. I believe the POL Board was updated but have no

      detailed recollection other than of the Senior Independent Director asking

      questions.


125.3 Please describe any meetings you had with Mr Parker, Mr Swift QC or

anyone else at POL, UKGI or BEIS concerning (a) the Swift Review and/ or (b)

its recommendations.


1256. In addition to the matters described above, I am able to recall or identify

      documentary evidence of the following meetings in which I was involved,




                                  Page 534 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      concerning the Parker Review. I cannot be sure that this is a comprehensive

      list, but rather it is everything which I can currently recall.


             a.   In response to matters I raised by email, Jane Macleod wrote to me

                  on 23 May 2016 describing that Deloitte were working to address

                  certain   recommendations         made     in    the   Parker   Review

                  (POL00 103200).


             b.   On 26 January 2016, Tom Wechsler emailed me a note from Patrick

                  Bourke which followed a telephone call between the Chairman and

                  the Minister in which both 'agreed the issue was losing potency and

                  dying away' but that in respect of the report itself 'it wou Id be

                  impossible to please everyone, no matter what was done.' They

                  anticipated accusations of whitewash and lack of independence,

                  etc, which would need to be ridden out by both POL and BIS

                  (POL00027116)


             c.   Tom emailed me on 29 April 2016 providing a file note of a meeting

                  between the Chairman and the Minister. The Chairman updated

                  Baroness Neville-Rolfe in respect of the recommendations from his

                  report (POL00103171).


             d.   I met with Jane on 13 June 2016, following an email on 10 June

                  2016 (POL00110440). Jane briefed me on Anthony de Garr

                  Robinson QC's advice that work underway on the Parker Review

                  should stop. As I recall, it was subsumed into the litigation work.


1257. I did not meet with Jonathan Swift QC, or his junior Christopher Knight.

                                     Page 535 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




126. Please consider POL00110406 (email from Tom Wechsler to you dated 10

April 2016). Was there a culture within senior management at Post Office to

prevent further investigation of complaints concerning Horizon at this time?


1258. I am asked whether there was a culture within senior management at POL to

      prevent further investigation of complaints in relation to Horizon in April 2016.

      I do not believe that this was the case. In fact, to the contrary, the senior

      management of POL and I felt that we had done everything reasonable to

      investigate cases of complaints in respect of Horizon.


1259. The note from Tom Wechsler states "beyond the CCRC and any legal action,

      we have done as much as we can ... [T]there must be an end to this. Ultimately,

      if there is a case the protagonists must make it in Court". The issue at this stage

      was not that there was a culture to prevent further investigations, but that the

      scheme had reached an end point. POL had finished its reviews; a majority of

      applicants left the scheme in autumn 2015 (at page 2 of (POL00065471)); a

      number of SPMs had lodged Data Subject Access Requests which Jane

      assumed linked to a possible class action. Further the Chairman was

      conducting his own review assisted by a QC. I genuinely do not believe that

      there was a culture within senior management at POL to prevent investigation

      of complaints in relation to Horizon. Rather, it was felt that we had done

      everything reasonable to investigate complaints. In fact, as can be seen from

      the section above regarding the Dalmellington bug, where issues were brought

      to my attention, I made sure that the right members of the team were asked to

      investigate them.




                                   Page 536 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1260. So far as I was concerned, we had taken complaints seriously, putting

      significant sums of money into the Second Sight investigation, the Mediation

      Scheme, carried out internal investigations and instructed external legal

      professionals in respect of the same, invited complainants to approach us with

      their concerns and funded independent advisers for them.


1261. At the time, we considered that we had exhausted all avenues of investigation.

      I am aware of, and very sorry for, how short-sighted and empty that now sounds.


Remote Access


1262. I am aware that Fraser J made a number of findings about remote access in

      his Horizon Issues judgment in the Group Litigation:


      a.   Over the lifetime of the system, Fujitsu used at least three forms of

           privileged access to Horizon.


      b.   These were Database Administration rights, Privileged User rights, and a

           powerful form of access permission known as APPSUP.


      c.   Each of these rights enabled Fujitsu to change transactions and branch

           accounts without the knowledge of the relevant SPM. In particular, the

           APPSUP privilege enabled Fujitsu to do whatever it wanted on the Horizon

           system.


      d.   In addition, there was a function built into Horizon, known as a Balancing

           Transaction, which enabled Fujitsu to insert or inject additional transactions

           into branch accounts.


      e.   For many years, all the members of Fujitsu's staff working at the Software
                                    Page 537 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           Support Centre in Bracknell had APPSUP privileges, even though internal

           Fujitsu documents recorded they were not supposed to have that role.


      f.   The controls around the use of these privileges and functions were

           inadequate to record the changes that Fujitsu made on the system. Fraser

           J found that Fujitsu only maintained user access logs from 2009. From

           2009 to July 2015, the logs recorded only when a user had logged on and

           logged off and failed to record any actions taken by the user. From 2015

           onwards, Fujitsu kept more detailed logs, but their content was still

           inadequate.


1263. I accept these findings. In this section of my witness statement, I set out my

      understanding of Fujitsu's remote access privileges at four points in time:


      a.   First, during my time as Network Director and Managing Director (2007-

           2012);


      b.   Second (in response to question 62.3.2) at the time of my discussion with

           Lord Arbuthnot on 23 May 2013;


      c.   Third (in response to question 67.4) at the time of my meeting with Lord

           Arbuthnot on 3 July 2013;


      d.   Fourth, at the time that I gave evidence to the House of Commons BIS

           Select Committee on 3 February 2015.


1264. Before doing so, I wish to outline my general understanding of what I

      understood "remote access" to mean at these times.


1265. I did not have a personal technical understanding of how the Horizon system
                                   Page 538 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      functioned and relied upon POL's IT department to escalate and explain any

      IT matters that were relevant to my roles. I knew in broad terms that branch

      accounts sometimes required correction - in the vast majority of cases due to

      human error - and believed this was done via the Transaction Correction

      process. I understood that if POL identified discrepancies in a branch's

      accounts, it would send the SPM a Transaction Correction. If the SPM agreed

      with the Transaction Correction, they would accept it via Horizon, and it would

      then amend the branch records. If the SPM disagreed, there was a process to

      challenge the Transaction Correction, which would lead to an investigation and

      decision by POL.


1266. I first became familiar with the term "remote access" because of claims made

      in 2012-2013 by a former SPM, Michael Rudkin, that he had observed a POL

      employee changing branch data remotely at a Fujitsu facility in Bracknell in

      2008. When I first engaged with the issue of "remote access" in 2012-2013,

      POL's focus was very much on the specific claims of Michael Rudkin. However,

      I came to understand the "remote access" issue to mean - more broadly -

      whether there was an ability to make changes to a branch's data without the

      SPM's knowledge. I cannot recall discussing or being briefed about this issue

      in terms of Fujitsu's remote access "privileges" until the start of the GLO

      Proceedings.


My understanding of Remote Access 2007-2012


1267. During my time as Network Director and Managing Director (2007-2012), I had

      no understanding that I can recall that branch data could be changed in any

      way other than by using the Transaction Correction process.

                                  Page 539 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1268. However, I can see from the documents disclosed by the Inquiry that some

      individuals within POL knew in the period 2007-2012 that Fujitsu had some

      remote access capabilities:


      a.   (POL00029710; POL00030001): This document is an email exchange on

           15 and 23 October 2008 - while I was Network Director - between Andrew

           Winn (P&BA) and Alan Lusher (Network Support) about Graham Ward, a

           suspended SPM. Alan Lusher reported to Andrew Winn that Mr Ward had

           claimed during an interview that figures had been entered into the cheque

           line of his branch accounts "electronically without his knowledge or

           consenf'. Mr Winn replied:


                "The only way POL can impact branch accounts remotely is via the

                transaction correction process. These have to be accepted by the

                branch in the same way that in/out remittances are i [sic] guess. If

                we were able to do this, the integrity of the system would be flawed.

                Fujitsu have the ability to impact branch records via the message

                store but have extremely rigorous procedures in place to prevent

                adjustments being made without prior authorisation - within POL and

                Fujitsu. These controls form the core of our court defence if we get to

                that stage. He makes a casual accusation that is extremely serious to

                the business. As usual he should either produce the evidence for this

                or withdraw the accusation".


      b.   (POL00028838) is a paper concerning the Receipts & Payments Mismatch

           bug dated 29 September 2010, which was shortly before I became

           Managing Director of POL on 18 October 2010. In summary:

                                    Page 540 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




       i.       I understand from the document and from evidence given to the

                Inquiry that the paper was prepared in connection with a meeting

                between Fujitsu and POL to discuss how to remove the effects of the

                bug from the accounts of the affected branches.


      ii.       The POL staff identified in the paper as attending the meeting include

                Alan Simpson (Security); Julia Marwood (Network); Ian Trundell (IT),

                and Andrew Winn (P&BA).


     iii.       The paper set out three solutions for correcting the discrepancies

                caused by the bug, the first of which was to "Alter the Horizon Branch

                figure at the counter to show the discrepancy. Fujitsu would have to

                manually write an entry value to the local branch account." The paper

                stated that the risks of this solution were that: "This has significant

                data integrity concerns and could lead to questions of "tampering"

                with the branch system and could generate questions around how the

                discrepancy was caused. This solution could have moral implications

                of Post Office changing branch data without informing the branch."


c.          (POL00088956) is a thread containing emails dating between 17

            November 2010 and 5 December 2010:


       i.       In the first email in the thread, on 17 November 2010, Mike Granville

                (POL Head of Regulation Strategy) asked Rod Ismay (POL P&BA)

                and Lynn Hobbs (Network) to comment on a "response note" which

                he had prepared to follow up on a meeting with Mike Whitehead at

                BIS about the JFSA.


                                   Page 541 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




 ii.   On 3 December 2010, Ms Hobbs forwarded Mr Granville's email and

       her original response to Mr Granville to John Breedon (POL National

       Contract Manager North). Her response to Mr Granville said:


            "I ... have just one observation. I found out this week that Fujitsu

            can actually put an entry into a branch account remotely. It came

            up when we were exploring solutions around a problem

            generated by the system following migration to HNGX. This

            issue was quickly identified and a fix put in place but it impacted

            around 60 branches and meant a loss/gain incurred in a

            particular week in effect disappeared from the system. One

            solution, quickly discounted because of the implications around

            integrity was for Fujitsu to remotely enter a value into a branch

            account to reintroduce the missing Joss/gain. So POL can't do

            this by Fujitsu can."


iii.   Ms Hobbs added in her email to Mr Breeden:


            "This is the last email exchange I had with Mike Graville about

            the BIS meeting. The attached documents were what Mike was

            proposing to send to BIS and I commented as below, I haven't

            seen anything further but I did have a conversation with Mike

            about the whole 'remote access to Horizon' issue. This was

            being looked into by Andy McLean and Mark Burley. The view

            being expressed was that whilst this may be possible it's not

            something we have asked Fujitsu to provide. I don't know what

            the final outcome was."

                          Page 542 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




           iv.        On 5 December 2010, Mr Breeden forwarded the thread to Angela

                      Van Den Bogerd, who at that time was a manager within Network.


      d.         I can also see from (POL00002151) that, on 27 November 2012, Gareth

                 Jenkins of Fujitsu gave a witness statement in support of POL's

                 prosecution of a SPM called Kim Wylie. On page 3, Mr Jenkins responded

                 to a comment in Ms Wylie's defence statement that it was possible to

                 access the Horizon system remotely. He stated:


                           "It is true that such access is possible; however in an analysis

                           of data audited by the system, it is possible to identify any data

                           that has not been input directly by the staff in the Branch. Any

                           such change to data is very rare and would be authorised by

                           Post Office Ltd. As I have not had an opportunity to examine

                           data related to this Branch, I cannot categorically say that this

                           has not happened in this case, but would suggest it is highly

                           unlikely."


      e.         I have been shown some of the emails generated during the production of

                 Mr Jenkins's witness statement. I can see from these emails that the

                 contents of the statement were known to Jarnail Singh of POL in-house

                 legal, and a number of lawyers at Cartwright King solicitors (Rachael

                 Panter, Martin Smith, Andy Cash, Andrew Bole): see (POL00097215).


1269. I do not recall the information in these documents being given to me when I

      was Network Director or MD. As I have already stated, issues in specialist

      areas of the business such as IT usually came to my attention when they were

      escalated by the head of the relevant department or function. I have no memory
                                         Page 543 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      of being told during my time as Network Director and MD that POL or Fujitsu

      could change branch data without the knowledge of the SPM. Nor can I recall

      being told of any concern that Fujitsu may have this ability.


1270. I have been shown (POL00120561), which is an email dated 26 November

      2010 from Mike Granville to me, Mike Moores, Mike Young, Susan Crichton,

      Kevin Gilliand, Sue Huggins, and Rod Ismay. In his email, Mike Granville

      referred to the allegations that the JFSA had been making about the integrity

      of Horizon and the associated processes that POL had used in terminating

      contracts: POL's approach throughout had been to robustly defend the integrity

      of the Horizon system.


1271. Mike Granville stated that, as a result of a succession of MPs writing to the BIS

      Minister referencing the JFSA's allegations, the minister, Ed Davey MP had

      met the JFSA. Subsequently, Mike Whitehead (a senior ShEx manager with

      responsibility for POL) had met Rod Ismay, Lynn Hobbs and Mike Granville to

      discuss some of the points raised by the JFSA. Mike attached to the email a

      briefing document for BIS to follow up on that meeting. My lawyers believe this

      may be the same document which Lynn commented on in the email chain at

      (POL00088956). On page 9 of (POL00120561) there is a comment in

      response to what seems to have been an assertion by the JFSA that "POL can

      access the system remotely and make changes to it". It states:


          "The system is based on a user log in, and all actions have to be endorsed

          by the user. POL cannot remotely control a branches system. Any technical

          changes by Fujitsu that impact the system have to go through the

          clearance processes which would prevent any amendment to existing data.

                                   Page 544 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




          The independent audit file is in place and can show all the system activity

          in a particular branch."


1272. I do not recall this document from the time. I can see what it says about remote

      access. According to my understanding from the time, it was not possible to

      make changes to SPMs' accounts without their knowledge.


1273. I have addressed the Inquiry's questions about EY's 2010 and 2011 audits of

      the control environment at Fujitsu (in my answers to Question 38). As I have

      set out, in 2011, EY reported that it had been difficult to obtain information from

      Fujitsu, identified control weaknesses, and made recommendations for

      improvements. Following the 2011 audit, Lesley Sewell (who was then POL

      Head of IT with a reporting line to Mike Young) led a steering group to consider

      and implement the recommendations set out in EY's management letter.


1274. Since POL was a subsidiary of RMG at the time of the 2010 and 2011 audits,

      EY's findings were presented to the RMG Audit and Risk Committee. Lesley

      and three individuals from EY attended the meeting of the Committee on 8

      December 2011 to discuss the audit: see the minutes at (RMG00000003).

      Although the minutes do not identify who made these comments, they record

      that:


          "Overall EY was satisfied that the control systems were reliable but they

          had to perform additional audit work to make this conclusion, and they

          made certain recommendations in the management letter following the

          audit for improvements which have been implemented. The IT control

          issues identified during the audit did not relate to the integrity of accounting

          data in the system. Rather, EY made recommendations about the
                                     Page 545 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




          documentation and authorisation of changes to systems and about

          opportunities for streamlined assurance".


1275. I did not attend this meeting, but the comment set out above reflected my own

      understanding at the time that the control weaknesses identified by Fujitsu did

      not call into question the accuracy of the accounting information held in the

      system. This was important because, to a large extent, POL's accounts were

      the aggregation of the accounts of the individual branches in the Network.


1276. EY's management letter for the 2011 audit (POl00030217) stated that they

      had reviewed privileged access to IT functions and that there were

      inappropriate    system     privileges     assigned   to   the   APPSUP    role   and

      SYSTEM MANAGER role at the Oracle database level on the Branch

      Database server supporting Horizon Online. The risk identified by EY was that

      unrestricted    access to     privileged    IT functions     increased   the risk of

      unauthorised/inappropriate access which could lead to the processing of

      unauthorised or erroneous transactions. In their management letter for the

      2012 audit (POl00029485), EY stated that while Fujitsu had undertaken

      actions to investigate some of the inappropriate privileged access identified

      from the 2011 audit, there remained inappropriate system privileges assigned

      to APPSUP and the SYSTEM MANAGER roles.


1277. Any recommendation by the auditor must be taken seriously. My view at the

      time was that POL was responding to EY's recommendations effectively. In

      2013, EY reported that focused management action, led by Lesley Sewell, had

      addressed many of the issues raised in previous years' audits, and that

      management was continuing to take steps to address challenges in the IT

                                     Page 546 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      environment. However, as stated above, I understood that the control

      weaknesses did not undermine the reliability of the accounting information held

      in the Horizon system. I cannot recall any conversation or briefing in which I

      was told that the APPSUP role enabled or could enable Fujitsu to alter

      transactions or branch data.


My understanding of Remote Access as of 23 May 2013


1278. One of the former SPM cases investigated by Second Sight in 2012-2013 was

      the case of Michael Rudkin. Mr. Rudkin told Second Sight that, in August 2008,

      he had visited a POL facility in Bracknell and been shown a basement room

      containing Horizon terminals just like those used in branches. He claimed that,

      in the basement, a POL employee showed him that he could use the equipment

      to make changes to branch accounts without the knowledge of the relevant

      SPM.


1279. My understanding was that POL had investigated Mr. Rudkin's account of his

      visit to Bracknell. I discuss the briefing I was given about his claims in July 2013

      below. However, I must have been told about Mr. Rudkin's claims by March

      2013, since on 11 March 2013, Alwen Lyons emailed me a note on the

      progress of Second Sight's review (POl00097587; POl00097589) which

      listed the "POL team at Bracknelf' as one of the thematic issues that Second

      Sight were investigating. On 19 March 2013, I received an email from Susan

      Crichton (POl00097719) which also contained a list of the thematic issues,

      including "POL team at Bracknell (Michael Rudkin evidence)".


1280. I do not recall who briefed me about Mr. Rudkin's claims, or what exactly I was

      told at this stage. I recall a general view at POL that his claims seemed odd. It
                                     Page 547 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      was painted as a suggestion that we were carrying out covert operations from

      a basement. I also remember the word "bunker" being used. It was difficult to

      understand why POL would do such a thing. There was also some doubt at

      this stage about whether Mr. Rudkin had ever visited the facility in Bracknell,

      which I understood was a Fujitsu facility, although individuals from POL also

      worked there. Overall, it would be fair to say that his claims wre viewed within

      POL with scepticism.


1281. On 16 May 2013, Alwen sent me an email containing speaking notes for a call

      I was having that day with Alice Perkins (POl00029587). I have discussed the

      context of Alwen's email in my answer to Question 60. The main issue in the

      email was the discovery of bugs in Horizon, but there is also a line in the email

      that: "Lesley is meeting Fujitsu tomorrow morning to go through the technical

      assurance that the subpostmaster's trading statement cannot be changed

      without their knowledge." I do not remember any conversations about this

      aspect of the email. Reading it now, I think I would have viewed it as being

      consistent with my belief at that time that it was not possible to make changes

      to branch accounts without the SPM's knowledge.


1282. I would have read it as meaning that Fujitsu were going to talk Lesley Sewell

      through the detailed technical reasons why Mr. Rudkin's claims about remote

      access were not correct.


1283. The Inquiry has asked me in Question 62.3.2 to describe my conversation with

      Lord Arbuthnot about remote access during our call on 23 May 2013 and my

      understanding of Fujitsu's remote access privileges at that time.


1284. My understanding at the time was that it was not possible for POL or Fujitsu to
                                   Page 548 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      change branch accounts without the SPM's knowledge. I knew that corrections

      did sometimes need to be made to branch accounts, but that the amendments

      were made via the Transaction Correction process. One of the reasons why I

      was sceptical about Mr. Rudkin's claims was that I could not see any reason

      why POL or Fujitsu would need to make any changes to branch accounts in

      secret. His account just seemed implausible.


1285. I have set out the context of my discussion with Lord Arbuthnot on 23 May 2013

      in my main answer to Question 62. Alwen Lyons took bullet point notes of the

      discussion which appear at (POL00098377). The discussion about remote

      access is recorded at the very end of Alwen's notes:


              "JFSA raised a concern with James that the Post Office is continuing

               with prosecutions despite the review taking place, predicated on the

               view that 'there is nothing wrong with Horizon'. JA does not think we

               should be prosecuting on that basis (I think because SS have made

               noises about finding something)


              PV promised she would go back to James on this point.


              JA said we should not go ahead until we can prove there is no remote

               access to the system or branch terminal which can change the spms

               account ( He did not say so but I think SS have suggested this)


              JA said again we have to avoid access to the spm accounts


              PV explained the E& Y audit at year end which gave the IT controls a

               good report.


                                  Page 549 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




               JA agreed that we needed to stop cases coming in and that future

                ones could go through the CoSec route"


1286. I do not recall any details of the conversation about remote access beyond

      what is recorded in Alwen's notes. I can see that prosecutions and the remote

      access I Michael Rudkin issue were not in my written agenda for the

      discussion, which focussed on the need to bring Second Sight's investigation

      to a timely and cost-effective conclusion: (POL00098317). It appears from

      Alwen's notes, and I have a recollection, that Lord Arbuthnot raised remote

      access at the end of our main discussion about the future of Second Sight's

      investigation. I have no recollection of giving Lord Arbuthnot any detailed

      response to his comments about remote access, and it is unlikely that I did so,

      since I had not been briefed to discuss this topic.


1287. I am not entirely sure what prompted me to mention the recent EY audit to Lord

      Arbuthnot. On 21 May 2013, two days before I spoke to Lord Arbuthnot, I

      attended a POL Board meeting at which the POL Board received the Annual

      Report   and    Financial   Statements   for   the    2012-2013   financial   year

      (POL00021513). The minutes record that Alasdair Marnoch (a non-executive

      director who chaired the ARC Committee) reported to the POL Board the "very

      positive feedback from the auditors who were complimentary about the controls

      in place and management capability".


1288. Although I have no clear recollection, I believe that I mentioned the audit as a

      general point of reassurance for Lord Arbuthnot, rather than in direct response

      to his comments about remote access. At the time of our discussion, I believed

      that POL or Fujitsu could not make changes to branch accounts without the

                                   Page 550 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      knowledge of SPMs. I had no understanding, because no-one had told me, that

      there was any connection between the controls around Horizon and the issues

      raised in the Michael Rudkin case.


1289. On 24 May 2013 (POl00029589), I received an email from Alwen Lyons with

      an update on the Second Sight investigation. Alwen mentioned that: "One of

      these [spot reviews] will be dealing with the issue of remote access to a

      subpostmasters account, which James specifically raised. I have just spoken

      to Lesley who has engaged Fujitsu today and is confident that within a week

      they will provide evidence about access and audit trails etc Lesley and I will

      meet Fuj on the 3rd to go through this, and then if we are comfortable go through

      with SS and Fuj on the 6th , so let the technical people can discuss the detail."


1290. I can then see from (POl00029590) that, on 4 June 2013 at 18:31, Martin

      Edwards emailed Alwen Lyons stating that " ... as you know, Paula is seeing

      Alice tomorrow. She asked if you could provide an update on the latest state of

      play with James Arbuthnot et al. I'll be sending her a list of issues/background

      points tomorrow morning at around 9, so if you were able to give me something

      by then that would be appreciated." Alwen responded to Martin at 18:47 in the

      same URN. She stated in relation to the remote access issue: "Lesley and I

      had a meeting with Fujitsu this week and they are providing for us an audit trail

      of adjustments which can be made centrally which they say happens very

      rarely, so we are waiting to see that and the controls in place. However they

      suggest that what Rudkin heard was the testers for HNGX referring to test data

      and not the live environment. This would be good if we can prove it."


1291. My lawyers have been unable to find any email or briefing to me from Martin

                                   Page 551 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      Edwards which appears to relate to his email exchange with Alwen Lyons on 4

      June 2013. I have no recollection either way whether Martin Edwards gave me

      an update about remote access around 4 June 2013. However, I cannot recall

      any change at this time in my understanding of remote access.


My understanding of Remote Access as of 3 July 2013


1292. The Inquiry has asked me in Question 67.4 to describe my understanding of

      Fujitsu's remote access privileges as at 3 July 2013, the date on which Alice

      Perkins and I met Lord Arbuthnot to discuss Second Sight's Interim Report,

      which was due to be finalised and presented to MPs on 8 July 2013.


1293. As far as I can remember, my understanding of remote access had not

      changed by 3 July 2013: I believed that it was not possible to alter branch data

      without the knowledge of the SPM. I can recall being told by Lesley Sewell, the

      POL CIO, that all transactions on the Horizon system were recorded in the data

      and these records could not be changed. As a result, it was impossible for

      anyone to make any changes to transactions without creating an audit trail.

      Lesley told me on several occasions (from at least June 2012 prior to our

      meeting with Lord Arbuthnot and Oliver Letwin) that all transactions on Horizon

      were digitally sealed and were impossible to change without leaving an audit

      trail. I understood that this meant that it would be visible in the data if someone

      had used remote access to make changes to branch transactions. The only

      development in my understanding by early July 2013 was that I was told that

      POL had investigated Mr. Rudkin's claims and concluded that he was

      mistaken. On the morning of 3 July 2013, Martin Edwards emailed me a briefing

      note on the Interim Report (POl00113369). Second Sight had selected Mr.

                                   Page 552 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      Rud kin's case as one of the "Spot Reviews" attached to the Interim Report. My

      briefing note contained a summary on POL's response under the heading

      "Case 2 - Spot Review 5 - Access to Live Horizon data".


1294. In summary, it stated that POL and Fujitsu had been unable to establish that

      he had visited the Bracknell facility in August 2008. Fujitsu had attempted to

      retrieve the visitor logs to the Bracknell facility for 19 August 2008, but that the

      records from 2008 were not available. Fujitsu had also interrogated emails,

      documents, and archived information but had been unable to verify his visit. A

      further review into POL work logs indicated that there were three POL test

      managers at Bracknell on 19 August 2008, but none of them had calendar

      records relating to a visit by Mr. Rudkin.


1295. The briefing also addressed the substance of Mr. Rudkin's claims that he saw

      a POL employee amending live Horizon data:


          "It has however been determined that in August 2008 the basement of

          Fujitsu's building contained a test environment that would look very similar

          to a live Horizon environment. This environment was not physically or

          technologically connected to the live Horizon environment. It was therefore

          impossible for anyone in this room to have adjusted any live transaction

          records, though Mr Rudkin may have witnessed some form of adjustment

          to the test environment.


          The separation of test and live environments is designed to guarantee the

          integrity of Horizon data."


1296. On 7 July 2013, after POL had received the final version of the Interim Report,

                                     Page 553 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      Alwen Lyons sent an email to me and other senior managers stating that there

      were only two areas where POL did not agree with Second Sight's conclusions:

       (POL00099088). One of these was the Michael Rudkin case:


           "We and Fujitsu had provided evidence to SS that there was only Testing

           systems in the basement in 2008. The equipment (hardware) and the

           testing system were located in the basement. This has been a constant

           challenge with SS as they contest that Rudkin has signed an affidavit and

           therefore there is a conflict of evidence. There appears to be a lack of

           willingness to accept the detail we have provided. We have also had the

           tester who Rudkin believes took him to the basement complete a witness

           statement. He has confirmed that there was only a testing system in the

           basement. This has been a constant challenge and Im [sic] not sure how

           this will get resolved."


1297. My understanding, therefore, was that POL had investigated the set-up in the

       basement of the Bracknell facility and was confident that Mr. Rudkin's claims

      were not correct. I remember that Lesley Sewell was very firmly of the view that

       his allegation was wrong and that he had - at best - misunderstood or

       misremembered a test demonstration.


1298. I recall two other interactions in relation to Michael Rudkin. The first is that, at

      some point, George Thomson, the General Secretary of the NFSP, told POL

      that he thought that Mr. Rudkin was unreliable. I cannot recall whether he told

       me this or whether this was information that came to me second hand.


1299. The second is that I raised the remote access issue with Duncan Tait, the CEO

      for Fujitsu Europe. I remember that Duncan was dismissive of Mr. Rudkin's
                                      Page 554 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




     claim that there was live access to the system in the basement at Bracknell. I

     recall him saying something along the lines that if Mr. Rudkin had seen the live

     environment, he had remembered it "upside down", because the system was

     managed by a team working on the sixth floor at Bracknell. I asked Duncan

     (and I remember feeling slightly embarrassed at my implied lack of trust) if a

     Fujitsu colleague could alter branch accounts remotely without a SPM knowing.

      I said I had been told by Lesley Sewell and others that it was not possible and

     besides, there was no understandable reason why anyone would try to. (The

     view of the POL team at the time was that the idea of an Fujitsu employee

     hacking into a SPM account was too fanciful to be true. 'Why would they?' was

     the phrase used.) Duncan's response was no and we concurred it was an

     implausible scenario. Why would a Fujitsu colleague try to hack into a branch's

     accounts? We couldn't find any suitable explanation - there was no way they

     could benefit financially from such an action. The only possible reason would

     be a malicious act by a disgruntled employee. Duncan described the core of

     Horizon like a black box, ie., similar to an aircraft flight recorder; he said that

     even if someone wanted to, it was not possible to alter or break it. I had heard

     the black box description before. He described how secure the system was -

     that even if someone had the motivation, it just wasn't possible - Horizon was

     like Fort Knox.I found it reassuring that the CEO of Fujitsu confirmed that there

     was no cause for concern and that the system could not be tampered with.


My understanding of Remote Access in February 2015


1300. The next occasion on which the remote access issue came onto my agenda

     was in early 2015, when I was preparing to give evidence to the House of


                                  Page 555 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      Commons BIS Select Committee, which was scheduled for 3 February 2015.

      The issue of remote access had been raised by an MP during a debate on the

      Mediation Scheme in December 2015 and I wanted to be prepared to answer

      any questions about remote access during the evidence session.


1301. At 07:29 on 30 January 2015, I sent an email to Lesley Sewell and Mark Davies

      stating as follows (POL00029812):


          "Dear both, your help please in answers and in phrasing those answers, in

          prep for the SC:


          1) "Is it possible to access the system remotely? We are told it is."   What

          is the true answer? I hope it is that we know this is not possible and that

          we are able to explain why that is. I need to say no it is not possible and

          that we are sure of this because of xxx and that we know this because we

          have the system assured.


          2) "You have said this is such a vital system to the Post Office, what testing

          do you do and how often? When was the last time?


          Lesley, I need the facts on these - I know we have discussed before but I

          haven't got the answer front of my mind - too many facts to hold in my

          head! But this is an important one and I want to be sure I do have it. And

          then Mark, to phrase the facts into answers, plus a line to take the

          conversation up a level ie., to one of our narrative boxes I rocks."


1302. I can see from this email that I had spoken to Lesley about remote access

      before but that I did not feel comfortable that I could deal with any questions

      without additional assistance: I cannot recall that I had had any briefing on
                                   Page 556 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     remote access since the publication of the Interim Report. In this email, I was

     therefore asking Lesley and Mark for the correct answer if a member of the

     Select Committee asked me about remote access.


1303. I can see from the email chain at (POL00029812) that my question was

     referred to a number of individuals working at POL and Fujitsu. At 17:50 on 30

     January 2015, Kevin Lenihan (POL Senior Information Services Manager)

     emailed Mark Underwood and Melanie Garfield suggesting that I should be

     briefed as suggested by James Davidson of Fujitsu:


         "Having looked again at the request from Paula, it appears that the

         fundamentals around this question (remote access) are not understood. I

         suggest that Paula is briefed along the lines of the following.


         1) No transaction data is held locally in any branch. Transactions are

         completed and stored in a central database and copies of all data is sent

         to a secure audit database.


         2) Sub-postmasters directly manage user access and password setting

         locally so system access (to create transactions) are limited to approved

         local personnel only who are responsible for setting their own passwords.

         Users are only created following an approval process which requires

         authorisation by the sub-postmaster. All subsequent transactions are

         recorded against the id used to log on to the system.


         3) Once a transaction has been completed, there is no functionality (by

         design) for transactions to be edited or amended. Each transaction is given

         a unique number and 'wrapped' in a digital encryption seal to protect its

                                  Page 557 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




          integrity. Alf transactions are then posted to a secure and segregated audit

          se,ver.


          4) On approval, there is the functionality to add additional transactions

          which will be visible and have a unique identifier in the audit trail. This is

          extremely rare and only been used once since go live of the system in 2010

          (March 2010)


          5) Support staff have the ability to review event logs and monitor, in real

          time, the availability of the system infrastructure as part of standard se,vice

          management processes.


          6) Overall system access is tightly controlled via industry standard 'role

          based access' protocols and assured independently in annual audits for

          ISO 27001, Ernst and Young for /AS 3402 and as part of PG/ audits."


1304. I do not recall seeing the emails in the chain at (POL00029812) before I left

      POL in 2019, and I do not recall any oral briefing about remote access prior to

      my appearance at the Select Committee in 2015.


1305. (POL00117097) is an addendum to my briefing pack for the Select Committee

      hearing, which was emailed to me on 2 February 2015 by Jane Hill

      (POL00117096). I have no memory of seeing this document at the time, but I

      can see that it includes a section on "remote tampering". It states:


              "Transaction data in branch accounts can't be changed remotely


              No evidence of malicious tampering


              No functionality in Horizon for PO or Fujitsu to edit, manipulate or
                                   Page 558 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




     remove transaction data once it had been recorded in a branch's

     accounts


    There is also no evidence at all of any malicious remote tampering


If pushed:


    Stress again that there is no remote access that enables branch

     transaction data to be edited, changed or manipulated.


    As you would expect, support staff can review and monitor the system

     - part of standard service contract - but, as above, transaction data

     cannot be manipulated.


    As part of day to day, business as usual process, Post Office can post

     correcting transactions to a branch's account- these are Transaction

     Corrections and Transaction Acknowledgements, visible to the

     postmaster, which enable accounts to be brought into balance. These

     have to be accepted by a user logged into the branch Horizon

     terminal before they are recorded in the branch accounts, so they are

     fully visible to the branch.


If injection of new transaction in a branch's account is raised:


    There is functionality to add transactions - this is the Balancing

     Transaction Process and would only be used in the event of an error

     that cannot be corrected by a TA or TC.


    It is good industry practice to have this functionality but the use of the

     process is so rare it would only take place after a full discussion with
                         Page 559 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




               the postmaster involved.


              These will be visible and also have a unique identifier in the audit trail.

               It has only been used once since March 2010 (Horizon Online go-

               live).


              The overall system access is tightly controlled via industry standard

               protocols and it is assured independently in annual audits for ISO

               27001, Ernst and Young for !AS 3402 and as part of PC/ audits. There

               are numerous tests and checks - including daily checks."


1306. I had a huge amount of reading to digest for the Select Committee hearing and

      I cannot now recall how closely I read this document or how well I understood

      it. Certainly, I do not recall any change to my belief that it was not possible to

      change branch accounts without the SPM's consent. This document, reading

      it now, would have reinforced that belief.


1307. Reading the document now, I do not understand why POL should have been

      so defensive about the existence of Balancing Transactions. I had no role in

      creating this document and I do not know what the rationale was for how it

      suggested I deal with the remote access issue. I do not know whether at the

      time I would have thought the suggested approach was wrong: I trusted my

      team and I knew that they put a great deal of thought into how POL should

      communicate messages and information. In the event, I was not asked about

      remote access at the Select Committee session. If I had been asked, I would

      have wanted to give as full and accurate an explanation as possible.


127. Please consider POL00025511 (letter of claim dated 28 April 2016).

                                   Page 560 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




127.1. Please set out your account of when you first became aware of the GLO

proceedings, what your initial views were on POL's strategy in relation to the

same and the conversations you had with others about handling it.


1308. I understand that the Claimants issued the Claim Form for the GLO

      proceedings on 11 April 2016 (POL00025510). On 13 April 2016, Mark

      Underwood informed Laura Thompson at UKGI that POL had been notified by

      the Claimants' solicitors, Freeths, in a letter dated 12 April 2016, that

      proceedings had been started (UKGI00006646). Jane Macleod informed Tim

      Parker by email on 15 April 2016. On the same day, she forwarded that email

      to Patrick Bourke, Rodric Williams, and Mark Underwood (POL00103162).


1309. I do not remember exactly when or how I first became aware of the GLO

      proceedings. I know I was aware by 24 April 2016, when I was copied into an

      email from Jane to Tim, which mentioned that a claim had been issued against

      POL in the High Court (POL00103165). Although this email appears to be the

      earliest written communication to me that refers to the GLO proceedings, I am

      confident, given the importance of the claim, that I would have been informed

      about it shortly after POL became aware that the claim was issued.


1310. The first legal strategy papers in respect of the GLO (at least that I have seen

      in the documents) were two briefing papers entitled "Postmaster Litigation"

      prepared by Jane and Rodric Williams for a GE meeting on 16 May 2016

      (POL00117704) and a POL Board meeting on 17 May 2016 (POL00006805).

      The only difference between the two papers is that the paper for the GE

      contained an additional section on the management and governance of the

      litigation, which I discuss below.

                                    Page 561 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1311. The first section of both papers set out the context. On 11 April 2016, 91 mostly

      former SPMs issued a High Court claim against POL. The Claimants had until

      11 August 2016 to formally serve the Claim Form. This step would trigger

      POL's obligation to respond to the Claim through the Court. On 28 April 2016,

      the Claimants' solicitors had sent POL a 53-page "letter before claim" setting

      out the Claimants' allegations in more detail. Court Protocol required POL to

      respond to the letter before the case was passed to the Court for formal case

      management. The claim         potentially posed      significant legal, financial,

      operational, and reputational risks to POL.


1312. The two papers summarised the Claimants' allegations under the heading

      "What are the Claimants alleging?". In summary:


      a.   Jane and Rodric felt that there was nothing new or surprising in the letter

           before claim, which did not set out how much the Claimants were claiming

           or how they propose to calculate their claim.


      b.   Much of the letter focused on technical points of law. The Claimants' main

           focus was the relationship between POL and SPMs. The Claimants were

           seeking to place greater responsibility on POL for branch accounting

           difficulties.


      c.   Apart from some generalised statements, there was no allegation that

           there was a systemic failure in the Horizon software. Rather, the letter

           before claim asserted that, because Horizon had the potential to cause

           discrepancies in the branch accounts, POL should not have relied on it so

           heavily and should have done more to investigate the possibility that

           Horizon was the cause of branch shortfalls.
                                   Page 562 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      d.   Other familiar allegations included poor training and support, the ability of

           Fujitsu   to   alter   branch   transactions   remotely,   improper   criminal

           prosecutions, and putting undue pressure on SPMs to make up shortfalls.


1313. The next section of both papers was entitled "What process will the Claim follow

      and over what time frame?". In this section, Jane and Rodric highlighted two

      issues arising out of the letter before claim:


      a.   The Claimants' solicitors had invited POL to agree in principle to a Group

           Litigation Order. Jane and Rodric's advice was that POL was entitled to

           know more about the claim before making any decision. There were

           practical and tactical implications for agreeing a GLO. For example,

           Freeths might not be able to fund the litigation if POL could show that the

           individual claims were insufficiently similar to justify a GLO. Equally, an

           early favourable ruling for POL on issues such as the effect of a criminal

           conviction or limitation periods could reduce the number of claimants and

           therefore the economic viability of the claim.


      b.   Freeths had asked whether POL was willing to mediate the claims. Jane

           and Rodric's view was that it was not possible to form a view at this stage

           whether mediation would be viable in some or all of the cases. They would

           keep under constant review whether options to mediate or settle would

           provide a better outcome for POL.


1314. The sections in the papers entitled "What are Post Office's objectives?" stated

      that the claim challenged a critical part of POL's business, namely, how it

      engaged with SPMs and the allocation of risk and responsibility for

      transactions, cash, and stock. Although most of the Claimants were former
                                     Page 563 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      SPMs, the claim raised issues in respect of current and former business as

      usual activities (e.g. branch accounting, SPM contract management, and debt

      recovery) because it concerned the core branch accounting principles and

      systems, including Horizon, currently in use. In that context, Jane and Rodric

      identified two main objectives in responding to the claim:


      a.   To proportionately manage POL's legal defence; and


      b.   To protect the Network going forward so that POL and current SPMs would

           have confidence in POL's systems.


1315. Other sections of the papers gave indications of the timetable for the progress

      of the claim through the Court, and the costs of the litigation. The section in the

      POL Board paper (POL00006805) entitled "Stakeholders" noted that the claim

      would have a wide impact on POL, affecting Network, Finance and the FSC,

      IT (including the relationship with Fujitsu), HR, Legal, and Communications, all

      of which would help inform POL's defence. Although other stakeholders, such

      as BIS and the NFSP, would be interested in the claim, their involvement

      should be limited to appropriate updates provided under an agreed

      communications plan: this was necessary to maintain legal privilege and

      confidentiality in the legal advice POL received and the strategy and tactics it

      adopted in its defence of the claim.


1316. The paper for the GE (POL00117704) contained a section called "Stakeholders

      and Managing the Claim". This section, which was not included in the POL

      Board paper, contained an overview of how Jane and Rodric proposed that the

      litigation be managed. In summary:


                                   Page 564 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




a.          The claim impacted upon a variety of functions across POL including from

            Network (Contract Advisor teams, NBSC, Branch Support Programme),

            the H R Advice Centre, Finance and the FSC, and IT (including POL's

            relationship with Fujitsu).


b.          Management of the claim would require support from, among others,

            Legal, Communications, and Finance.


c.          The litigation would be treated as a new project, distinct from legal business

            as usual and the previous Mediation Scheme activity.


d.          A sponsor would be appointed from within the business to provide

            leadership to the project. Because of the issues raised by the claim, Jane

            and Rodric believed this person should be a Senior Leadership Team

            member from the Network.


e.          The day-to-day management of the claim would be handled by POL Legal

            with support from Bond Dickinson as external solicitors.


f.          A Steering Group would be formed from representatives of the each of the

            business functions set out above. The proposed structure and mandate of

            the Steering Group was as follows:


       i.        One person would have overall responsibility for decision making.


      ii.        The Steering Group would support and instruct the legal team in its

                 management of the claim.


     iii.        The Steering Group would inform the communications plan to be

                 managed by the Communications Team.
                                      Page 565 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




        iv.    The Steering Group would report to the GE and other senior

                management as required.


        v.     The Steering Group would monitor and control expenditure.


1317. The GE was asked at the end of the paper to endorse the proposals for the

      management of the claim. The POL Board on the other hand was asked only

      to note the contents of the POL Board paper.


1318. Although the briefing papers state that they were prepared for the GE on 16

      May and the POL Board meeting on 17 May 2016, the documents indicate that

      the GE paper was discussed at a GE meeting on 13 May 2016: in an email to

      Mark Davies on 21 May 2018, Jane Macleod stated that the GE paper was

      "walked in to [sic] the end of the GE meeting on 1315" (POL00103199). The

      May meeting of the POL Board was held on 24 May 2016. The minutes of the

      meeting record that Jane Macleod introduced the report on the Postmaster

      Litigation and gave a verbal (i.e. oral) update on the High Court claim as

      described in the Noting Paper (POL00021542; POL00027219). As far as I can

      see from the documents, these were the first occasions on which the GE and

      POL Board discussed the litigation.


1319. I do not recall the discussions at the GE or the POL Board meetings about the

      initial strategy set out in the two briefing papers. The main strategic issue which

      Jane and Rodric had identified in the papers was whether POL should agree

      to the Claimants' proposal of a GLO. The essence of their advice was that the

      point could potentially be argued both ways, but that no decision should be

      made until POL had seen the full details of the claim. A secondary strategic

      issue was whether POL should agree to the Claimants' proposal of mediation.
                                    Page 566 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      Jane and Rodric's view on mediation was, again, that POL would not be able

      to take a view until it had seen details of the all the claims. However, they would

      keep the possibility of settlement discussions under review. From my reading

      of the papers, the GE and the POL Board were not asked to make any decision

      on strategy. I was in no position to agree or disagree with how the lawyers

      were proposing to deal with these strategic issues.


1320. I do have a clear recollection that I told Jane Macleod, not necessarily at the

      GE or POL Board meetings but certainly at an early stage after I became aware

      of the litigation, that I was unhappy that POL was now in legal proceedings with

      former SPMs. This did not seem right, and I felt that there should be a different

      way of handling matters. I knew, however, that while POL would not have

      wanted the litigation, it now had no choice but to engage and follow the court

      process. We had at least two conversations on this topic, two of which I

      remember reasonably clearly. I remember Jane telling me the first time, that

      there could be options to settle out of court but that we would need to wait for

      the details of claim. The second time, she was less sure that settling was an

      option and, with regret, she thought that the litigation was the only way of

      getting answers to the questions raised in the claim.


1321. I can see from (POl00103200) that, on 21 May 2016, I emailed Jane and

      others a list of questions arising from my reading of the paper for the Board

      and the discussion at the GE meeting. The email at the top of (POl00103200)

      sets out both my questions and Jane's answers. I discuss this email chain

      further in my answers to Questions 128 to 131, but it is worth noting at this




                                    Page 567 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




stage the questions I asked about the management and governance of the

litigation:


a.   I asked who we had engaged as our primary legal advisors alongside Bond

     Dickinson, and whether they were experienced and streetwise enough. I

     mentioned that Linklaters may have been mentioned as another possibility.

     Jane responded that Bond Dickinson had been instructed on the basis that

     their assistance on Project Sparrow meant that they had a deep

     understanding of the history, the individual cases, and the political

     sensitivity of Sparrow. POL had also now engaged Anthony de Garr

     Robinson QC, a leading commercial barrister, who had extensive

     experience of group litigation. Anthony de Garr Robinson QC would be key

     to developing and implementing a litigation strategy. While Linklaters had

     given some advice in the past, they did not have an in depth understanding

     of the issues, and the engagement of a magic circle city firm would

     reinforce the impression that POL was taking a heavy-handed approach.


b.   I asked who and what was our internal resource and governance for the

     litigation. Jane answered that the POL legal team - consisting of Jane and

     Rodric Williams - would work with Bond Dickinson. It had been discussed

     and agreed at the GE meeting on 13 May 2016 that Tom Moran would be

     the internal 'client' for these purposes, and his role would be to ensure that

     the overall strategy of the litigation process protected POL, its Network,

     and the attractiveness to future agents and SPMs. Mr Moran would be

     supported by a Steering Group comprising senior representatives from

     across the business. It was proposed at the GE meeting that the members


                              Page 568 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




     of the Steering Group would be Tom Wechsler (representing me), Angela

     Van Den Bogerd, Mark Davies, Patrick Bourke, a representative from

     Finance to be discussed, and in addition Rodric Williams, Jane,

     representatives from Bond Dickson and, when necessary, Anthony de Garr

     Robinson QC.


1322.1 have a number of reflections on this part of the email:


a.   I have some recollection of the discussion at the GE meeting about who

     should sit on the Steering Group. Tom Moran, who was the General

     Manager of the Network with responsibility for Network Operations. I

     regarded him as an impressive person who had a good general knowledge

     of the business. His appointment was a sign that POL was taking this

     seriously. I remember the Group HR Director, Neil Hayward, saying at the

     meeting that POL needed to put its best people on the Steering Group.

     From recollection, these comments arose because there was some initial

     reluctance on the part of the functions affected by the litigation to allow their

     best managers, all of whom were very busy, to work on the Steering Group.


b. The reason why I did not sit on the Steering Group was that the decisions

     that the Steering Group would be tasked to make would require detailed

     knowledge of both the litigation and the workings of each of the functions

     affected by the claims. For this reason, the membership of the Steering

     Group was to include senior managers from each of these functions. I

     would not have been able to immerse myself in the necessary detail

     alongside my other duties as CEO. Instead, Tom Wechsler sat on the

     Steering Group as my representative. Tom's attendance meant that there

                               Page 569 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     was a channel of communication between me and the Steering Group

     outside any formal reporting by the Steering Group to the GE or the POL

     Board. I did not put in place any system or guidelines for Tom to update

     me on the activities of the Steering Group. I trusted him to use his judgment

     about whether any discussions or decisions by the Steering Group should

     be brought to my attention.


c.   Additionally,   and   importantly,   Jane updated    me about the         GLO

     proceedings at regular one-to-one           meetings and   during    ad   hoe

     conversations as and when Jane wished to raise an issue with me. Within

     a short period of time, these became Jane's preferred line of reporting to

     me as she tightened up governance around legal privilege. Tom gave me

     occasional updates but Jane became the main channel of communication

     between me, the GE and the Steering Group.


d.   From my perspective, the individuals identified in Jane's email were the

     right group of people to manage the litigation. I thought they were an

     impressive and dedicated team, who would ensure that POL's internal

     expertise in the functions affected by the claim would be used to inform the

     decisions of the Steering Group.


e. Jane's reply to my question about governance states that Tom Moran's

     role was to ensure that the overall strategy of the litigation process

     protected POL, its Network, and the attractiveness to future agents and

     SPMs. The reason why this was included in Mr Moran's role was that the

     funding   agreement     with   the    UK    government   for   the   Network

     Transformation Programme and the Network more widely contained

                               Page 570 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          targets for the size and geographical accessibility of the Network. POL was

          obliged to make regular reports on the Network to Parliament. It was seen

          as important that the litigation strategy should take account of any impact

          it may have on POL's core duty to provide the public with essential

          services.




127.2. Please explain your experience of overseeing a company facing

significant litigation such as the GlO. In your view, what level of oversight over

the litigation by you and the Board was appropriate?


1323. I had no experience of dealing with significant litigation such as the GLO

      Proceedings. I cannot claim that I became familiar with the process of litigation

      during the GLO Proceedings: I did not have time to do so alongside my other

      duties.


1324. Based on my sole experience of large-scale litigation, I believe there are a

      number of aspects to good governance. A key consideration, which I raised at

      the very outset of the litigation (see my answer to question 127 .1) was that the

      business should be represented by appropriately skilled and experienced

      lawyers. A second consideration, which I also raised at the outset, was that

      there should be a formal system of internal governance for the litigation.

      Another aspect of governance was that the business should ask questions and

      not avoid difficult topics. I was keen to do what I could to challenge and check

      POL's lawyers' rigour and governance.




                                   Page 571 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1325. Substantial litigation such as the GLO Proceedings, poses a particular

      challenge for a business. I understood that the issues in the GLO Proceedings

      were complex on three levels: the law, the facts, and (for the Horizon Issues

      Trial) the technical IT issues, for which expert evidence was necessary.


1326. The legal team was heavily engaged on the details of the case for - literally -

      years. It was not possible for me or the POL Board to understand the case in

      anything approaching the level at which it was understood by the lawyers. The

      oversight challenge for the business arising from this was that the POL Board

      would not necessarily know what it needed to know in order to exercise

      oversight. In other words, the POL Board would not always know what

      information it should be looking at or the questions it should ask. A further

      challenge is that it is difficult for a board composed of non-lawyers to disagree

      with legal advice from respected lawyers, particularly if the advice appears to

      be well-rationalised.


1327. Consequently, we relied on the lawyers, not only to run the case competently

      and professionally, but also to ensure that matters which I or the POL Board

      needed to be aware of were escalated. The main mitigation to this challenge

      was the selection of skilled and experienced lawyers who could be expected to

      do this. However, the nature of litigation means that the business will operate,

      almost as a default position, on the basis that the lawyers and their legal advice

      can be relied upon.


127.3 Please set out your involvement with the GLO Proceedings. In particular,

please address your involvement with POL's litigation strategy, explaining the

reasons for the decisions you made. The following request below should not

                                   Page 572 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




limit your response to this paragraph.


1328. In line with the Inquiry's request, I have set out my involvement with the GLO

      Proceedings within the appropriate sections of my statement.


128. Please consider POL00025507 (email from Rodric Williams to PM litigation

Steering Group on 6 June 2016), POl00025508 (agenda for steering group

meeting on 7 June 2016), POl00025507 (draft terms of reference), POl00025510

(Claim Form) and POL00025511 (letter from Freeths to Rodric Williams on 28

April 2016).


128.1. Please describe where the Postmaster litigation Steering Group sat in

the management structure of POL Please explain your involvement with or

oversight of the group.


1329. The decision to establish the Steering Group was taken by the GE at its

      meeting on 13 May 2016: see the email from Jane Macleod to me on 23 May

      2016 (POl00103200).


1330. On 23 May 2016, Rodric Williams sent an email to the members of the Steering

      Group (POl00110433). These included Tom Moran, Angela Van Den Bogerd,

      Patrick Bourke, Mark Davies, Rob Houghton, Tom Wechsler and Nick

      Sambridge (POl00110433). Andrew Parsons would attend meetings as

      necessary depending on the issues being discussed.


1331. Rodric Williams stated in his email that:


          "The Claim potentially poses significant legal, financial, operational and

          reputational risk to Post Office. Our response to it must therefore be

                                   Page 573 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




         informed by more than purely legal considerations. To do this the GE has

         decided to establish a Steering Group headed by Tom Moran and

         comprising senior members from affected parts of the business. The

         Steering Group will then support and instruct the Legal team in its day-to-

         day management of the Claim.


         "The Steering Group's work will develop and change as the litigation

         progresses. To begin with, the Steering Group will meet once every two

         weeks for an hour to work through a standard agenda (see attached)."


1332. (POL00025508) is the agenda for what appears to have been the initial

     meeting of the Steering Group on 7 June 2016. I note that one of the first items

     on the agenda was the Steering Group's terms of reference. The Inquiry has

     referred me to (POL00025507) as being the draft terms of reference, but that

     is the URN for an email from Rodric Williams to the members of the Steering

     Group on 6 June 2016, to which he attached a draft of the terms of reference

     and other documents. I assume that the Inquiry intended to refer me to

     (POL00025509), which is a draft term of reference for the Steering Group dated

     June 2016. The draft set out the Steering            Group's objectives and

     responsibilities as follows:


     a. The objectives of the Steering Group were to ensure that POL's defence of

         Group Litigation protected the Network, was proportionately managed, did

        not place unplanned constraints or resource burdens on POL, and was

        consistent with business as usual practices, processes and procedures.


     b. To achieve these objectives, the GE had agreed that the Steering Group

        would undertake the following responsibilities:
                                    Page 574 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




           i.    To provide a forum for cross-business discussion of claim-related

                 business as usual issues so that all relevant matters were considered

                 when making a decision.


          ii.    To provide instructions to POL's legal team on business as

                 usual/commercial matters.


         iii.    To maintain and progress an Action Plan for claim-related activity,

                 and monitor the resources required to deliver against that plan.


        iv.      To sign off key claim-related documents.


         v.      To monitor and approve claim-related expenditure.


        vi.      To review, challenge and sign off any communications plans

                 developed as a consequence of the claim.


        vii.     To report matters to the GE as appropriate.


1333. The Inquiry has asked me where the Steering Group sat in the management

      structure of POL. As stated in the documents mentioned above, the Steering

      Group was given its responsibilities by the GE and had a reporting line to the

      GE. The members of the Steering Group were all senior managers within their

      functions and included two members of the GE (Rob Houghton and Jane

      Macleod) and two regular attendees of the GE (Tom Wechsler and Mark

      Davies).


1334. I had very little direct involvement that I can recall in the Steering Group after

      the GE agreed to establish it in May 2016. I do not know if I saw the Steering

      Group's terms of reference. It is likely that Jane Macleod discussed them with

                                    Page 575 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      me at a one-to-one and at a GE. As I was not a member, I did not receive the

      papers prepared for the Steering Group by POL's internal and external lawyers.

      There were regular GLO updates by Jane to the weekly GE meeting.

      Additionally, Jane would provide updates to Al Cameron and me and other GE

      Directors on important decisions or discussions of the Steering Group, often

      before some of these matters came to the Board: see for example

      (POL00024292; POL00024308; POL00024199; POL00024700).


1335. On 13 June 2016, Tom Wechsler sent me an email in advance of a one-to-one

      meeting between Jane Macleod and me in which he set out an agenda and

      commentary from Jane (POL00110441 ). Tom informed me that what he called

      the "Sparrow litigation group", i.e. the Steering Group, had now met and agreed

      ways of working. He told me that Jane would update me on those ways of

      working and on the Parker Review: "Going forward, this is the regular way I

      which we [sic.] will keep you informed as there is a need to keep written material

      to a minimum and to protect what there is with legal privilege. I will of course

      let you know of any significant developments as they happen." It is not clear

      whether "/" in this part of the email is Tom or Jane but, as I have already

      indicated, both Jane and Tom were channels of communication between me

      and the Steering Group.


128.2. Whose responsibility was it for co-ordinating the business to ensure that

POL's corporate knowledge was available to the Steering Group?


1336. Tom Moran, as Chairman, was responsible for ensuring that relevant corporate

      knowledge was available to the Steering Group. I regarded Tom as an



                                   Page 576 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      impressive and dedicated manager who would ask the right questions and get

      things done.


1337. The members of the Steering Group were chosen because they were senior

      managers in their own functions. For example, Rob Houghton as CIO was

      POL's most senior IT manager. Angela Van Den Bogerd was a senior Network

      manager and was heavily involved in Sparrow and the Mediation Scheme.

      Rodric Williams had been involved in the legal issues arising from Sparrow,

      including prosecutions. My belief at the time was that these individuals would

      either know the relevant information themselves or know how to source the

      information from within their functions.


128.3. In your view, should the steering group's terms of reference have

included words to the following effect "ensure the claims are handled fairly".


1338. I am not certain that I saw the Steering Group's terms of reference, but I would

      not have objected to the inclusion of words to the effect that the claims should

      be handled fairly. I should not speculate on why this language was not included

      by those who drafted the terms of reference. From my perspective, it went

      without saying that POL would approach the GLO with fairness. The colleagues

      I worked with on the POL Board and GE were individuals with great integrity. It

      would not have occurred to me that the point needed to be said. I had worked

      with the members of the Steering Group for many years and trusted them to

      manage the litigation with integrity and fairness towards the Claimants.


128.4. What do you understand the following objective to mean: "protects the

Network"?


                                   Page 577 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1339. My understanding of the Steering Group's objective of protecting the Network

      was that POL was obliged as part of the government's funding of the Network

      Transformation Programme, and of POL more generally, to maintain a stable

      Post Office network in accordance with targets set by the government for the

      size of the Network and the geographical accessibility of Post Offices to the UK

      population. I believe this objective was intended to direct the Steering Group to

      take into account the impact of the litigation on the confidence of serving SPMs

      and future recruits. This went to the heart of POL's purpose of serving the

      public. This was an obligation POL took very seriously.


129. Please consider POL00103171 (email from Tom Wechsler to you on 29 April

2016) and UKGI00006685 (email from you to Board members on 2 May 2016).


129.1. Please set out to what extent you briefed (a) Tim Parker (b) the POL Board

(c) representatives from ShEx/UKGI and (d) BEIS or the relevant department on

POL's strategy and conduct of the GLO Proceedings, throughout the relevant

period. For each Board or committee meeting below, please set out to what

extent. if at all, Board members or other POL employees were involved in

decision making in relation to or otherwise asked questions or made challenges

in respect of (a) the merits of POL's defence to the GLO Proceedings and its

litigation strategy and (b) POL's ongoing actions in respect of convicted SPMs.


1340. The Inquiry has asked me to set out the extent to which I briefed (a) Tim Parker;

      (b) the POL Board; (c) ShEx / UKGI; and (d) BEIS on POL's strategy and

      conduct of the GLO Proceedings. I will deal with Mr Parker and the Board

      together and the UK Government bodies together.



                                   Page 578 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1341. It is my recollection, and the documents in disclosure indicate, that I very rarely

      briefed any colleagues at POL on POL's strategy and conduct of the GLO

      Proceedings. Briefings to the POL Board on the GLO Litigation (and not only

      on strategy but procedural and logistical matters) were primarily the

      responsibility of Jane Macleod as GC. On occasion, POL's external lawyers,

      Bond Dickinson and / or its lead counsel, Anthony De Garr Robinson QC and

      David Cavender QC, would attend Board meetings to give advice directly to

      the Board.


1342. I have not been shown any documents to indicate that I briefed Tim Parker on

      the GLO Proceedings outside the setting of POL Board meetings or

      communications with the POL Board. I can see from an email on 13 May 2016

      to Tim from Jane Macleod (POl00103194) that Jane was to give Tim

      fortnightly updates on the GLO Proceedings and the Parker Review. Moreover,

      Tim was a member and the Chairman of the Board Postmaster Litigation Sub-

      Committee from its establishment in March 2018 and received additional

      updates on the GLO Proceedings in that capacity. I should mention that Tim

      and I had weekly one-to-one conversations. I cannot recall any specific

      examples or topics, but I am sure that we discussed the GLO Proceedings from

      time to time. I tended to defer to Jane's knowledge of the case when it came to

      POL's strategy and conduct. If I thought Tim needed to be updated in relation

      to a legal issue or issue of strategy I would either ask Jane to brief Tim or ask

      her to join us when Tim and I were meeting. Additionally, as GC and Company

      Secretary, Jane also met with Tim on a frequent one-on-one basis.




                                    Page 579 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1343. I have identified a number of communications with the POL Board in which I

      gave information or expressed an opinion about POL's strategy and conduct of

      the GLO Proceedings. I believe that a number of documents relevant to this

      question have been uploaded to the Inquiry's Relativity site this week. I have

      not yet had a chance to review them.


      a.   In an email to the POL Board on 2 May 2016 (UKGI00006685) I informed

           the POL Board about POL's approach to media enquiries about the GLO

           Proceedings. I address this email further in my answer to Question 129.2.


      b.   My CEO report for the POL Board meeting on 26 September 2016

           (POl00103259) contained an update on the GLO Proceedings on page 6.

           The update was largely concerned with timetabling and procedure, but it

           mentioned that the GLO Proceedings should determine the amount of

           detail that the Claimants must give about their individual cases, on which I

           commented: "more is better for Post Office; less for the Claimants".


      c.   My CEO report for the POL Board meeting on 31 January 2017 contained

           an update on the Claimants' application for a Group Litigation Order, to

           which POL would be consenting (POl00104103). Since the Claimants

           were likely to present any outcome as a victory, my report stated that POL

           proposed to respond positively along the lines that it welcomed the Court's

           decision as this offered the best opportunity for the matters in dispute to be

           heard and resolved.


      d.   On 19 October 2019, I emailed the POL Board with my view that POL

           needed to make changes to how it presented its case following Fraser J's

           criticisms of POL's conduct and attitude in his judgment dismissing an
                                    Page 580 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




          application by POL to strike out parts of the Claimants' evidence

          (UKGI00008549).


1344. As CEO I was involved in briefing the Postal Affairs minister and officials about

      the GLO Proceedings. I had meetings about the litigation with Kelly Tolhurst

      MP (the Parliamentary Under-Secretary for BEIS) on 3 September 2018 and

      with Alex Chisolm (the Permanent Secretary for BEIS) on 17 October 2018. I

      address these meetings and refer to the relevant documents in my answer to

      Question 168.


129.2. Please explain the communications policy POL adopted in respect of the

GlO and why you considered it to be appropriate.


1345. I have approached Question 129.2 on the basis that it asks about POL's policy

      in relation to three forms of communications: (a) external communications; (b)

      internal communications; and (c) communications with stakeholders. In

      accordance with what I understand to be the purpose of Question 129.2, I

      confine my answers to evidence of the policy or approach that POL adopted in

      these areas, as opposed to decisions about individual communications.


1346. I have no real recollection of POL's communications policies during the GLO

      Proceedings. My evidence is therefore very much drawn from the documents

      disclosed by the Inquiry.


External communications


1347. On Monday 2 May 2016 at 14:22, I emailed the POL Board about recent media

      coverage of the GLO Proceedings and shared with the POL Board an update



                                   Page 581 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      from Jane Macleod on her first reaction to the contents of the Claimants' letter

      before claim (UKGI00006685).


1348. I wrote that, as the articles in The Sunday Times and the Mail over the

      weekend made clear, the Claimants were already involving the press. I

      informed the POL Board that POL would take a different approach based on

      legal advice. Now that the matter was the subject of Court proceedings, the

      Court was the proper place for discussion of the issues. Therefore, POL's

      response to enquiries would be limited to acknowledging that it had received

      the claim and that it would respond through the legal process. I stated that we

      would review the communications strategy in parallel with the development of

      a litigation strategy, and that the POL Board would be updated on both. I had

      asked for a briefing paper to be prepared for the POL Board's May 2016

      meeting.


1349. The terms of reference for the Steering Group stated, in paragraph 2.2 (f), that

      the responsibilities of the Steering Group included reviewing, challenging and

      signing off any communications plans developed as a consequence of the

      claim (POL00025509). Mark Davies, POL's Communications Director, sat on

      the Steering Group.


1350. (POL00006440) is a decision paper by Bond Dickinson for a meeting of the

      Steering Group on 12 July 2017. The question to be decided was whether POL

      should change its communication strategy. The first section of the paper,

      entitled "Background'' indicates that as of July 2017, POL's external

      communications strategy remained that it would issue short and neutral

      statements to the effect that POL would not comment on live litigation.

                                   Page 582 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1351. There were two reasons why a change in approach was being considered at

      this time. First, it was considered likely that POL's Defence (which was due to

      be served on 18 July 2017) would leak to the press. Second, 26 July 2017 was

      the deadline for any potential claimant to join the GLO Proceedings. It was

      likely to be announced that around 400 to 500 (mostly former) SPMs had joined

      the GLO, leading potentially to adverse publicity.


1352. As an alternative to its current approach to external communications, POL

      could adopt a more partisan messaging strategy, based on the strength of its

      Defence and the weaknesses in the Claimants' claims. Bond Dickinson's

      recommendation was that POL should not change its external communications

      policy at this stage. In their view, it should maintain its current reactive and

      neutral communications strategy unless there was a significant increase in

      media reporting. The disadvantage of adopting a more aggressive strategy was

      that it could create media interest where there was currently none. In any case,

      the media tended to side with SPMs regardless of POL's messaging.


1353. On 29 July 2017 at 10:49, Alwen Lyons sent the POL Board an update on the

      litigation   from   Jane   (UKGI00006959).      She    reported    that   POL's

      communications approach would continue to be that the SPMs had sought to

      resolve this matter through the Courts and that was the appropriate forum

      through which the issues should be resolved. Therefore, POL did not plan to

      make any external comment beyond that POL was aware of a claim and was

      defending its position through the legal process. To do otherwise would only

      serve to provoke further coverage.




                                   Page 583 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1354. However, on the same day that Alwen sent Jane's update to the POL Board,

      Jane suggested to the members of the Steering Group that POL should have

      an additional response line that could be used if the remote access issue came

      up (POL00024967). Jane's suggested wording was: "We are aware of a claim

      and we are defending our position through the legal processes. We welcome

      the opportunity for these allegations to be considered and resolved through the

      Court process."


1355. Jane's wording appears to form the basis for a new standard response to media

      inquiries, though with the addition of points about the number of Horizon users

      and the number of transactions processed through the system:


      a.   On 31 July 2017 at 20:46, Alwen Lyons forwarded to the POL Board a

           message from Mark, which I note he had prepared at my request

           (POL00110697). Mark had been approached by The Financial Times,

           which   had   requested    information      and   comment about the   GLO

           Proceedings. In his email, Mark summarised his response to The Financial

           Times: POL had confirmed to the newspaper that it was defending the

           proceedings and welcomed the opportunity to do so in Court. It had also

           highlighted the number of Horizon users since the system was introduced

           and the number of transactions it handled. However, POL would not

           comment further.


      b.   On 2 August 2017 at 17:42, Mark Davies emailed a group, which included

           me, about a press release by the JFSA (POL00110699). Mark stated that

           POL had a "standard line" that it was defending GLO Proceedings, that it



                                     Page 584 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           welcomed the opportunity to do so in Court and highlighting the number of

           Horizon users since its introduction.


      c.   Similarly, in an email on 20 October 2017 at 9:47, Mark Davies reacted to

           concerns expressed by me about media interest in the Case Management

           Conference, stating "our lines are standard ones and we will hold on

           them ... "


1356. POL adopted a different communications plan in the lead up to and during the

      Common Issues Trial and the Horizon Issues Trial. I have not seen a finalised

      plan for the trial period, but a number of documents disclosed by the Inquiry

      set out POL's approach in similar terms. (POL00111196) appears to be a

      briefing paper by Mark Davies on POL's media activities during the trial period.

      It states on page 3 that POL's strategy was:


      a.   Develop a clear set of reactive lines to take for media. It was not

           recommended that POL should take a proactive approach, although POL

           would be prepared for rapid rebuttal where necessary and would

           proactively ensure that our position was reflected in external coverage of

           the trial.


      b.   Engage with stakeholders and partners in advance of the trial to raise

           awareness and set out our approach.


      c.   During the trial monitor and assess coverage across all media channels.


      d.   Provide regular updates on media penetration and sentiment to internal

           stakeholders.



                                    Page 585 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      e.   Plan other communications carefully to avoid unhelpful clashes.


      f.   Deploy external expertise through an agency with substantial experience

           of handling disputes such as this.


1357. Paragraph     1356(f) above,     is   likely to   be   a   reference   to   Portland

      Communications, an external public relations agency, which assisted POL in

      its handling of the media.


1358. Page 4 of Mark's paper stated that POL's tactics would be not to comment

      beyond a standard headline statement, other than to intervene when media

      coverage was factually inaccurate. A proactive approach would risk both

      irritating Fraser J and fanning the flames of the coverage, with the unintended

      consequence of increasing interest in the trial among external audiences.


1359. The briefing set out on page 11 is the suggested POL standard response to

      media enquiries:


           "We're defending this case vigorously and welcomed the Group Litigation

           Order issued by the Court as offering the best opportunity for matters in

           dispute to be heard and resolved. We will not comment on specific details

           outside of public hearings while the litigation is continuing.


           We have confidence in the Horizon system, which is robust, reliable and

           used across 11,500 branches by postmasters, agents and their many

           thousands of staff, to process millions of transactions successfully every

           day, including on behalf of the UK's high street banks."




                                    Page 586 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1360. My email to a group of POL managers on 21 February 2019 at 13.21

     (POL00111699), shows that I was aware of this approach. At the bottom of the

     email chain, Tom Cooper asked whether the Court could protect POL from

     journalists overstating the evidence about Horizon.


1361. I replied to Tom that we should defend robustly but avoid adding extra

     coverage. As before we should hold our ground: "the system is robust. And not

     comment any further during the trial. So 'aggressive' no, robust- absolutely no

     question." Further down in my email I referred to the objective of POL's

     approach and strategy to communications during the trial. This was "to

     minimise coverage in the mainstream media. Therefore we don't engage in any

     public debates, we have strong lines but we add no oxygen by commenting or

     engaging. This is not news despite how the claimants will present it as that; our

     approach is to curtail interest as much as possible". I cautioned against

     considering using legal tools such as injunctions and demands for apologies.

     Mark agreed with me in an email at 14:19 on 21 February 2019. He stated that

     our external communications strategy was to minimise negative comment by

     holding the robust line we had deployed throughout, while also taking steps to

     challenge and rebut inaccurate representations and brief journalists about the

     nature of the claims against POL. I believe that POL's external communications

     policies were appropriate. This was for two reasons. First, POL believed that it

     would be inappropriate for POL to discuss the dispute with the SPMs in the

     media. The litigation involved many personal details about the SPMs and we

     believed that the only proper place to discuss the case was in court. Second,

     we felt there was a risk that detailed reporting of the GLO Proceedings could



                                  Page 587 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      lead to misunderstandings or sensationalised stories which could undermine

      the confidence of the network.


   Internal communications


1362. POL's approach to internal communications about the GLO Proceedings was

      not so much a policy as the implementation of legal advice from Jane Macleod.

      Jane was risk averse as a lawyer. I remember that one of Jane's overriding

      concerns during the litigation was that POL should not inadvertently lose

      privilege in legal advice. On 21 May 2016 at 15:35, Jane sent an email to a

      group of senior POL managers, which included me, setting out how we should

      handle internal communications about the GLO Proceedings (POL00117702).


1363. Jane advised that board papers, minutes, emails and other correspondence

      relating to Sparrow and the GLO Proceedings could become disclosable.

      Therefore, all correspondence in any form relating to the GLO Proceedings

      must be addressed to either Rodric Williams or Jane, any other individuals

      must be cc'd only (and these must be kept to a minimum), and any emails

      about the litigation must contain the words "Request for advice" in the subject

      line. Further, such emails should not be forwarded to any third person, whether

      inside or outside POL.


1364. Rodric sent a similar communications protocol to the members of the Steering

      Group on 22 June 2016 at (POL00021700). All documents, including emails,

      should be marked "Confidential and Subject to Legal Privilege", documents

      connected to the claim should not be forwarded or circulated beyond their initial

      distribution list, care should be taken when creating new documents which

      concerned the litigation, documents that may be relevant should not be
                                   Page 588 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      destroyed, and the members should consult the legal team if they were in any

      doubt about a document. I had no reason to question the appropriateness of

      this legal advice.


Communications with stakeholders


1365. Again, I would not necessarily term it a policy as such, but I can see from the

      documents that POL was aware that it needed to communicate its position in

      the GLO Proceedings to stakeholders, including the UK Government. I

      mentioned this in my email to a group of POL managers on 23 May 2016 at

      (POL00103201 ), where I stated that we needed to keep ministers and MPs

      briefed and calm in the run up to the next general election, and to manage to

      CWU and NFSP. In particular, I considered that one of POL's objectives with

      ministers was to avoid them making public statements of opinion at this stage,

      which could potentially inflame matters, especially in relation to Lord Arbuthnot,

      who was a prominent critic of POL and who was also in communication with

      Alan Bates and the JFSA.


1366. In her reply to my comment in the same URN, Jane Macleod stated that while

      managing stakeholders was important, POL needed to understand the risks to

      both them and POL in such briefings. I address this aspect further in my answer

      to Question 129.3.


129.3. Did you and/ or senior management at POL aim only to give the least

amount of information necessary on POL's conduct and strategy in the GLO

Proceedings to third parties?




                                   Page 589 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1367. I do not believe I had this aim, and I was not aware of others having this aim.

      As mentioned above, Jane Macleod was extremely cautious about the loss of

      privilege. I had a broad understanding that POL was entitled not to share with

      third parties any legal advice, including about conduct of the litigation and

      strategy. I recall from the time that the need to protect privilege was a major

      overriding concern of Jane's.


1368. From my perspective and recollection, POL's approach to communications with

      third parties was determined by the need to protect POL's legal position and

      not by any general reluctance to provide information. It seemed to me entirely

      sensible that a party to high value litigation would not want to share its legal

      strategy any more than necessary. This is encapsulated in the GE paper about

      the GLO Proceedings at (POL00117704 ). It stated that communications about

      the litigation with stakeholders such as the government and the NFSP should

      be limited to appropriate updates as part of an agreed communications plan,

      so as to maintain confidentiality in the legal advice received and the strategy

      and tactics POL adopted in its defence of the claim.


1369. I have seen some documents which show individuals within POL expressing

      reluctance or caution about sharing information with the government:


      a.   In her email to Tim Parker on 15 April 2016 (POL00103161) Jane referred

           to his upcoming meeting with the minister, Baroness Neville-Rolfe. Jane

           said that it was likely that her House of Lords colleague, Lord Arbuthnot,

           had been briefed by the JFSA and that POL needed to be careful about

           what the minister said to Lord Arbuthnot.



                                   Page 590 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      b.   (POL00103171) is an email from Tom Wechsler to me on 29 April 2016

           with feedback on a meeting between Tim Parker and the minister Baroness

           Neville-Rolfe. It records in paragraph 4 that Tim gave the minister some

           limited details about the claim but stated that he was unable to tell her much

           more until POL had received Particulars of Claim. In an email on 17 June

           2016 at (POL00041246), Rodric Williams raised the possibility that

           Baroness Neville-Rolfe might share a letter from Jane Macleod containing

           privileged information with Lord Arbuthnot.


1370. I do not know whether Rodric's concerns were justified or not. I do remember

      from the time a concern that the government might inadvertently share with

      Lord Arbuthnot information about the GLO Proceedings it had received from

      POL. These emails appear to reflect those concerns.


130 Please consider POL00027221 (minutes of Group Executive meeting on 13

May 2016). Please describe what discussion the group had on the GLO

Proceedings.


1371. The GE met at Finsbury Dials on 13 May 2016 in the morning (POL00027221).

      The Inquiry has asked that I explain what discussion the group had on the GLO

      Proceedings in that meeting.


1372. Under AOB in that meeting, it states:


           "Sparrow. JM gave a verbal update on the Sparrow litigation".


1373. The minutes should have been clearer that, in addition to the verbal update

      which Jane Macleod gave, she also produced a draft document which she



                                    Page 591 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      walked into the meeting. By "walked in", I mean that she brought copies to

      distribute, and collected those copies back at the end of the meeting.


1374. I know this not because of my memory but because of other documents I have

      seen in preparing this witness statement. For example, Jane sent an email to

      Mark Davies on 21 May 2015 attaching "Board Paper re Bates v. POL

      (17.05.16).docx" (emphasis added) (POL00103199):


          "Mark


          "Apologies - I hadn't realised you weren't sighted on this.


          ''The GE paper was walked in to the end of the GE meeting on 13/5.

          Thinking about it, you had had to leave a bit earlier I think - and if I have

          correctly remembered it, then that would explain your dilemma - for which

          I apologise. The main purpose of that paper was to explain the

          litigation timetable (assuming that the matter went all the way through - I

          didn't want people to think that this would be all over anytime soon) and to

          lay out the path for (a) getting agreement on who the internal 'client' would

          be (agreed as Tom Moran representing network) and (b) getting agreement

          for the establishing of the steering committee - on which Com ms would be

          represented (although it hasn't met yet). The Board paper (attached) is a

          slightly cut down version of that paper and Paula's questions arise from the

          Board paper.


          "I hope once you have had a chance to look at the two papers, things will

          be clearer and hopefully you will be more comfortable, but please let's chat




                                  Page 592 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




               on Monday. I won't reply to Paula's email from earlier today until we have

               had a chance to speak.


               "Sorry ...


               "Jane"


1375. Although this is clearly a later version of the paper, being dated 24 May 2016,

      I believe this is the paper at (POl00006805). I think that because Jane refers

      to the GE paper, on 21 May 2015, as the "Board paper". Jane does not suggest

      there is anything new in the Board paper, as compared to the GE paper, but

      rather some things have been removed.


1376. Reading that Board paper with Jane's email above, the discussion at the GE

      appears to have covered:


                a.      A summary of the Claimants' allegations;


                b.      The anticipated timeline of the litigation;


                c.      The costs of the litigation;


                d.      POL's objectives in the litigation, its main objectives being defined

                        by Jane as:


          i.         Proportionately manage Post Office's legal defence; and


         ii.         Protect the Network going forward so that Post Office and current

                     agents have confidence in our systems;


                e.      A discussion of the stakeholders;


                                           Page 593 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




           f.      A discussion of who the internal client should be, with the conclusion

                   that it should be Tom Moran; and


              g.   Getting agreement for the establishment of a Steering Group.


1377. This email jogs my memory of some discussion in the meeting. I do recall that

      I urged my colleagues to release their best team members to enable them to

      work on this project. This was how Tom Moran came to be involved. He was,

      in my view, the best person from the network to work on this and a really good,

      really talented manager. Angela Van Den Bogerd was also a valuable member

      of this team on account of her significant memory of the detail of Project

      Sparrow. Patrick Bourke was a senior manager in legal who was well

      respected.


1378. I sent an email on 21 May 2016 raising 'Ta] couple of questions (some building

      on the GE discussion so I have the answers documented". By context, that

      must be a reference to the 13 May 2016 GE meeting. The questions I asked

      were:


          "1) who have we engaged as our primary legal advisers alongside BO? If

          BO alone, are they equipped - experienced enough and street wise

          enough? And do they have specialism/experience in point 3 below? (You

          may have mentioned Linklaters in this context?)


          2) who/what is our internal resource/governance?


          3) I won't describe this correctly but you will follow my point (it relates to Sir

          Tony Hooper's concern and one of the issues at the heart of the

          Hillsborough case): can we (Al, Neil, Kevin and myself) have a deep dive
                                     Page 594 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




          on the issues related to the (im)balance of power of the institution vs the

          individual. We need to understand this irrespective of Sparrow.


          4) the paper is well written, balanced and reassures me we will handle it

          well. Thank you. Notwithstanding ... could you/Mark put on your blackest

          hats and think through the worst outcomes: I would like a downside horizon

          scan. Eg., are there any judicial review or (mis)use of public funds angles

          at all - costs expended to date, failure of our own mediation scheme.


          5) Horizon expert - the board note doesn't cover this: we need to brief the

          new NEDs and remind the others - could you/Tom give me a speaking note.


          6) Stakeholders section: paras 22 and 23 - needs to include more on

          political, Government and IR stakeholders. Eg .. keeping ministers and MPs

          briefed and calm in the run up to the next GE; managing the CWUINFSP;

          specific journalists and media interest; etc. Could Mark/Tom provide a

          speaking note."


1379. My email ended by saying, "Thanks for a good and clear paper", that being

      further confirmation that we considered Jane's paper at the GE.


131. Please consider POL00117702 and POL00103201 (your email chain with

Jane Macleod and others on 21/23 May 2016).


131.1. Please set out in full your concerns regarding briefing the Board on

Horizon and the GLO Proceedings.


1380. This question refers to my email to Jane Macleod and others on 21 May 2016

      with a list of questions arising from the POL Board "Postmaster Litigation"


                                  Page 595 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      paper (which is at (POL00006805)) and the discussion at the GE meeting on

      13 May 2016, together with Jane's reply to me with her answers on 23 May

      2016 (POL00103201 ).


1381. I do not recall being concerned to brief the POL Board in the sense of being

      reluctant to brief the POL Board. I had a concern when the litigation began,

      which is reflected in the questions I asked Jane, that neither I nor the other

      POL Board members had experience of dealing with litigation, certainly of this

      size and importance. I wanted to ensure that the business was supported with

      appropriate legal advice (my first question to Jane in my email) and that there

      would be governance for the management of the litigation (my second question

      to Jane).


1382. I was also concerned that the POL Board should be equipped to scrutinise the

      litigation and consider the risks. I asked Jane in my fourth question in my email

      if she and Mark could put on their "blackest hats" and think through the worst

      outcomes and produce what I called a "downside Horizon scan", for example

      whether there were risks arising from judicial review or allegations of the

      misuse of public funds. This kind of risk analysis is an essential part of running

      any business, the idea being to have solutions or mitigating actions ready if the

      risks materialise.


1383. In the final point in my email, point 7, I stated that I wanted to ensure that we

      shared all angles with the NEDs, so that they were aware of how noisy and

      difficult it could become. Some of the non-executive directors were new to the

      Board and may not have been aware of the level of media scrutiny and

      reporting that the litigation would attract. Another reason why I wanted the non-

                                   Page 596 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      executive directors to be fully informed was that their independence from the

      executive management and experience of other businesses meant that they

      were a good source of internal scrutiny.


131.2. Did the risk of papers to the Board and/ or minutes of meetings being

disclosable documents affect (a) what was recorded in papers or (b) what was

minuted in meetings?


1384. Before Jane sent her response to my questions, she sent me an email on 21

      May 2016 with advice on privilege (POL00117702). Jane stated that all POL

      Board papers, minutes, emails and other correspondence were now potentially

      disclosable and subject to Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA") disclosure.

      Therefore, any correspondence in any form relating to Sparrow and the matters

      subject to litigation must be addressed either to Rodric Williams or Jane herself,

      other recipients should only be copied and kept to a minimum, and emails must

      contain wording in the subject line that it is a request for legal advice.


1385. This email was typical of Jane's way of working. I thought that Jane was a good

      lawyer who always wanted to do the right thing as GC. One of Jane's

      characteristics was that she was extremely risk averse. As I have said, it was

      one of her ongoing concerns during the litigation that POL should not

      inadvertently lose privilege in its legal advice.


1386. Minutes of the GE and POL Board meetings often mention that the GE or the

      Board was given a verbal or oral update on Sparrow or the litigation. There

      may have been different reasons for this on different occasions. The minutes

      of the GE meeting on 13 May 2016, for example, refer to a verbal update on

      the litigation, with no mention of the "Postmaster Litigation" paper for the
                                    Page 597 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      meeting (POL00027221 ). What appears to have happened is that the paper

      for the GE was not ready for the meeting and, in Jane's words in her email to

      Mark Davies on 21 May 2018 at (POL00103199), it was "walked in" at the end

      of the meeting. I also remember Jane informing me that if privileged information

      was put or embedded in a non-privileged document it may lose its privilege. I

      do not recall if this was the reason why minutes often recorded only that the

      GE or the POL Board was given a verbal or oral update.


131.3. What did you mean when requesting "a deep dive on the issues related

to the (im)balance of power of the institution vs the individual. We need to

understand this irrespective of Sparrow".


1387. I cannot go much further than what I wrote in the email. I wanted POL to

      examine its relationship with SPMs to see whether there was any force in the

      Claimants' case that the relationship was unfairly biased towards POL. If the

      balance was not right, we would want to correct that regardless of how the

      litigation progressed.


1388. Jane advised me in her reply that one of the themes underlying the claims

      turned on the nature of the contract between POL and SPMs and whether POL

      had breached duties of good faith. The legal team was going to develop its

      response to the letter before claim over the next two months with a view to

      determining whether there were weaknesses in POL's position. Any

      weaknesses would be identified with a view to addressing them through

      business as usual, as well as determining the right strategy to address them in

      the litigation. Tom Moran and the Steering Group would be critical to this

      analysis so that POL would achieve the right balance. Commercially, POL must

                                  Page 598 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      ensure that the outcome of the litigation was to validate that the balance of

      power was and is fair. The output of the review of POL's position and any

      recommendations would be discussed by the GE. I accepted Jane's advice

      and explanation as a sensible way of examining the balance of power issue.


131.4. Please consider "Both QCs that we interviewed recommended that we

address the 'Rudkin' allegation - that is whether it is possible for PO/Fujitsu to

remotely alter branch       transactions without this        being visible to the

Postmaster". Please set out what your knowledge of Fujitsu's remote access

privileges was at this point.


1389. At this stage, in May 2016, I remained of the belief that neither POL nor Fujitsu

      could change transactions or branch data remotely, without the knowledge of

      the relevant SPM.


132. Please consider POL00027219 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 24

May 2016) and POL00027218 (the agenda). Was there any discussion of the GLO

Proceedings?


1390. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 24 May 2016 record that Jane

      Macleod introduced the report on the Postmaster Litigation and gave a verbal

      update on the High Court claim, as described in the noting paper. Jane

      proposed that POL should continue to instruct Bond Dickinson, who had

      detailed knowledge and experience of the claims, and that Anthony de Garr

      Robinson QC had been interviewed and instructed to act for POL. I believe that

      the report mentioned in the minute is the POL Board paper entitled "Postmaster

      Litigation" at (POL00006805). This was almost certainly the first occasion on

      which the POL Board as a whole had discussed the litigation. I cannot
                                   Page 599 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      remember what Jane told the POL Board in her oral briefing or any discussion

      among the directors.


133. Please consider POL00110441 (emails from Tom Wechsler and Jane

Macleod to you dated 10/13 June 2016).


133.1 Please describe all discussions you had regarding stopping the

Chairman's review (or acting on recommendations drawn up by Jonathan Swift)

because of the GLO proceedings. Did you consider it appropriate to pause the

review or actioning recommendations which were intended to remedy issues

within POL and Horizon?


1391. In Tom Wechsler's email to me of 13 June 2016, he describes that updates on

      the Parker Review would be given to me by Jane and that "there is a need to

      keep written material to a minimum and to protect what there is with legal

      privilege" (POL00110441).


1392. I am aware that Anthony de Garr Robinson QC had given "strong advice" that

      "the work being underlaken under the aegis of [the Parker Review] should not

      continue in light of the litigation" but that "the subject matter of that work should

      continue provided it is re-scoped and re-instructed for the purposes of the

      litigation" (POL00110442) in June 2016. Jane Macleod made me aware of this

      and briefed me on the consequences. Jane did not invite me to make a decision

      - it was not my review to stop.


1393. Bond Dickinson wrote to POL on 21 June 2016 "to confirm the advice given by

      Tony Robinson QC at a conference held on 9 June 2016" (POL00006601 ).

      This amounted to the proposition that "Mr Parker's review should cease

                                    Page 600 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      immediately" but that the fourth, fifth, sixth and eighth recommendations of

      Jonathan Swift QC should continue to be implemented.


1394. I did not see that advice. Jane sent it to Tim (POl00022764).


1395. I cannot recall any other discussions in which I was involved regarding stopping

      the Parker Review.


1396. I am asked by the Inquiry whether I considered it appropriate to pause the

      review or actioning recommendations which were intended to remedy issues

      within POL and Horizon. As I have said, this is something which Jane briefed

      me on in June 2016. But I did not understand that the Parker Review had

      stopped: rather, I understood that the same recommendations continued to be

      pursued appropriately, but that this was under the "aegis" of a response to the

      litigation rather than as part of a standalone piece of work. Given that this was

      as a result of advice from our QC, I was content that it should be done in this

      way.


133.2 To what extent, if at all, did the GlO Proceedings influence POl's action

in respect of past convictions of SPMs based on Horizon data. If it had any

influence, please explain the justification for the same.


1397. On 24 May 2016, Rodric Williams emailed Jonathan Swift QC (copying

      Christopher Knight) and asked (POl00103207):


          "Now that POL has been sued, is it reasonable for POL to address any

          further steps it might reasonably take in respect of the SPMR cases

          through the proceedings, rather than in response to your report and

          recommendations?"
                                   Page 601 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1398. As I have set out above in answer to the Inquiry's questions concerning the

      Parker Review at paragraph 1256.d, I was aware that there was a rationale for

      stopping the response to Jonathan Swift QC's recommendations being a

      standalone task, and making it part of POL's response to the litigation.

      However, aside from this, I did not think that the litigation changed POL's

      approach to past convictions. For example, I thought that POL was continuing

      to comply with its disclosure obligations and continuing to engage with the

      CCRC.


134. Please consider POL00103220 (email from Tom Wechsler to you dated 4

July 2016). Please explain the background to this correspondence on the

review of Seema Misra's conviction.


1399. On 4 July 2016, Tom Wechsler wrote to me by email with "details from Rod on

      the Misra case" (POL00103220). The Inquiry directs my attention to this

      correspondence and asks me to explain the background to it.


1400. I see that Tom says in his email that this is "further to my last message". I have

      not been able to identify an earlier message from Tom on this topic and so I

      am unable to explain what this refers to. It also looks, from the formatting of the

      email, as though the information about Seema Misra has been copied and

      pasted from somewhere else, but I have not yet identified the source within the

      Inquiry's disclosure.


1401. It seems likely that the purpose of Tom's email was responding to emails

      concerning Tim McCormack.




                                    Page 602 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




               a.   Tim McCormack emailed Piero D'Agostino on 1 July 2016, copying

                    me   and   Tim    Parker,   specifically concerning   Seema    Misra

                    (POL00 119584).


               b.   I sent it on to Al Cameron and Rob Houghton, with Tom in copy, on

                    1 July 2016 regarding the Dalmellington Error. This arose from Tim

                    McCormack's biog (POL00029971 ).


               c.   Angela asked for "the actual email from Tim McCormack" to be

                    forwarded to her (POL00026913).


135. Please consider POL00041258 (emails from Jane Macleod on 25 July 2016)

POL00030007 (emails chain with Jane Macleod, you and others on 27 July

2016), POL00022663 (email from Jane Macleod to you and another on 28 July

2016), POL00022663 (attachment to the prior email), POL00022666 (attachment

to the prior email) and POL00103232 (Alwen Lyons email to the Board on 29 July

2016).


135.1. Please explain your involvement in POL's decision making in how to

respond to the letter of claim in the GLO proceedings.


1402. As I describe above at paragraph 1347, on 2 May 20161 shared with the Board

         an update from Jane in respect of her first reaction to the Claimants' letter

         before claim. I noted at that point that the letter had been passed to our legal

         advisers and a discussion between them and the business would take place

         next week as to litigation strategy (UKGI00006685).


1403. The way that the letter of response would be approved was described in a note

         from Bond Dickinson (updated on 8 July 2016): among other dates, it states
                                      Page 603 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      that on 28 June a draft would be provided to POL Legal for comment; on 14

      July the Steering Group would meet to decide key tactical points in the letter;

      on 20 July, the Steering Group would approve the letter (POL00006599).


1404. The agenda for that steering group meeting lists the "tactical decisions" which

      fell to be made (POL00022641):


          "a. Do we address in detail the "bugs" in Horizon identified by Second Sight

          or will this cause more difficulties?


          b. Do we attack Second Sight's credibility/ expertise in order to undermine

          their reports?


          c. Do we release Second Sight from their confidentiality obligations and

          allow them to speak to Freeths?


          d. Do we lodge counterclaims against the Claimants who have outstanding

          debts?


          e. Do we agree not to assert any Official Secrets Act obligations against the

          Claimants?


          f. Do we engage in further mediation?


          g. Do we explain whether part of Post Office's motivation for bringing

          prosecutions is a desire to recover money?"


1405. A series of "'one page' papers for each of the tactical decisions" was provided

      by Andrew Parsons on 13 July (POL00022638).




                                    Page 604 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1406. I have not seen any disclosure which relates to a Steering Group meeting on

      20 July 2016, as envisaged by Bond Dickinson. I have also not been able to

      identify any minutes from the 14 July 2016 Steering Group in documents

      disclosed by the Inquiry to date.


1407. Jane Macleod wrote to me on 24 July 2016 stating that POL's letter of

      response was to be sent by Friday 29 July, and that I would be briefed on the

      response on Tuesday 26 July "to take you through the approach to that letter"

      (POl00041258). In this email Jane provided some detail as to the matters

      which she would explain on 26 July, including a risk of further adverse publicity

      following the reply, and that the letter would flag "that there are a limited number

      of individuals in Fujitsu with super-user rights which can only be used in very

      limited and controlled circumstances".


1408. Jane sent an email on 26 July 2016 confirming that she had briefed the GE that

      morning on the progress of the litigation. She records in her email considerable

      concern on the part of the GE as to the change of message on remote access,

      and that they had        suggested    rephrasing    that section    of the    letter

      (POl00030006).


1409. Jane sent a further email to Andrew Parsons and others on 26 July 2016, which

      from context is likely to be after I met with her for the briefing on the letter of

      response. Jane recorded that I had "suggested that (I) speak to the UK CEO

      of Fujitsu (Duncan Tait)" on a number of matters, including alerting him to the

      fact and timing of the response letter (at page 2 of (POl00030006)). I do not

      remember speaking to Duncan Tait at that point.



                                    Page 605 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1410. On 28 July 2016, Jane emailed me and Al Cameron providing some specific

      information as to what the letter of response would say about remote access

      (POL00022663). Our approval was not sought, but rather we were being

      informed. The inference I draw from this is that the words had been checked

      by the appropriate person and confirmed to be accurate.


135.2. When did you first become aware that "within Fujitsu there are a limited

number of individuals who have super-user rights which can only be used in

very limited and controlled circumstances"? What did you understand this to

mean?


1411. I believe I first became aware that there were individuals within Fujitsu with

      super-user rights from the email that Jane Macleod sent to me on 24 July 2016

      at 20:44 (POL00041258). Jane's email stated that I should be aware that there

      might be negative publicity arising from POL's reply to the Claimants' letter

      before claim, which was due to be sent on 29 July 2016. Jane went on to

      explain that, as a result of the Deloitte work, POL would be flagging that "within

      Fujitsu there are a limited number of individuals who have super-user rights

      which can only be used in very limited and controlled circumstances". This was

      a different positioning from the public statements POL had previously made,

      and therefore POL should be prepared for adverse comments from the usual

      corn mentators.


1412. I replied at 07:19 on 25 July 2016 in the same URN: "This is clear- my inly

      (sic) query is we (sic) FJ super-users. What did we say previously?" Where I

      said "we", I meant "re". This was a typo.



                                   Page 606 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1413. Jane replied to me the same day, now copying other senior POL managers

      and Andrew Parsons. Jane wrote that POL hadn't previously addressed super-

      users and that the phrasing of some previous statements as to who could

      access branch data was quite narrow. POL was now collating previous

      statements, and looking at those which Fujitsu had previously provided, to

      assess the extent of the communications gap.


1414. On 26 July 2016, Jane Macleod informed Andrew Parsons that she had

      briefed the GE that morning on the progress of the litigation (POL00030006).

      In particular, she had commented to the GE on the remote access issue in

      POL's response to the Claimants' letter before claim. Later in the email, Jane

      stated that I had suggested that I should speak to Duncan Tait. Jane suggested

      that I should raise a number of issues connected to the remote access issue,

      including that if the Deloitte work uncovered a different position from that which

      Fujitsu and POL had stated publicly for years, we would need to consider

      carefully how to manage the impact.


1415. Although I have no distinct recollection, I believe that I understood that the

      issues raised by the new information about Fujitsu super-users related to

      remote access and to the extent of Fujitsu's ability to access and edit branch

      data.




135.3. Were you satisfied that POL's response to the letter of claim was

accurate? If so, how did you satisfy yourself that it was accurate?




                                   Page 607 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




1416. As is clear from the wealth of documentation generated in discussion of the

      letter of response, the internal legal team was responsible for checking the

      accuracy of what was said in the letter of response. This was done with the

      assistance of the Postmaster Litigation Steering Group, the counsel team and

      Fujitsu. I believed that I was entitled to rely upon their collective investigations

      rather than having to check the facts in the letter myself.


135.4. Who was responsible for the "more assertive" tone of the POL's

response to the letter of claim? Was this based on legal advice?


1417. I believe that Anthony de Garr Robinson QC advised that this was the

      appropriate tone for the letter. I say this because of an email which says that

      the letter of response "has been reviewed by our QC Tony Robinson" and "the

      tone of our response is more assertive than we have used previously"

      (POL00024967). If he was not responsible for the tone, Anthony de Garr

      Robinson QC at least does not appear to have challenged it as inappropriate.


1418. I do recall, when reading the letter, considering that it was too legalistic and

      that it was not the tone that I would have used in correspondence, but I also

      recognised that legal writing serves a specific purpose and was outside my

      expertise.




135.5. On reflection, do you consider that POL's response to the letter of claim

was appropriate?


                                    Page 608 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1419. Given the findings of Fraser Jin the GLO proceedings, I do not consider that

      the letter of response was appropriate. I considered it appropriate at the time

      because I believed that POL had carried out proper investigations into the claim

      and because the letter had been reviewed by the Steering Group and by

      experienced solicitors and counsel.


136. Please consider POL00021543 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 25 July

2016), POL00021544 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 29 September 2016)

and POL00021545 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 25 October 2016). Did the

Board discuss the GLO Proceedings in these meetings? If not, why not?


1420. I have read the minutes of the POL Board meetings on 25 July, 29 September

      2016, and 25 October 2016 and I can see that they do not mention any

      discussion about the GLO Proceedings. I do not recall these meetings, but I do

      not believe that the GLO Proceedings were discussed. I have a clear memory

      of Tim Parker saying that litigation usually took a long time to work through the

      initial stages. It could be a year or so. He did not want Board time taken up with

      procedural process and planning work and background issues. That was for

      the legal team and advisers to be getting on with. As I have explained above, I

      had no experience of leading an organisation through litigation and I respected

      the Chairman's steer.


1421. POL had put in place a structure for the management of the litigation. As I have

      stated in my answer to Question 128, the Steering Group was created and

      given its responsibilities by the GE in May 2016. Its membership was selected

      to ensure that the Group had the requisite knowledge and expertise across the

      areas of POL's operations, which were involved in and affected by the claim.

                                   Page 609 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     Given the seniority and expertise of the managers who served on the Steering

     Group, and the support they were receiving from internal and external lawyers,

     matters were not escalated from the Group to the GE or the POL Board unless

     Jane Macleod considered that it was necessary to do so.


137. Please consider POL00027185 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 24

November 2016). Please describe the update you provided to the Board.


1422. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 24 November 2016 (POL00027185)

     record under the heading "Any Other Business" that I updated the POL Board

     on two legal cases. One of these was "Sparrow", which I told the POL Board

     "was expected in January". I am sure that "Sparrow'' was a reference to the

     GLO Proceedings and that I explained to the POL Board that an application by

     the Claimants to permit the group litigation would be heard in January 2017.

     Otherwise, I cannot recall my update to the POL Board. I have not seen any

     briefing to me from the legal department for the meeting and my CEO report in

     the Board pack for the meeting (POL00103892) does not mention Sparrow or

     Horizon.


138. Please consider POL00110564 (email from Jane Macleod to you dated 28

November 2016), POL00110565 (attachment to the prior email), POL00091418

(Jane Macleod's email chain on 28 November 2016), POL00091419 (Tom

Wechsler and your email in response), POL00041377 (further email chain

between Rodric Williams and Andrew Parsons) and POL00091420 (email chain

between yourself, Al Cameron and Mark Davies on 29 November 2016).


1423. On 2 November 2016, Jane Macleod sent me and Al Cameron a section of a

     longer letter to Freeths and asked for our comments (POL00110564).
                                 Page 610 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      (POL00110565) is the attachment to Jane's email. The purpose of the draft

      section of the letter was to notify the Claimants that POL had recently

      discovered that it was theoretically possible for Fujitsu administrators to access

      Horizon databases in a way which could change the branch account and to set

      out POL's position on remote access in light of that information.


1424. I can see from the documents in disclosure, which I did not see at the time, that

      the draft had been the subject of numerous discussions and revisions before it

      was sent to me on 29 November 2016. Since the Inquiry has asked me about

      the removal from the letter of expressions of POL's regrets, it may assist the

      Inquiry if I summarise the history of the drafting, as recorded in the documents,

      before I turn to my own involvement in finalising the wording of the remote

      access section of the letter:


      a.   POL's letter dated 28 July 2016 in response to the Claimants' letter before

           action contained a section on POL's current understanding of Fujitsu's

           privileged administration access to Horizon (see paragraph 5.16.4 of

           POL00030211 ):


                "Administrator access to databases: Database and server access

                and edit permission is provided, within strict controls (including

                logging user access), to a small, controlled number of specialist

                Fujitsu (not Post Office) administrators. As far as we are currently

                aware, privileged administrator access has not been used to alter

                branch transaction data. We are seeking further assurance from

                Fujitsu on this point."



                                      Page 611 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




b.        On 27 October 2016, Freeths responded to this comment in paragraphs

          119 to 122 of their letter in response to POL's letter of 28 July 2016

          (POL00041392). Freeths asserted that, in light of the information contained

          in POL's letter, previous statements by POL about remote access were

          "untruthfuf'.


c.        An update on Freeths' response was on the agenda for the Steering Group

          meeting on 1 November 2016 (POL00024984) but I have not seen any

          minutes from the meeting.


d.        On 18 November 2016 at 19:25, Andrew Parsons sent Jane Macleod and

          Rodric Williams some draft wording on the remote access issue "as

          discussed in the con with Tony'' (POL00023426). This appears to be a

          reference to the conference with Anthony de Garr Robinson QC discussed

          in the email chain at (POL00029103).


e.        The attachment to Andrew Parsons' email on 18 November 2016 would

          appear to be the document at (POL00023431 ). This version of the draft

          made a number of points in relation to Freeths' allegation that prior

          statements by POL about remote access were untrue:


     i.         Paragraph 1.12 of the draft stated that POL had relied on Fujitsu

                when dealing with Second Sight, responding to cases within the

                Mediation Scheme, and making public statements. It went on: "In light

                of what Post Office now knows about administrator access .. .it

                accepts that certain statements it has made historically might not

                have been correct. It is regrettable that this has happened and that it


                                   Page 612 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




                 has only now come to light, but Post Office does not accept that this

                 has caused any harm to any Claimant."


      ii.        Paragraph 1.13 of the draft set out the context of POL's prior

                 statements, which POL asserted must be viewed alongside the

                 questions that it had been asked at the time the statements were

                 made.


     iii.        In paragraph 1.14, POL denied that it had committed fraud or

                 deliberately concealed any relevant matter. On analysis, POL's prior

                 statements were either true, or were made in good faith and were

                 believed to be true when they were made.


f.          Mark Underwood replied to Andrew Parsons at 21 :15 on 18 November

            2016, attaching a revised version with his amendments shown in tracked

            changes (POL00023435). My lawyers have been unable to find a copy of

            the attachment in the Inquiry's disclosure.


g.          Andrew Parsons replied to Mark Underwood at 13:17 on 20 November

            2016 (POL00023435). Andrew Parsons had updated the draft and

            attached a further revised version: "Where I agreed with your suggested

            amendments, I've included them and deleted the respective comment. In

            relation to your other questions, I've added my answers to the attached."

            My lawyers have been unable to find the attachment to this email.


h.          Mark Underwood replied to Andrew Parsons on 20 November 2016 at

            14:34 (POL00041324). Mark Underwood's greatest concern with the

            drafting was that it did not include a qualification that the logistical

                                     Page 613 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     challenges to Fujitsu using administrator access to delete or change data

     were so huge that it was not a credible line of enquiry. Mark Underwood

     believed it was necessary for POL's letter to include details of the logistical

     challenges. Otherwise, if the letter was leaked to the media or the Network,

     it could be quite damaging as it would provide soundbites that would give

     credibility to an allegation that lacked any merit. Mark Underwood believed

     there was sufficient time before POL sent the reply to Freeths to put

     "suitable pressure" on Deloitte to provide information about the logistical

     challenges.


i.   In the same email chain, Jane Macleod replied to Rodric Williams and

     Mark Underwood at 09:03 on 21 November 2016, asking them to make

     sure that "Rob H" (I believe Rob Houghton) was happy with the wording,

     and that there was a discussion with him about how to approach Fujitsu.

     Mark Underwood forwarded Jane's email to Andrew Parsons at 09:12 on

     21 November 2016 and asked if they could pick it up prior to the Steering

     Group meeting that afternoon.


j.   In a separate email thread at (POL00023433), on 21 November 2016 at

     08:47, Jane Macleod sent Andrew Parsons her "minor comments" on the

     current version of the remote access drafting. Jane set out in her email her

     "more substantive" comments on how POL presented the argument about

     Fujitsu's administrator access. In her view, the sequence of statements

     should be as follows:




                              Page 614 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




              "The question of access has come up many times starting with the

               Rudkin allegations, and including many specific questions raised by

               SS.

              In relation to such specific questions, PO reverted to FJ to clarify the

               technical details in order to respond appropriately to the specific

               questions asked.

              PO has recently commissioned further work and this is wider in scope

               than the specific questions asked.


              In summary:


               o     PO does not have access or the ability to change transaction

                     data


               o     There are a small number of staff within FJ who currently and

                     historically have had administrator access. This means ....


               o     FJ have advised us that there are controls in place to ensure

                     that     this      administrator   access      is     not     used

                     inappropriately ... .[tbc]."


k.        At 17:20 on 24 November 2016, Andrew Parsons sent Rodric Williams a

          "rough draft" of the letter to Freeths, which he asked Rodric not to circulate

          as it was still an early draft (POl00041373). Andrew Parsons made two

          comments in relation to the remote access section of the letter:


     i.        Anthony de Garr Robinson QC was not happy with paragraph 9.10 of

               the draft, and the list of controls in Horizon which prevented the


                                     Page 615 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




               editing of data. Although Jane felt strongly about this, Mr Robinson

               QC thought this was a hostage to fortune.


    ii.        The story that "POL relied on FJ's statements" in paragraph 9:11 of

               the draft had been "watered down". Andrew Parsons explained that

               having reviewed all the back material, there was a concern that the

               issue of database access had been flagged in the POL Board

               Briefing. Although Andrew Parsons' view was that it was still fair to

               say that POL had relied on Fujitsu, this was not clear cut and POL

               needed to be careful in its language.


L         Andrew Parsons suggested a conference call as soon as possible to

          discuss the remote access section of the letter. Andrew Parsons suggested

          that the participants in the call should be counsel, Andrew Parsons, Jane

          Macleod, "Tom M' (presumably Tom Moran), "Rob" (presumably Rob

          Houghton), and "Marl(' (presumably Mark Davies). Andrew Parsons stated

          that he did not think that the draft letter needed to go to the full Steering

          Committee, as it was mainly a legal letter rather than factual statements

          about POL, but he would welcome Rodric's thoughts.


m. On 27 November 2016 at 09:39, Andrew Parsons emailed a further version

          of the full letter to Freeths, which incorporated comments from "Tony and

          Rod" (presumably Anthony de Garr Robinson QC and Rodric Williams)

          (POl00024869). The version of the email disclosed by the Inquiry does not

          identify the recipients: however, the email chain above Andrew Parsons'

          email contains what appear to be replies to Andrew Parsons from Jane

          Macleod and Tom Moran. In his email, Andrew Parsons asked "Rob" (who

                                   Page 616 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     I assume was Rob Houghton) to review the section on remote access.

     Andrew Parsons commented in relation to remote access:


          "Following feedback from Deloitte, we cannot definitely say that POL

          (as distinct from FJ) never had the ability to change Horizon data

          because Deloitte and the current staff at FJ just don't have enough

          knowledge of Old Horizon to confirm this. This was a point made in

          an early draft but it has now been removed.



          "We have (I hope) now found a formulation of words that avoids

          having to overtly throw FJ to the wolves and avoids any risk of waiving

          privilege in any documents, but still gives us a fair story to tell. We

          have also toned down the admissions of making incorrect statements,

          though they are still there. I hope this might make it easier to get this

          fetter cleared through GE and FJ.


          "We have a call scheduled for 5pm tomorrow with Tony which we can

          use to run through any comments. Comments by email before then

          are also welcomed."


n.   On 27 November 2016 at 11 :06, in the same chain, Tom Moran asked Jane

     Macleod what she thought they should do to brief and obtain sign-off from

     the GE (or a sub-set of the GE).


o.   Jane replied to Tom Moran on 27 November 2016 at 13:06. She proposed

     to mention the letter to the GE the following morning, and then circulate the

     remote access section to me, Mark Davies, and Rob Houghton for any final

     comments.
                              Page 617 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




p.   Jane provided comments on the latest draft of the letter to Freeths in an

     email to Andrew Parsons at 22:04 on 27 November 2016 (POL00025050).

     One of Jane's comments was to ask whether "it is possible to tone down

     the 'regrets language' eg in 9.3.5, 9.5 and 9.6" to something along the lines

     of:


           " .. .with the benefit of hindsight it is now possible to construe those

           statements as deficient in that they did not address the question of

           administrator access. In each case PO was seeking to address the

           questions that had been raised. PO did not intend to make any

           misleading statements nor was it wilfully reckless in doing so. The

           Post Office personnel responsible for those statements believed

           when they were made in the context in which they were made. What

           was said reflected what they understood the position to be after

           making relevant inquiries. [Unfortunately, they did not pick up on the

           issue of Fujitsu administrator access as Post O#ice w-ouf.d have

           /.ike4.-}" (strike out as in Jane's original email).


q.   On 28 November 2016 at 07:42, Jane Macleod asked Andrew Parsons "in

     light of the comments received overnight" to send 'Jusf' the remote access

     section, stating that she would "prefer not to circulate the wording from

     yesterday's draft more widely (Paula, Al, Mark D, Angela etc)"

     (POL00024874).


r.   In the same URN, Andrew Parsons sent Jane updated remote access

     wording at 12:41 on 28 November 2016. He commented that "The general

     direction of your comments was to be less apologetic in tone and less

                                Page 618 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




           repetitive, both of which we've tried to accommodate in the attached."

           Andrew Parsons stated that the key issue was how far POL wanted to go

           in accepting that incorrect statements had been made in the past. He

           suggested to Jane that they should discuss the point at 17:00 that day with

           Anthony de Garr Robinson QC.


s.         My lawyers have found documents in the Inquiry's disclosure which may

           be associated with the emails between Andrew Parsons and Jane

           Macleod on 27 and 28 November 2016.


t.         (POL00024806) is a version of the remote access drafting to which the

           Inquiry has given a date of 27 November 2016. It contains three statements

           in relation to POL's regrets:


      i.        Paragraph 1.3.5. states that POL identified the issue of potential

                access to Horizon databases when it was preparing its Letter of

                Response. "Post Office regrets that it did not previously identify the

                possibility that Fujitsu staff with certain administrator access rights

                could potentially do this; however noting that it would be very difficult

                and potentially detectable."


     ii.        Paragraph 1.5 states that: "At each stage an issue arose, Post Office

                did its honest best to ascertain the position to respond to the question

                it believed it was being asked and to reveal what it had found. In doing

                so, Post Office may have regrettably made some incorrect

                statements, but refutes any suggestion that it ever did so deliberately

                or did so to mislead or deceive." This wording is followed by an


                                    Page 619 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




       unattributed comment: "(not sure about this sentence - I don't believe

       you've answered inappropriately in the past)".


iii.   Paragraph 1.6 states that the POL personnel responsible for making

       those statements "believed the statements when they were made.

       What was said reflected what they understood the position to be after

       making relevant enquiries. Unfortunately, they did not pick up on the

       issue of Fujitsu administrator access as Post Office would have liked.

       This is a matter of great regret, but it does not mean that Post Office

       exhibited wilful blindness to reckless indifference to the truth of those

       statements."


iv.    This wording is followed by the unattributed comment "(I think this is

       too much). Can we not say''. Below the comment, someone has

       inserted alternative wording for paragraph 1.6:


            "The Post Office responded appropriately to the question of

            whether transactions could be altered by Post Office without the

            postmasters knowledge -         the answer to this question is

            consistently the same - it is not possible. Expanding on this - it

            is possible for FJ to access the system through administrator

            access, which they have confirmed. This is not unusual and is

            in common with any other organisation. You would need to

            discuss with them their ability to modify transactions; our expert

            assessment would say that this is extremely difficult but

            theoretically possible."



                          Page 620 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




u.         (POL00024991) has been dated 28 November 2016 on the Inquiry's

           disclosure website. It contains the same expressions of POL's regret as

           (POL00024806) and contains the same unattributed comments.


v.         On 28 November 2016 at 12:09, Andrew Parsons sent Jane Macleod and

           others what he called an updated version of the remote access section for

           approval (POL00024874). (POL00024875) (dated 28 November 2016 by

           the Inquiry) is likely to be the version of the drafting attached to this email.

           While there were three expressions of regret in the previous drafts dated

           27 and 28 November 2016, there is only one in this draft:


      i.        Paragraph 1.3.5. stated that: "When preparing our Letter of

                Response,     we    identified the theoretical potential for Fujitsu

                administrators to access Horizon databases in a way which could

                change branch accounts. This is discussed in more detail below. Post

                Office regrets that it did not previously identify this possibility even

                though it is unreal to suggest that this is a true factor behind the

                shortfalls suffered by any postmaster".


     ii.        The previous drafts had contained language of regret in relation to

                POL's    previous    statements    about    remote    access.   However,

                paragraph 1.4 of this draft stated:


                      "At each stage, Post Office ascertained the position to respond

                      to the questions it believed it was being asked. With the benefit

                      of hindsight, some of Post Office's statements may have been

                      incorrect in light of what has since been identified in relation to

                      Fujitsu's administrator access rights (see below). But Post
                                     Page 621 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




                    Office refutes any suggestion that it ever made false statements

                    deliberately or did so to mislead, deceive or conceal. The Post

                    Office personnel responsible for those statements made them

                    in good faith: what was said reflected what they understood the

                   position to be after they had made relevant enquiries at the

                    time."


1425. The version of the draft that Jane Macleod emailed to me and Al Cameron

      on 28 November 2016 at 13:49 (POL00110564; POL00110565) appears to

      be identical to the version that Andrew Parsons emailed to Jane on 28

      November 2016 at 12:09 (POL00024874; POL00024875).


1426. In her covering email for (POL00110565) on 28 November 2016, Jane stated

      that the intention was to send the longer letter to Freeths (of which the remote

      access drafting was one part) on 29 November and that there was to be a call

      at 17:00 on 28 November to review the wording with POL's QC (which must

      refer to Mr Robinson QC). That call was to be attended by the POL team,

      including Mark Davies. Jane also set out the wording from POL's letter to

      Freeths in July 2016, which Freeths had picked up on and which the new

      wording was designed to address. This was the statement in POL's letter:


              "Administrator access to databases. Database and server access

              permission is provided, within strict controls (including logging user

              access) to a small, controlled number of specialist Fujitsu (not Post

              Office) administrators. As far as we are currently aware, privileged

              administrator access has not been used to alter branch transaction

              data. We are seeking further assurance from Fujitsu on this point."

                                  Page 622 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1427. Al   Cameron    responded    to   Jane   at    15:04 on   28   November 2016

      (POL00091418). He wrote that he had paused and sucked his teeth on

      paragraph 1.4 of the drafting:


               "For the avoidance of doubt, I am sure it is true, it just reads

               defensively and as a conspiracy theorist's wet dream? Happy to leave

               it to your best judgment but rather than making value statements

               about honesty, may have been incorrect, I did wonder if we would be

               better off simply saying ... 'We now understand the question more fully

               and would answers questions X and Y as follows: Fujitsu can do X

               but there are rigorous controls of Y etc.'"


1428. Jane replied to Al at 15:22 on 28 November 2016. Jane said that this was a

      difficult issue and that the statements had already been watered down. POL

      would be speaking to its QC at 17:00 to understand his concerns, as the QC

      was arguing for stronger wording (POL00091418).


1429. At 15:41 on 28 November 2016, I sent Jane and Rodric (cc'd to others,

      including Tom Moran and Rob Houghton) (POL00091419), which was an

      amended version of paragraph 1.4 of (POL00110565). For ease of reference,

      I have marked up in red below the changes that I proposed:


               "At each stage Post Office did its honest best to ascertained the

               position so to respond transparently to the question it believed it was

               being asked.    With the benefit of hindsight, some of Post Office's

               statements may have been incorrect in light of what has now been

               identified in relation to Fujitsu's administrator access (see below).

               Horever, Post Office refutes any suggestion that it ever made false
                                   Page 623 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




                statements deliberately or did so to mislead or deceive.        The Post

                Office personnel responsible for those statements belie,1ed the

                statements Ylhen they were made them in good faith: Wwhat was said

                reflected what they understood the position to be after they had made

                ma.king relevant enquiries at the time."



1430. These were the only changes to the draft that I suggested in my email. I wrote

      in my email that, as Al had said, I was not a lawyer either but "I prefer this as it

      is both simple and the truth. Any reason why it needs to be different?"


1431. Tom Moran replied at 16:03 on 28 November 2016, stating that he and Rob

      Houghton had edited the draft along the lines I had suggested. They agreed

      that we should keep things as simple as possible and not be apologetic given

      that POL had acted in good faith throughout. The next section of Tom Moran's

      email was addressed specifically to Jane Macleod:


          "Jane - as you now have consistent feedback from Al, Paula, me as

          SteerCo chair and Rob can we take the below as the default in our call at

          5? If there is a critical reason why you/BO/our QC thinks we have to keep

          the original text or something similar we'll need to understand what it is and

          weigh it up against the reputationallcomms impact on the network and

          wider business.


          As discussed, the thing remaining for me is for this to have the Comms

          review and the reactive comms management approach in place prior to

          sending."



                                    Page 624 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1432. I can see from (POl00041377), that Rodric Williams and Andrew Parsons had

      an email exchange between themselves about my amendments to the draft. In

      an email on 28 November 2016 at 16:41 Rodric said that he liked the look of

      my statement, but proposed some amended wording if Anthony de Garr

      Robinson QC was adamant that the letter should contain some contrition.

      Rodric's proposed wording included a sentence that: "It is regrettable that Post

      Office did not anticipate the potential for Fujitsu administrator [[malfeasance]]

      in its previous statements, for which it is sorry, Post Office refutes any

      suggestion that it ever made false statements deliberately or did so to mislead

      or deceive". Andrew Parsons replied to Rodric at 16:55 that he quite liked my

      wording, but they should speak to Anthony de Garr Robinson QC and see what

      he said.


1433. At 23:35 on 28 November 2016, Jane Macleod sent me a revised version of

      the paragraph of the remote access drafting that I had commented on earlier

      that day (POl00091420). Jane wrote that, following discussions with the QC

      and Bond Dickinson that afternoon, the recommended language to be included

      in the letter to Freeths was as follows:


          "At each stage, Post Office ascertained the position to respond

          transparently to the questions it believed it was being asked. With the

          benefit of hindsight, some of Post Office's statements may have been

          incorrect in light of what has since been identified in relation to Fujitsu's

          administrator access rights (see below). But Post Office refutes any

          suggestion that it ever made false statements deliberately or did so to

          mislead, deceive or conceal. The Post Office personnel responsible for


                                   Page 625 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




           those statements made them in good faith: what was said reflected what

           they understood the position to be after they had made relevant enquiries

           at the time."


1434. Jane commented that the challenge had been to balance the risk of adverse

      publicity ahead of the court process (which was POL's concern) with the need

      to be open and transparent with the court in admitting that certain of the

      information we provided previously on this issue could be construed as

      "wrong".


1435. Jane also mentioned that she would be taking Mark Davies through this

      wording on 30 November 2016. When I replied to Jane, at 07:37 on 29

      November 2016, I said that it was "important Mark scans for any other areas,

      which could be sensitive to media scrutiny." Mark, who was copied into the

      chain, replied that he would do that.


1436. Although I cannot recall whether I saw the full letter to Freeths, I can see from

      page 121 of (POl00110586) that the wording that Jane sent me on 23:35 on

      28 November 2016 in (POl00091420) was included in the final version of the

      letter.


138.1. Please explain if you believed the content of the draft response to be

accurate and, if so, what steps you took to satisfy yourself that it was.


1437. I believed that the draft was accurate. I relied upon the fact that the drafting

      was produced and reviewed by the team who had been tasked by POL with

      investigating the Claimants' allegations and preparing POL's response. I can

      see from the emails I was sent at the time that the draft had been prepared by

                                   Page 626 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




        Bond Dickinson, and reviewed by Jane Macleod, Rodric Williams, Tom Moran

        (the chair of the Steering Group), Rob Houghton (POL's CIO), and Anthony de

        Garr Robinson QC. These people were either senior POL managers or well-

        regarded external lawyers. I trusted that they would not send a letter to the

        Claimants' solicitors if they thought that it was inaccurate.


 1438. In addition to the emails, I had conversations with Jane about the letter to

        Freeths. I remember Jane telling me that POL intended to validate the factual

        position in the remote access section with Fujitsu and Deloitte.


 1439. I can see from an email from Andrew Parsons to Rodric and Jane on 29

        November 2016 at 16:15 (POL00041383) that the draft was reviewed and

        approved by Deloitte subject to one minor change. However, Fujitsu did not

        respond to POL's enquiries before the letter had to be sent. In the same URN,

        Jane accepted Andrew Parsons' suggestion (which he had discussed with

        Rodric Williams) that the letter could be sent to Freeths without Fujitsu's prior

        approval so long as Deloitte gave POL the all-clear (which minimised the risk

        of factual errors in the letter). That would leave a residual risk that Fujitsu might

        complain or disagree, but in Andrew Parsons' view, it was an acceptably small

        risk.


 138.2. Why did you prefer your suggested wording? Why did you seek to

 remove expression of contrition? Did you engage with POL's external legal

 advisers on this issue?


1440.   I was not conscious when I proposed my amendments to the draft that Jane

        Macleod had sent to me on 28 November 2016 (POL00110564) that I was

        seeking to remove any expressions of contrition by POL.
                                      Page 627 of 861
                                                                                          WITN01020100




1441.   As far I can recall, the first version of the draft that I saw was the version that I

        received from Jane on 28 November 2016. As I have set out above, earlier

        versions of the draft (POL00024806;             POL00024991) contained three

        expressions of regret. By the time Jane sent the draft wording to me, two of

        those expressions of regret had been removed. I did not suggest removing the

        one that remained in the draft sent to me by Jane (in paragraph 1.3.5 of

        POL00110565).


1442.   I preferred the wording I suggested in my email on 28 November 2016 at

        (POL00091419) because I thought it was simpler and more straightforward. I

        thought that the original language to the effect that POL had done its honest

        best to ascertain the facts about remote access looked defensive and a little

        mealy-mouthed. If POL had acted properly, as I understood it had, I thought

        the letter should say that.


1443.   I did not personally engage with POL's external legal advisers on the drafting.

        I understood from Jane's email to me on 28 November 2016 at 23:35

        (POL00091420) that what Jane described as the "recommended" version of

        the draft remote access wording had been reviewed and approved by Anthony

        de Garr Robinson QC.


 138.3. To what extent did concerns about adverse publicity affect the way POL

 presented its case in the GLO Proceedings?


 1444. I did not give any direction that the way in which POL presented its case in the

        GLO Proceedings should be influenced by concerns about adverse publicity,

        and I did not perceive that others were being influenced by concerns about how

        the case would be reported in the media.
                                      Page 628 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1445. Any business will keep an eye on potential publicity, to identify what the effect

        might be, and to prepare for that. This is why I wanted Mark Davies to review

        the letter to Freeths. However, my perception was that the media review of

        POL's statements in the litigation was a separate exercise to deciding how POL

        should present its case.


138.4. Please explain what steps, if any, POL took in relation to its new

understanding of Fujitsu's access rights. In particular, did you take steps to

ensure that past convictions of SPMs were appropriately reviewed?


1446. I do not know what steps were taken and I did not give a direction that the

        business should consider the impact of the new information on past

        convictions. My assumption at the time was that if any material came to light

        that was relevant to past prosecutions, that material would be reviewed and, if

        necessary, disclosed by POL's legal team in accordance with POL's

        obligations. I would have expected to be told if POL had given any additional

        disclosure to convicted SPMs. (POL00110565), an early version of the

        response to Freeths on remote access, stated at paragraph 1.8.1 that: "Post

        Office is fully aware of its ongoing prosecution disclosure duties and will make

        such disclosures (if any) where appropriate." I believe I saw this, as in

        (POL00091420), Jane Macleod referred to the wider drafting around remote

        access "which I circulated to you earlier today".


138.5. To what extent did you discuss this matter with the Board, UKGI or

BEIS?


1447. This was an important matter for the Board to be briefed on, but I do not recall

        today how that briefing took place. Jane Macleod, Al Cameron and I were in
                                     Page 629 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      frequent contact with the Chairman and with the UKGI NED and the POL Board

      generally. In addition, the POL Board received oral updates on an ongoing

      basis on a number of matters. However, I have not yet seen any documents in

      the Inquiry disclosure to confirm that they were briefed on this issue.


139. Please consider UKGI00007544 (minutes of POL Audit, Risk and

Compliance Committee on 30 January 2017). Please describe the discussion of

the GLO proceedings in that meeting.


1448. I attended the meeting of ARC on 30 January 2017. The minutes of the meeting

      (UKGI00007544) record on page 6 under the heading "Legaf' that the GC,

      Jane Macleod, gave an update on Sparrow:


             "The Group Litigation Order has been heard by the Court. The initial

             hearing went as well could be expected, with the court requiring a high

             level of information from the claimants. The next procedural hearing

             would be in October but it was not expected that any substantive matters

             would be heard before next year."


1449. Although I do not recall what was discussed at the meeting, I have reviewed

      documents in the Inquiry's disclosure which provide context to Jane's report to

      the POL Board:


      a. (POL00006404) is a Bond Dickinson decision paper for a Steering Group

         meeting on 21 November 2016. The section entitled "Background" stated

         that the hearing for a GLO had been listed for 26 January 2017.


      b. (POL00025060) is a draft communication paper in relation to the application

         for a GLO. A copy of this document was emailed by Melanie Garfield to
                                   Page 630 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




       Andrew Parsons, Rodric Williams, and others on 20 January 2017

       (POL00025021 ). The first section of the document appears to be a draft

       section on the litigation for my CEO Report (presumably for the January

       2017 POL Board meeting). It stated that POL would consent to the litigation

       being heard under the GLO procedure, although there were a number of

       aspects of the procedure that needed to be agreed. It was anticipated that

       the SPMs would present any outcome as a victory for them. It indicated that

       the Board would be updated on the outcome of the hearing on 26 January

       2017 by email, with a verbal update to follow at the January 2017 POL

       Board meeting.


    c. On 25 January 2017, Jane emailed the POL Board an update on the

       application for a GLO, which was to be heard the next day (POL00103302).

       Jane informed the Board that this was a preliminary hearing to decide how

       the case should be managed. A hearing on the substance of the claims was

       not expected before 2018. POL expected the Court to make a GLO and

       POL agreed that this was the best way for the litigation to proceed. POL

       expected the SPMs to brief the media that the making of a GLO was a

       victory for them. POL intended to welcome the Court's decision as providing

       the best opportunity for matters to be heard and resolved but would not

       make any other comment. POL internal communications were prepared to

       deal with any adverse publicity. A verbal briefing on the outcome of the

       hearing and the way forward would be provided at the January 2017 POL

       Board meeting.


140. Please consider POL00021546 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 31


                               Page 631 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




 January 2017). Please describe the update provided to the Board.


1450. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 31 January 2017 (POL00021546)

      record on page 3 under the heading "CEO Reporf' that I introduced my CEO

      Report to the POL Board. My January 2017 CEO Report, to which the minutes

      refer, contains a section on the litigation on page 5 under the heading "Project

      Sparrow'' (POL00027200). The contents of this section are almost identical to

      Jane Macleod's email to the POL Board on 25 January 2017 (POL00103302).

      The minutes record that I informed the POL Board that the GLO had come to

      Court on 26 January 2017 and that detailed information would need to be

      provided for each claimant. The claim was likely to return to Court in the

      Autumn of 2017 for further procedural directions. I cannot recall any discussion

      at the meeting beyond what is set out in these documents.


141. Please consider POL00025375 (email from Tom Wechsler on 13 February

2017) and POL00025376 (Bond Dickinson note for Steering Group on 14

February 2017). Please explain to what extent you were involved with POL's

decision making in respect of its strategy to the GLO Proceedings.


1451. So far as I can recall, I was not involved in any discussions or decisions about

      POL's strategy for the GLO Proceedings. Bond Dickinson's decision paper on

      POL's strategy (POL00025376) was prepared for a Steering Group meeting on

      14 February 2017. It was not sent to me in the email chain on 13 February

      2017 (POL00025375) and I have no recollection of seeing the strategy decision

      paper or being briefed on its contents.


1452. I have a memory of being informed by Jane Macleod in a one-to-one

      discussion that POL would need go through a process of identifying lead
                                   Page 632 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      Claimants, but I cannot recall any details of this discussion or whether it

      happened in February 2017 or later.


142. Please consider POL00021547 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 28

March 2017) and POL00021438 (minutes of POL Audit, Risk and compliance

Committee on 18 May 2017). Please describe the discussion of the GLO

proceedings in these meetings.


1453. I do not recall the discussion at the POL Board meeting on 28 March 2017. The

      signed minutes of the meeting (POL00021547) contain a record of a "verbal

      update" on the litigation given by Jane Macleod (on page 9 under the heading

      "Sparrow Update"). In summary:


      a.   The application for a GLO was heard in January 2017 and the order for a

           GLO had been signed in the week commencing 20 March 2017. Freeths

           were continuing to advertise the GLO Proceedings to potential claimants,

           and the cut-off date for new claimants to apply to join was the end of June

           2017. The business expected more adverse publicity during this period.


      b.   The Claimants' General Particulars of Claim were expected imminently.

           These would set out in more formal terms the legal basis of the SPMs'

           claims. Once that document had been received, POL would have until the

           end of June 2017 to prepare and file its Defence. This would be followed

           by a Case Management Conference, expected in October 2017, at which

           the Court would determine how the claim should proceed.


      c.   Jane noted that the Claimants had not quantified their claims.


1454. The draft unsigned version of the minutes of the meeting at (POL00027188)
                                  Page 633 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      contain, on page 10, a more detailed summary of Jane's update than the

      signed minutes:


      a.   The draft minutes contain details of the potential size of the litigation

           group. A total of 187 individuals had replied to date. POL was in the

           process of retrieving files for the 81 confirmed members of the litigation

           group.


      b.   It was expected that cases would be tested on particular themes and that

           claims would be grouped together if they were sufficiently similar. Many

           of the claims concerned the nature of the contracts between POL and

           SPMs.


      c.   Although the claims had yet to be quantified, POL understood that SPMs

           had been told that if the Claimants succeeded against POL in Court, the

           first 21 million of any award would be used to pay their legal costs and

           other expenses. The draft minutes recorded the observation that: "This

           large expectation of claims value was highly inflated and what was legally

           enforceable would be much lower."


      d.   Jane confirmed that she was pleased with the current progress of the

           litigation and welcomed the Court process. She confirmed that a QC and

           junior were working on the matter and looking at risk. The Claimants'

           arguments based on implied contracts and a duty of good faith were not

           expected to succeed.


1455. As noted in the minutes at (POL00021438), I did not attend the ARC meeting

      on 18 May 2017. The only record of any discussion of the litigation at the

                                  Page 634 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      meeting is on page 5, which stated that the ARC discussed the litigation and

      Jane was asked to circulate a note to update the ARC on the funding of the

      litigation.


1456. On 22 May 2017, Alwen Lyons forwarded to the members of the ARC an email

      from Jane about the Claimants' litigation funding, noting that this was an action

      from the last meeting: (POL00103307). In summary:


      a.    The claim was funded by Therium Litigation Funding IC.


      b.    The Claimants had entered into individual Conditional Fee Agreements

            with Freeths. The details of these arrangements were confidential and

            had not been shared with POL.


      c.    The Claimants had the benefit of Legal Expenses Insurance (underwritten

            by QBE, CBL Insurance, and Sompo Canopius). POL had received

            redacted copies of the policy documents and was taking advice on

            whether they were adequate to provide security for POL's costs if POL

            was successful in its defence of the claim.


143. Please consider POL00021548 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 25

May 2017). Did the Board discuss the GLO Proceedings at this meeting?


1457. I do not recall whether the POL Board discussed the GLO Proceedings at its

      meeting on 25 May 2017. There is no record of a discussion in the minutes

      (POL00021548). I would be surprised if there was no discussion of the

      Claimants' litigation funding and its implications for the quantification of the

      claim. I can recall an ongoing concern, both at the ARC and at the POL Board,

      about the potential contingent liabilities arising from the claim. Since the ARC
                                   Page 635 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      had requested and received details of the Claimants' funding arrangements

      only a few days before the POL Board meeting, I believe there would have

      been some discussion about this issue, but I cannot recall it and I have not

      been shown any documents which could help refresh my memory.


144. Please consider POL00027182 (minutes of the General Executive

Committee meeting on 13 July 2017).


144.1. Please describe the discussion in respect of the GLO Proceedings at

this meeting.


1458. I have little independent recollection of the GE meeting on 13 July 2017. The

      minutes (POL00027182) recorded as Agenda Item 10 that Andrew Parsons

      from Bond Dickinson had joined the meeting and briefed the GE on POL's

      Defence and subsequent procedural steps. In summary, the minutes recorded

      that Andrew Parsons made the following points in his briefing:


      a.   He described the role of the Defence document in the proceedings and

           noted that it would be signed by Jane Macleod on POL's behalf.


      b.   The accuracy of the factual statements in the Defence had been reviewed

           internally by the POL staff with knowledge of the relevant facts.


      c.   He summarised the key themes in the litigation and the approach to those

           issues in the Defence.


      d.   The window for additional claimants to join the GLO Proceedings would

           close on 26 July 2017. Present indications suggested that there would be

           400-500 claimants in the group.


                                    Page 636 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




     e.    The Claimants would have an opportunity to respond to the Defence in a

           formal document called a Reply. This was due to be filed with the Court

           on 20 September 2017. While it was not mandatory for the Claimants to

           file a Reply, it was likely they would do so given the complexity of the

           case.


     f.    A Court hearing, called a Case Management Conference, would take

           place on 19 October 2017. The hearing would be an opportunity for POL

           and the Claimants to agree further steps leading up to trial, including the

           selection of individual SPMs' cases which the parties wished to put

           forward as Lead Cases, disclosure of documents, witness evidence, and

           expert evidence.


     g.    The Lead Cases would be examined in greater detail by the Court at mini-

           trials with the aim of using those cases to determine points of principle or

           fact that applied broadly to many cases. This would require the parties to

           set out their positions on the Lead Cases in further, case-specific

           Particulars of Claim, Defences, and Replies.


1459. (POL00110666) is a "Question and Answer'' document that Bond Dickinson

      prepared for the GE meeting on 13 July 2017. I do not know whether GE

      members were given copies of this document. Agenda Item 15 of the minutes

     contained the GE's feedback on the agenda items and the effectiveness of the

     sessions. There is an unattributed comment in this section: "Sparrow too long".

      I cannot remember who made this comment or whether it referred to Andrew

      Parsons' oral update or to a document.


1460. Paragraphs 2 to 4 of (POL00110666) contain an overview of POL's Defence
                                  Page 637 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      and how the legal team proposed to deal with two themes of the case in the

      Defence: (1) remote access and the integrity of Horizon (paragraph 3) and (2)

      the Claimants' attacks on the fairness of the contract between POL and SPMs,

      which took the form of attempts to imply additional terms into the contracts and

      allegations that the contracts contained unenforceable unfair terms (paragraph

      4 ). Paragraph 2 made a general point that the generic structure of the claim

      made it difficult to ascertain the claims and the risks to POL, but provided some

      high-level observations on the merits:


      a. Bond Dickinson advised that the Claimants faced an uphill battle to have

         POL's standard terms overturned and replaced with new terms.


      b. They were more confident about the robust nature of Horizon and the

         accuracy of the data it held, following further work by Deloitte and Fujitsu.


      c. The greatest area of concern was the operation of POL's suspense

         accounts. The Claimants asserted that branch losses may have been

         caused by the incorrect operation of such accounts. Preliminary work by

         Deloitte had highlighted that there were many accounts that could be

         operated as suspense accounts and the controls around these accounts

         were weak. Further work was underway but would not be completed by the

         time the Defence was due to be filed.


1461. Given that (POL00110666) appears to have been produced for the GE meeting

      on 13 July 2017, I believe it is fair to assume that Andrew Parsons' oral

      explanation of the Defence, as recorded in the minutes, was based on this

      document.


                                   Page 638 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1462. The minutes recorded that the outcome of the Sparrow briefing was that the

      GE requested that the GE and the POL Board should be given a further update

      after the Case Management Conference. This update should include an

      assessment of the potential impact on POL of the range of possible litigation

      outcomes on POL and POL's business operations, based on the issues in the

      Lead Cases.


144.2. What was your understanding at that point on the purpose and meaning

of POL's Defence?


1463. My understanding of the purpose of POL's Defence was that it was the formal

      Court document in which POL set out its factual and legal case in response to

      the claims.


1464. My understanding at this point of the meaning of POL's Defence was derived

      from Andrew Parsons' update to the GE at the meeting on 13 July 2017, which

      I believe was very likely to have been based on the "Question and Answer''

      document that Bond Dickinson prepared for that meeting (POL00110666).


144.3. Please set out the steps you took to satisfy yourself that POL's General

Counsel would be in a position to certify the Defence as true on behalf of the

company.


1465.One point made by Andrew Parsons at the GE meeting on 13 July 2017 that I

      do remember was that the Defence would be signed by Jane Macleod, as

      POL's GC, to verify that it was true. I knew of course that neither Jane nor any

      other single individual at POL had direct knowledge of all the factual matters

      covered in the Defence: that is why, as I have said, the membership of the

                                  Page 639 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      Steering Group was drawn from the various functions within POL which were

      affected by the claim. I would have been reassured at the time by Andrew

      Parsons' briefing that the accuracy of the factual statements in the Defence

      would be reviewed by POL staff with knowledge of the relevant facts. I recall

      as a further challenge and support to Jane, that I emphasised this point to the

      GE. I asked GE directors to check with senior colleagues from their teams who

      sat on the Litigation Steering Group, that those individuals were comfortable

      with the accuracy of the factual statements.


145. Please consider POL00003340 (letter from Bond Dickinson to Freeths

dated 18 July 2017 enclosing POL's Generic Defence and Counterclaim).


145.1. Did you review the Generic Defence and Counterclaim before it was

served on the claimants? If not, when did you first review it?


1466.1 have described the receipt by POL of the Claim Form and Particulars of Claim,

      and the Amended Generic Particulars of Claim. The Inquiry has asked a series

      of questions about the Generic Defence and Counterclaim. I do not recall if I

      read the Generic Defence and Counterclaim (POL00003340) before it was

      served on the Claimants. I know that I had been briefed on the counterclaim,

      as Jane Macleod had to explain to me what a counterclaim was (she did the

      same for the GE and Board I believe - although currently I cannot see any

      documentation on the latter) and POL had received advice that it should lodge

      a counterclaim.


1467.1 do recall reading the Generic Defence and Counterclaim for a meeting with

      Anthony de Garr Robinson QC, but this was after the document had been

      signed and served on the Claimants. The document was served on 18 July
                                  Page 640 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




     2017. I see that I was sent a copy of the "Final Version Defence" by Jane

     Macleod on 19 July 2017 (POL00249979). I do not recall if I read the Defence

     that day but I do remember reading it in preparation for a meeting with Anthony

     de Garr Robinson QC, which took place on 29 September 2017.


1468.1 am confident in my memory for a variety of reasons. First, I remember meeting

     Anthony de Garr Robinson QC quite well, and I remember that I had a number

     of questions on legal terminology that I wanted him to help me understand.

     Second, I note from documents I have seen that this meeting was in

     September, not earlier: (POL00028055) is an email from Andrew Parsons to

     Jane Macleod on 28 September 2017 which arranges the meeting for the

     following day and says, indicating that Anthony de Garr Robinson QC and I

     had not met before, that Andrew Parsons has "prepped Tony on Paula and Al's

     respective styles". Jane attended the meeting in case any issues arose which

     needed to be followed up, but she did not think the purpose of the meeting was

     to generate "actions" (POL00024459).


1469.1 knew that the Generic Defence and Counterclaim were the product of a

     considerable amount of work undertaken by POL's legal team in conjunction

     with an experienced solicitor and counsel team. The Steering Group was

     overseeing the verification of the details.


1470. The Inquiry has asked me five specific questions as to particular paragraphs of

     the Generic Defence and Counterclaim, in each case asking me the basis on

     which POL pleaded that matter. Given that I did not read or approve the

     Generic Defence and Counterclaim before it was signed, I do not expect that

     the Inquiry wants me to speculate as to the reasons that certain matters were

                                   Page 641 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




     pleaded. I therefore have not answered each of Questions 145.2 - 145.6.


145.2. Please consider paragraphs 43(1) to (3). Please explain the basis on

which POL pleaded that "The blocked value is not (and is not treated as) a debt

due to Post Office".


145.3. Please consider paragraph 48(3)(b). Please explain the basis on which

POL denied that Fujitsu "edited or deleted specific items of transaction data".


145.4. Please consider paragraph 48(3)(c). Please explain the basis on which

POL pleaded that Fujitsu had not implemented fixes that had affected the

reliability of accounting balances, statements or reports.


145.5. Please consider paragraph 48(4). Please explain the basis on which POL

pleaded that "To the best of Post Office's knowledge and belief, there is no

issue in the Known Error Log that could affect the accuracy of a branch's

accounts or the secure transmission and storage of transaction data".


145.6. Please consider paragraph 57(4). Please explain the basis on which POL

pleaded that "To have abused those rights so as to alter branch transaction

data and conceal that this has happened would be an extraordinarily difficult

thing to do, involving complex steps ... which would regire months of planning

and an exceptional level of technical expertise. Post Office has never

consented to the use of privileged user rights to alter branch data and, to the

best of its information and belief, these rights have never been used for this

purpose".


145.7. Did you believe the contents of the Generic Defence and Counterclaim

to be true? How did you and POL satisfy yourself that it was?
                                Page 642 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1471. The Generic Defence and Counterclaim was the product of the delegated

     function of the Steering Group (at which Tom Wechsler was effectively my

     proxy) and its experts and external advice from Bond Dickinson and leading

     and junior counsel. I know also that input from Deloitte and Fujitsu was

     obtained where it was required (see (POl00024489)). The minutes of the

     Group Executive Meeting on 13 July 2017 record that Andrew Parsons joined

     the meeting and confirmed that the accuracy of the factual statements included

     in the document had been reviewed internally by those POL staff with

     knowledge of the relevant facts (POl00027182).


145.8. Please explain the reasons for POL making a counterclaim.


1472. The Counterclaim was set out page 73 of the Generic Defence and

     Counterclaim. This was a claim in respect of any Claimants who were liable for

     a shortfall and / or a loss of cash and / or stock which POL had not at that time

     recovered in full. The Inquiry has asked the reasons for making this

     counterclaim.


14 73.1 note that the advantages and disadvantages of this approach were set out in

     advice from     Bond Dickinson, in the form of a "decision" document

     (POl00006360). There is no date on the face of this document and on the

     Inquiry's Relativity system it is marked as being dated 8 July 2016, which

     cannot be right. However, from the context I understand that it was probably

     written in May 2017. I have seen an email dated 17 May 2017 from Andrew

     Parsons to Mark Underwood and Rodric Williams attaching a draft decision

     paper regarding whether POL should be advancing counterclaims.


1474. Decision 4 in the document is headed "Does Post Office lodge counterclaims
                                  Page 643 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




     against Claimants who have outstanding debts?" The document then sets out

     a summary:


               "There are 29 claimants who owe outstanding debts to Post Office,

               with total cumulative debt at just under 1 m. Approximately 300k has

               been "written off" by Post Office already so the total outstanding debt

               on Post Office's books is just under 700k".


1475. Bond Dickinson recommended that the counterclaim should be pursued,

     having weighed up the merits and demerits of the position. I understand that

     the purpose of this was so that it could be decided by the Steering Group.


1476.1 did not have any involvement in the Steering Group discussions and

     decisions. However, as I say above, I do recall a one-to-one conversation with

     Jane Macleod in which we discussed this. The conversation probably took

     place before the Generic Defence and Counterclaim was signed, but I cannot

     remember this for sure.


1477.1 recall Jane telling me the pros and cons of making a counterclaim and telling

     me that the legal advice which POL had received was that a counterclaim

     should be included. Although this was presented primarily as a legal and

     strategic question by Bond Dickinson, it was also a question of people-

     management and, as recognised by Bond Dickinson, had the potential to show

     that POL was "acting oppressively''.


1478.Jane probably anticipated, quite rightly, that I would have been instinctively

     uncomfortable with the idea of POL making claims against its SPMs. Therefore,

     I expect that the reason that Jane would have told me about the decision of the

                                  Page 644 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




     Steering Group was so that I could have the opportunity to comment.


1479. The reason I think that this is likely to have been before the Generic Defence

     and Counterclaim was signed is because Jane would have wanted to give me

     the chance to object, rather than telling me after the fact.


1480.Although I cannot remember the discussion in any detail, I believe that Jane is

     likely to have told me that the Steering Group had made a decision. Obviously

     if I had firmly objected then I could, and would, have said so. However, like the

     Steering Group, I gave proper consideration to strong advice where it was

     given.


146. Please consider POL00021549 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 25 July

2017).


146.1. Did the Board discuss the GLO Proceedings at this meeting?


1481. There is nothing in the minutes which I have seen to indicate that the POL

     Board discussed the GLO proceedings. In light of the fact that the Generic

     Defence and Counterclaim had been considered by the GE on 13 July there is

     little else which would have fallen to be discussed (or, indeed, decided) by the

     POL Board on 25 July 2017. It is possible that Jane Macleod had already

     agreed with Tim Parker, whom she met regularly, that a full discussion would

     take place around the time of the CMG.


146.2. Please explain the background and reasoning for the decision "not to

prosecute agents if they cou Id use the Horizon system as a defence". Why was

this to be reconsidered once Deloitte had completed its work?



                                  Page 645 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1482. The Inquiry has asked me to comment on part of paragraph 17/56 (e) in the 25

     July 2017 minutes (POL00021549). The whole paragraph reads:


             "The CEO explained that the decision not to prosecute agents if they

             could use the Horizon system as a defence would be reconsidered once

             Deloitte had completed their work on Horizon and could be used in court

             as an expert witness."


1483. The reason that this was to be reconsidered once Deloitte had completed their

     work was simply because, at the time, POL could not prosecute SPMRs where

      no expert witness evidence was available. Without an expert to vouch for

      Horizon, prosecutions were a non-starter. POL had paused most prosecutions

      in cases where there was an issue with the Horizon system. Deloitte was part

      of that process in terms of validating and answering any questions in respect

      of the system.


1484. Once Deloitte had completed its review and, if appropriate, confirmed the

      integrity of Horizon, then POL would come back to the question of whether to

      prosecute SPMs and consider what expert evidence might be relied upon.


1485.1 think there may be a typo in the minutes. I think that the last sentence perhaps

      should read " ... once Deloitte had completed their work on Horizon and could

      be used in court by an expert witness" (emphasis added for clarity). I do not

      recall it being the proposal that Deloitte would act as an expert witness, but

      rather that another expert witness might give evidence relying upon the report.

     An earlier email from Andrew Parsons, in June 2016, states:


             "Deloitte will remain directly engaged by POL as an expert investigator.

                                   Page 646 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




            We've confirmed to Mark that we do not intend at this stage to engage

            Deloitte as an expert witness in Court. This apparently makes things

            much easier on his side when it comes to "risk management". I have

            however said that Defoitte's work may be passed to another expert

            witness at some stage so that they could re-use the factual

            investigations conducted by Defoitte." (at page 2 of (POL00041238))


1486. POL would not want to prosecute somebody if it could not rely on Horizon data.

     We believed that Horizon data was reliable, but to have assurance on this the

     Deloitte work was necessary.


147 Please consider POL00006380 (Bond Dickinson note on general strategy

for Steering Group meeting on 11 September 2017), POL00006503 (Bond

Dickinson note on legal strategy options), POL00041485 (email from Jane

Mcleod to you and others on 21 September 2017), POL00041486 (attachment

to the prior email), POL00021550 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 26

September 2017), POL00006384 (Amy Prime's email to Andrew Parson's on 28

September 2017) and POL00006499 (Andrew Parsons email to Jane Macleod

on 28 September 2017).


147.1 To what extent were you involved in POL's decision making on strategy

in the GLO at this point?


1487.1 was involved in the decision-making strategy to the extent that the POL Board

     and I signed off the strategy that was set at the PSLG meeting on 11

     September 2017 for the Case Management Conference (see Bond Dickinson's

     note of that date (POL00006380)).


                                  Page 647 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1488.A summary of the advice given to POL in the PSLG by Bond Dickinson was

     provided in table form. I know that I saw that document, because a version with

     my handwritten notes has been disclosed by the Inquiry (POL00107163). The

     note describes Bond Dickinson's advices to POL on five strategic options for

     the future management of the GLO, together with its recommendations in each

     regard. I made those notes in a meeting with Anthony de Gaar Robinson QC.

     I discuss the meeting, which took place on 27 September 2017, at paragraphs

     1494 and 1495. I had also seen a slightly amended version, which had been

     discussed at the POL Board the day before.


1489.On 16 September 2017, I spoke with Al Cameron, Kevin Gilliland and others,

     following which it was agreed that a briefing paper would be prepared for the

     POL Board (including advice from Andrew Parsons) on litigation options. I know

     the date of the meeting from (POL00024660). I know the purpose and content

     of the meeting from (POL00024700):


              1.       "Following the Steering Group last Monday, we briefed Paula, Al

              and Kevin on the legal advice for the proposed strategy for the CMG

              in particular the advice we should proactively address the contractual

              issues. As a result of that briefing, and to support the advice, Tom M

              and I were asked to:


                        developed some options that we could consider to address the

                         risks should the postmasters be successful in arguing that

                         some or all of the additional duties should be implied into the

                         contract, and


                        brief the Board on the legal risks at the Board meeting on
                                     Page 648 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




                          Tuesday."


1490. Jane Macleod prepared a first draft of this briefing document and circulated it

      to Thomas Moran and Andrew Parsons. Andrew Parsons provided comments,

      as did Thomas Moran (POL00024660). Discussion between Jane, Andrew and

      Tom continued for a few days (POL00024690).


1491. I received the briefing paper - as did Al Cameron and Kevin Gilliland - at 18:04

      on 21 September 2017 (POl00041485). The cover email described that the

      paper had a:


                   2.   "summary of options which we discussed on Monday (Appendix

                   1), as well as a summary of the duties which Freeths seek to imply,

                   and the possible actions that Post Office could take as a result of an

                   adverse decision (Appendix 2).


                   3.   I would then propose to use the paper as speaking notes at the

                   Board on Tuesday to explain the rationale for the decision."


1492. I note from the language which Jane used in that email ("to explain the rationale

      for the decision") that the purpose of the briefing paper was to explain the

      Steering Group's decision to us, including a detailed explanation of their

      rationale.


1493. The paper is (POl00041486). Consistent with the wording of Jane's email, the

      "input sought" in the paper from the POL Board was:


                   4.   "The Board is asked to endorse the recommended strategy and

                   the risks inherent in it."

                                        Page 649 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




1494.The POL Board meeting took place on 26 September 2017 as planned. The

     minutes at 17/68 record this under "Litigation Update":


              (a) "The Board received a verbal update on the Postmaster Litigation

                  from the General Counsel, noting that the Case Management

                  Conference would be held on 19 October, and the outcome of the

                  CMG would be directions given by the Court as to the conduct of

                  the case over the next 12-18 months. There were key strategic

                  issues to be decided as to Post Office's preference for the

                  sequence in which the legal arguments were to be address, and

                  Post Office had receive (sic) legal advice as to the preferred

                  sequence.


                  The Board discussed the advice and its implications, and

                  approved the proposed strategy."


1495. I had wanted to speak to Anthony de Garr Robinson QC before the POL Board

     meeting on Tuesday 26 September 2017 to ensure that I understood

     everything as the litigation progressed. However, he was not available to meet

     me until 29 September 2017. Although this meeting was after the POL Board

     meeting, it was still before the Case Management Conference, so it would have

     been possible to revisit the decision of the POL Board, if appropriate.


147.2 Please consider "Our target audience is therefore Freeths, the funder

and the insurers who will adopt a cold, logical assessment of whether they will

get a pay-out, rather than the Claimants who may wish to fight on principle

regardless of merit". Did this summarise POl's approach to the GlO

Proceedings? If so, please explain why that was an appropriate approach in
                                 Page 650 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




circumstances where the claimants included SPMs who had been convicted

on the basis of data generated by Horizon, which they claimed lacked integrity.


1496.1 am asked whether POL's approach to the GLO proceedings can be

       summarised as "our target audience is therefore Freeths, the funders and the

       insurers who will adopt a cold, logical assessment of whether they will get a

       pay-out, rather than the Claimants who may wish to fight on principle

       regardless of merit."


1497. These words are taken from a note prepared by Bond Dickinson for Steering

       Group for their meeting on 11 September 2017 (POL00006380). These words

       were not included in the summary table of options which I was provided with,

       nor in Jane Macleod's note to the POL Board, in advance of the 26 September

       2017 meeting.


1498. In full context, the quotation is this:


              "4.2 This leads us to the view that, in the fullness of time, Post Office

              may need to address each of the 522 claims individually given the

              diversity of their circumstances. Taking every case to a full conclusion

              through the litigation process is unattractive as it would take years and

              the costs would be extremely high.


              4.3 We believe the better solution is to try to force the Claimants into a

              collective position where they will either abandon the claims or seek a

              reasonable settlement. ft should be remembered that the claims are

              financially supported by Freeths (whose fees are at feast partially

              conditional on winning), a third party funder and insurers. Without this

                                     Page 651 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




            support these proceedings would not have been possible. Alf three

            entities will likely have the power to pull their support if the merits of the

            case drop below a certain level. Our target audience Is therefore

            Freeths, the funder and the insurers who will adopt a cold, logical

            assessment of whether they will get a pay-out, rather than the Claimants

            who may wish to fight on principle regardless of merit."


1499. The summary table of options (POl00107163) had this similarity: in respect of

     "Option 3", which was recommended by Bond Dickinson in conjunction with

     "Option 2", it said "some early victories might shake the confidence of the

     Claimants and their litigation funder". However, this was one of four

     advantages identified for Option 3, with three further advantages being

     identified for Option 2.


1500.1 therefore do not think that it is accurate to say that the short quotation

     identified by the Inquiry represents POL's approach to the GLO Proceedings.

     First, I was not involved in the Steering Group discussion in September 2017

     at which this featured in a longer advice document provided to them by external

     lawyers and so I do not know the extent to which it featured in its decision

     making.


1501. However, POL did intend to take steps to resolve the GLO quickly. This had

     the dual effect of reducing costs and the draw on staff time (and the impact on

     on-going business more generally), and also seeking to avoid this being drawn

     out which would be unfair and unhelpful for the SPMs. There was also a

     particular consideration that this came at a time when POL wished to recruit

     more SPMRs to run new post office branches, but with ongoing litigation this

                                   Page 652 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      prospect was unattractive for new recruits. To the extent that the words quoted

      by the Inquiry in Question 147.2 indicate that POL wished to seek a quick

      resolution of the GLO Proceedings, I would agree that this was the strategy

      followed by the business.


1502. My understanding of POL's strategy was what was set out in the summary table

      of options (POL00107163) and Jane's briefing note for the POL Board

      (POL00041486). This is borne out in the POL Board minutes of 26 September

      2017 which approved this description of the strategy.


147.3 What were your views on Bond Dickinson's suggestion that POL would

be in a "very difficult commercial position" if the SPMs' arguments on the terms

of the relevant contract were upheld? In particular,


1503. Bond Dickinson described at 4.8.3 of its 11 September 2017 note (which was

      prepared for the Steering Group and not the POL Board) (POL00006380):


              "Moreover, the Claimants' arguments on the postmaster contracts are

              not without merit. There is a chance that they might be successful, in

              which case Post Office would be left in a very difficult commercial

              position (see our previous advice on possible worst case outcomes)."


1504. The Inquiry asks whether I agreed with this. I do not recall seeing this

      document,     as      say   above.   However,    both   (POL00107163)      and

      (POL00041486) include similar wording. At page 1 of (POL00107163), which

      says:


              "The Claimants' arguments on the postmaster contracts are not without

              merit. There is a chance that they might be successful, in which case
                                  Page 653 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




            Post Office would be left in a very difficult commercial position (see our

            previous advice on possible worst case outcomes and the possibility of

            an existential crisis for Post Office)."


1505. (POl00041486), at page 5, says:


               "The Claimants' arguments on the postmaster contracts are not

               without merit. There is a chance that they might be successful, in

               which case Post Office would be left in a very difficult commercial

               position."


1506. The POL Board and I approved this strategy. I agreed that this part of Jane's

     paper was an accurate observation.


147.3.1 Please address the perceived issues arising from the alleged term that

sought "to reverse the burden of proof so as to make Post Office responsible

for investigating shortfalls".


147.3.2 Please set out the basis on which it was considered fair for SPMs to

investigate shortfalls in circumstances where they alleged that the Horizon IT

System caused the discrepancy.


1507. The Inquiry asks me to consider part of paragraph 9 in Jane Macleod's paper

     (POl00041486) and to consider the fairness of SPMs investigating shortfalls.

     The full paragraph reads:


            "We believe that the most damaging group of terms sought to be implied

            are those that seek to reverse the burden of proof so as to make Post

            Office responsible for investigating shortfalls. Post Office's contention is


                                   Page 654 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




             that only the Postmaster can know what happens in branch, such that

             the Postmaster is best placed to deal with a shorlfall. This is parlicularly

             the case where postmasters actively seek to conceal losses."


1508. Knowing now that the Horizon system was not reliable, I accept entirely that it

     was not fair on SPMs to require them to prove that Horizon (and therefore POL)

     was responsible for shortfalls. However, as I understood matters at the time,

     there was a process in place for SPMs to raise disputes with the figures

     displayed and produced by Horizon, and I understood that SPMs had access

     to all of the information they needed about their business (for example, by

     cashing up properly each day through receipts kept in branches, viewing

     transaction log data and reports produced by Horizon) to allow them to identify

     where any shortfalls arose and the reasons for those shortfalls.


1509.1 also understood that POL had the data necessary to investigate the cases

     where issues were raised by SPMs through agreed processes. If I had

     personally looked at that data it would not have made any sense to me and I

     would not have known whether I had all the required data or not, because I did

     not have that technical expertise. Moreover, it was not my personal job to

     investigate shortfalls. I would not have had the time to, even if I did have the

     training.


147.4 Please consider your talking point: "Would the court consider the impact

of the doomsday decision in particular, the impact on public funds and POL

business, when making a decision". Did you consider that POL's business

model was more important than the merits of the SPMs claims?


1510.On 28 September 2017, Andrew Parsons sent a short email (written by Jane
                                   Page 655 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




     Macleod) of my "talking points ... for tomorrow's meeting" to junior counsel.

     These included "would the court consider the impact of the doomsday decision

     in particular, the impact on public funds and POL business, when making a

     decision" (POL00028063 ).


1511.1 have been shown a further email between Andrew and Jane that evening

     which sets out from Anthony de Garr Robinson QC "what he plans to cover

     tomorrow with Paula/ Al" (POL00006499).


1512. Following on from the "doomsday" note, Mr. de Garr Robinson QC intended to

     address:


                "3. Mood music


                5.   "a. We need to weave into the story that losing on the "burden of

                proof" issue would be disastrous for POL, but this needs to be done

                with great care and not over-exaggerated."


1513. The Inquiry has asked whether POL considered that its business model was

     more important than the merits of the SPMs' claims.


1514.My question about "doomsday" was a question as a non-lawyer to Leading

     Counsel, asking an open question so that I could understand the process. I

     wanted to know what the Court could and could not (and would / would not)

     take into account. I asked the question because I did not know the scope of the

     decision which the Court would make. I wanted a lawyer to explain this to me

     so that I could then form a more informed view on how the facts could be used

     in that framework.



                                   Page 656 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1515.1 was aware that there was a strong public interest in the survival of Post Offices

      because of their value to communities throughout the country. I could also see

      that POL could be in a very difficult commercial situation as a result of the

      litigation. I knew the amount of cash which POL had in the community in

      branches: if the Court held that the contract with SPMs was not enforceable in

      respect of an SPM's liability, I was concerned as to the viability of the business,

      the network of Post Offices and the provision of cash into communities. Taking

      those matters together, I wanted to understand how the Court would respond.


147.5 What were your views on settling with the SPMs at this stage?


1516.1 am asked about my views on settling with SPMs at this stage: I relied on legal

      advice as to what was best for the business; this advice informed my views

      heavily. Notwithstanding my view as to what was best for the business, and

      therefore what view I ought to hold as CEO of the organisation, I did personally

      find it uncomfortable for the business to be involved in litigation of this nature

      with individual SPMs. This was a view I expressed to Jane on at least two

      occasions. However, ultimately, that was just one factor which I (and the

      advisers to POL) had to weigh in the balance.


147.6 Please set out the discussion on the various litigation options at the

Board meeting on 26 September 2017.


1517.1 do not recall the discussion on 26 September 2017 and so I am led by the

      documents. I can speculate as to what is likely to have happened, but I am not

      able to say so conclusively.


1518.1 have seen that Jane's briefing paper was not included in the POL Board pack

                                     Page 657 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      and agenda, and it does not say in the minutes that the POL Board considered

      Jane's paper and/ or that the paper was noted. I have also seen that I saw the

      paper on 21 September 2017, but it was not sent to the whole POL Board on

      that date (POl00041485). The format of the paper is precisely what would be

      expected for a POL Board meeting and is consistent with training which POL

      staff (including, I think, Jane) had undertaken on how POL Board papers should

      be structured and presented. This makes it likely that Jane gave copies to the

      POL Board, either by turning up with copies or by providing copies through the

      reading room. Finally, I note that Jane said in her email to me on 21 September

      2017 that she would use the paper as "speaking notes" in the POL Board

      meeting.


1519. Taking those matters together, I think it is likely that Jane brought copies of the

      briefing paper (POl00041486) to the POL Board meeting and talked the POL

      Board through it. As the POL Board had not received a copy beforehand, it

      would not have had the time to consider it, hence the item is described as a

      verbal update.


1520.1 am not able to recall the nature of the discussion beyond what is in the

      minutes.


147.7 Please identify any legal advice you or the Board relied on when

considering this decision.


1521. The POL Board received legal advice through the paper which Jane had

      prepared. Seeing the paper trail in preparing this witness statement, I know (as

      I understood at the time, although without the specific detail) that this itself was

      prepared by reference to legal advice from Bond Dickinson and counsel
                                    Page 658 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




      instructed in the litigation.


1522. As set out above, I met Mr. de Garr Robinson QC shortly after the POL Board

      meeting but before the Case Management Conference. If I had been told

      anything in that meeting or had changed my view on any matters approved by

      the POL Board, I would have had no reason not to re-open the discussion; it

      would not have been too late.


148. Please consider POL00028070 (Deloitte's 'Bramble' - Draft Report dated

3 October 2017).


148.1. When did you read this report?


1523. I knew that Deloitte had been commissioned to carry out a piece of work on

      Horizon as a result of the Parker Review, and the recommendations of the

      barristers which Jane Macleod had emailed to me on 22 January 2016

      (POL00103110).


1524. I can see from the documents, that I was given a broad understanding of what

      Deloitte's work entailed. In her email to me on 23 May 2016 (POL00103200),

      Jane Macleod stated that Deloitte were currently undertaking work to address

      the recommendations and that one of the workstreams that was already

      underway was whether it was possible for POL or Fujitsu to remotely alter

      branch transactions without this being visible to the SPM. On 24 July 2016,

      Jane emailed me to give forewarning that there might be adverse publicity

      arising from POL's response to the Claimants' letter before claim, which POL

      was scheduled to send on 29 July 2016 (POL00041258). Jane stated that as

      a result of the work carried out by Deloitte, POL would flag that there was a

                                      Page 659 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      limited number of individuals at Fujitsu who had super-user rights to Horizon,

      which could only be used in limited circumstances. I can also see from the

      minutes of the POL Board meeting on 25 July 2017 (at page 4 of

      (POL00021549)) that I explained at the meeting that "the decision not to

      prosecute agents if they could use the Horizon system as a defence would be

      reconsidered once Deloitte had completed their work on Horizon and could be

      used in court as an expert witness."


1525. I do not believe that I saw any version of Deloitte's Project Bramble report until

      after I had left POL. I have not seen any documents in the disclosure to date to

      suggest that I was sent the version referred by the Inquiry, nor any version of

      the Project Bramble report, while I was at POL.


148.2. Please explain your views on the report when you read it. in particular

paragraphs 1.4.2.5 - 1.4.2.11, 1.4.3.3, 1.6.1 - 1.6.2. 148.3. With whom did you

share I discuss the findings of this report?


1526. Please see my answer to Question 148.1.


148.3. With whom did you share I discuss the findings of this report?


1527. Please see my answer to Question 148.1.


148.4. Please set out what further action POL took as a consequence of the

findings of this draft report.


1528.1 do not know what action POL took as a consequence of the findings of the

      draft report.


149. Please consider POL00021551 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 31
                                    Page 660 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




October 2017).


149.1. Please describe what update was given to the Board on the GLO

proceedings.


1529. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 31 October 2017 (POL00021551)

      do not contain any discussion of the GLO Proceedings. My CEO Report for the

      meeting (starting at page 20 of (POL00103898)) contained an update (on page

      26) about the Case Management Conference and the resulting workstreams

      (which focussed on disclosure, identifying the Lead Claimants, and planning

      and preparatory work for trial). The report also stated that a verbal update

      would be provided to the POL Board at its 31 October 2017 meeting. I cannot

      recall if an update was in fact given.


149.2. Did the Board discuss the draft Project Bramble report by Deloitte? If

not, why not?


1530.1 have no memory of the POL Board discussing the draft Project Bramble report

      on 31 October 2017. I am very doubtful that the report was discussed, as there

      is no briefing on the report in the meeting pack at (POL00103898).


150. Please consider POL00024317 (email from Mark Underwood on 1

November 2017), POL00024318 (agenda), POL00024323 (Bond Dickinson

noting paper on Deloitte reports) and POL00024322 (Bond Dickinson noting

paper on future work). Please set out your involvement with the decisions in

respect of litigation strategy following the CMC.


1531. As I have already mentioned, the management of the litigation, including

      strategic decision-making, was delegated by the GE to the Steering Group. The
                                   Page 661 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      usual position was that I did not become involved in matters within the mandate

      of the Steering Group, unless either Jane Macleod or Tom Moran decided to

      escalate an issue to me, or to the GE or the POL Board. Further, documents

      prepared for the Steering Group were not generally shared outside the Steering

      Group. Mark Davies' email on 1 November 2017 (POL00024317) (to which

      POL00024318; POL00024323; and POL00024322 were attachments) was an

      email to the Steering Group and its secretariat to circulate the documents for a

      meeting on 3 November 2017. These documents were not sent to me, and I

      would not have expected them to be sent to me.


1532. An issue which did come to me after the Case Management Conference was

      how POL should manage the risk that Mr. de Garr Robinson QC, might not be

      available for the first trial in the GLO Proceedings (the Common Issues Trial).


1533. The background is that, at the Case Management Conference on 19 October

      2017, Fraser J had made an order that the Common Issues Trial would take

      place over 20 days starting on 5 November 2018. Mr. de Garr Robinson QC

      had a pre-existing diary commitment for another trial for another client. This

      might have ruled him out from representing POL at the Common Issues Trial.

      I understand that, on 19 October and 25 October 2017, Fraser J heard an

      application by POL to delay the Common Issues Trial to accommodate Mr. de

      Garr Robinson QC's availability. The Judge refused to move the trial for the

      reasons he set out in his judgment dated 10 November 2017, in Alan Bates &

      Others v Post Office Limited [2017] EWHC 2844 (QB) (POL00004167).


1534. Mr. de Garr Robinson QC'S availability was initially considered at Steering

      Group level. One of the documents circulated by Mark Davies to the Steering

                                  Page 662 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




      Group on 1 November 2017 in his email at (POL00024317) was a decision

      paper by Bond Dickinson on "How should Post Office address Counsel's

      availability for trial?" (POL00006435). Bond Dickinson outlined four options and

      recommended that POL should bring onboard a new senior junior, Jamie

      Goldsmith. This would ensure that POL would have a senior counsel available

      until trial, whether or not Mr. de Garr Robinson QC could act for POL at the

      trial.




1535. The Bond Dickinson paper on counsel's availability was discussed in the email

      thread at (POL00024311). On 2 November2017 at 18:16, Tom Moran emailed

      Jane Macleod, Mark Underwood, Rodric Williams, and Andrew Parsons with

      his comments, as he was unable to attend the Steering Group meeting on 3

      November 2017. He agreed with Bond Dickinson's recommendation to engage

      Jamie Goldsmith, but added:


           " .. .from now on in this case I think we should have a Steering Group rule

               which means that, whenever we choose an option which is not the most

           conservative we should formally notify Paula and note to GE. This is to get

           buy-in and avoid any future challenge that we have made short-term 'false

               economies'. In this instance I do not [sic] this recommendation is such."


1536.Jane replied to Tom Moran on 3 November 2017 at 09:14 in the same URN:


                 "Just to be clear - Paula was briefed on the outcome of the CMG

                 including the risk to Tony's availability, immediately after the CMG,

                 however I have not had the chance to update her with the results of the

                                       Page 663 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




              2nd application last week (which confirmed that the hearing would go

              ahead in November irrespective of Tony's availability and that the judge

              would have made that decision in any event), nor was the CMG

              discussed at the Board on Tuesday (although Paula's CEO's report

              suggested it would be).


              I have a call with Paula this afternoon and will take her through the

              updated position, however I think we need to make a recommendation,

              and having been briefed on this previously, I recommend appointing a

              senior junior now (Jamie Goldsmith) and that we wait until the outcome

              of Tony's trial in May before making a decision on replacing him, noting

              that we have Daniel Toledano on standby."


1537. At 16:05 on 3 November 2017, Jane Macleod emailed Andrew Parsons,

     Rodric Williams, and Mark Underwood to update them on a conversation she

     had just had with me (POL00024346). Jane reported that I was very nervous

     about taking any risk on Mr. de Garr Robinson QC not being available and that

     I wanted to know why we would not just change QC immediately. Jane went

     on:


           "I have said that there is a lot to do over the next few months and changing

           to a new counsel at this point would be problematic; timing is slightly quieter

           in May (when we would find out) and we believe there is sufficient time to

           get Daniel embedded then (although clearly there is risk with him

           continuing to be available).


           Paula would like a further briefing - I suggest that we do a 'pros and cons'

           based on the WBD paper we looked at this morning. She is concerned that
                                    Page 664 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




          we will need to explain this at the November board and wants to make sure

          we have the right answers."


1538. I do not remember any details of the conversations with me that Jane

      summarised in her emails, but I have no doubt that Jane's emails were

      accurate. I recall being concerned that POL should have clarity on the barrister

      who would represent it at the Common Issues Trial, and that whoever that

      person was should be fully engaged and fully prepared.


1539. Returning to the email thread at (POL00024346), Andrew Parsons replied to

      Jane at 16:16 on 3 November 2017 saying that Bond Dickinson would prepare

      a "pros and cons" paper. Rodric Williams replied at 17:33. In his view, one of

      the big pros for keeping Mr. de Garr Robinson QC was that he had settled the

      pleadings and set out POL's strategy for trial. Any new QC would have their

      own views on how the case should be shaped.


1540. Andrew Parsons replied on 5 November 2017 in the same URN. Andrew

      Parsons wrote that bringing in new counsel would inevitably shift the emphasis

      of POL's defence in ways which would be difficult to predict. Although the Court

      would be able to manage, and would understand a shift in approach following

      a change of counsel, Andrew Parsons' greater concern was that any change

      might be misunderstood within POL: "There are lots of ways to present a case

      and a change of direction now may be misunderstood as meaning that the

      previous way was incorrect. I could see this causing quite a few headaches".

      Andrew Parsons felt, on balance, that the potential benefits of a consistent

      approach with Mr. de Garr Robinson QC outweighed the benefits of bringing in

      Daniel Toledano QC.

                                  Page 665 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1541. The document at (POL00024268) appears to be a draft of the "pros and cons"

      document that Bond Dickinson had agreed to provide in Andrew Parsons' email

      at 16:16 on 3 November 2017 in (POL00024346). The document was emailed

      to Jane Macleod and others on 8 November 2017 by Andrew Parsons, who

      described it as "the first draft of the briefing for Paula": (POL00024267). It set

      out four options, with comments on the upsides and downsides of each. I have

      not seen a final version of (POL00024268), or any version of the document

      being sent to me.


1542. This issue was discussed again in the email chain at (POL00024340). At 20:26

      on 12 November 2017, Rodric Williams emailed Jane Macleod, Tom Moran,

      and Mark Underwood (cc. Andrew Parsons) with an update on counsel

      availability. Jamie Goldsmith, the senior junior barrister POL had lined up, was

      now unable to take on the case. In Rodric's view, Jamie Goldsmith's

      unavailability, combined with Fraser J's ruling that the timetable would not be

      affected by counsel's availability, pointed in favour of engaging Daniel

      Toledano QC as a second QC on the case. Andrew Parsons replied on 12

      November 2017 in the same URN. Andrew Parsons also now slightly favoured

      engaging a second QC instead of a senior junior barrister.


1543. Jane Macleod replied at 08:12 on 13 November 2017 in the same URN. I can

      see from Jane's email that there was to be a GE meeting that morning. Jane

      set out in her email how the counsel availability issue should be presented to

      the GE. Jane felt that it was unconvincing to say that only Mr. de Garr Robinson

      QC understood POL's case. That position was also inconsistent with an

      argument that Daniel Toledano QC would be able to read into the case during


                                   Page 666 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      May 2018. Jane thought that a better argument would be that Mr. de Garr

      Robinson QC had developed a rapport with the Judge. Jane suggested

      presenting the issue to the GE in the following way:


      a.   The Judge had said that court dates would be scheduled irrespective of

           counsel availability.


      b.   There was a moderate chance that Mr. de Garr Robinson QC would not be

           available for the Common Issues Trial in November 2018.


      c.   There was a further hearing scheduled for February 2019. It was almost

           certain that POL would need two teams working in parallel to prepare for

           both trials.


      d.   POL needed a contingency plan because it had proposed to engage a

           senior junior to cover hearings over the next few months. However, he was

           no longer available. POL was now considering engaging a second QC,

           both as a contingency, and to ensure continuity. This was a more

           expensive option, and the additional costs could be over 1 million over 15

           months.


1544. I do not recall the GE meeting on 13 November 2017, and I have not seen any

      minutes or notes from that meeting. However, the minutes of the POL Board

      meeting on 23 November 2017 (POL00021552), which I attended, recorded on

      page 6 under the heading "Group Litigation Update (Verbal)" that Jane

      provided an update on the outcome of the Case Management Conference and

      outlined the dates for future hearings. Jane noted that Fraser J had indicated

      that Court dates would not be set by reference to counsel's availability. This

                                   Page 667 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      posed a potential issue for POL in relation to the hearings starting in November

      2018 (i.e. the Common Issues Trial) as our Lead Counsel might not be

      available. Contingency plans (as noted above) were being developed.


1545. Although no discussion is recorded in the minutes, and I have no recollection

      of any discussion, I am confident that Jane's update to the POL Board would

      have prompted a discussion about counsel availability, as it was such an

      important issue.


1546. This issue was ultimately resolved by instructing a second QC, David Cavender

      QC. I can see from a letter dated 14 December 2017 from Bond Dickinson to

      Freeths that David Cavender QC was engaged by that point: see footnote 1 on

      page 3 of (POl00024423). I have not seen any documents which record the

      decision to engage a second QC, but I have a recollection that it was a decision

      of the POL Board.


151. Please consider POl00004167, the judgment of Fraser Jin Bates & Others

v. Post Office limited [2017] EWHC 2844 (QB).


151.1. Did you, the Board or senior management at POL consider this

judgment? What. if any, discussion arose from the judge's comment that "A

fundamental change of attitude by the legal advisers involved in this group

litigation is required. A failure to heed this warning will result in draconian

costs orders".


1547. The judgment was circulated to the senior managers who sat on the Steering

      Group. This was appropriate, because they were collectively responsible for

      the management of the GLO Proceedings on behalf of POL. On 9 November

                                  Page 668 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      2017 at 9:47, Rodric Williams sent a draft of the judgment to Jane Macleod,

      Melanie Corfield, Mark Davies and Tom Moran (cc. Andrew Parsons and Amy

      Prime) (POL00041527). Rodric drew their attention to Fraser J's comments in

      paragraph 20:


             " .. .the litigation needs to be progressed in a more timely, cost-effective

             and proportionate manner than it has to date, and that this will require

             greater cooperation between the parties. He considers the failure of the

             parties to do so to date lies 'more or fess equally on both sides."


1548. Rodric Williams wrote under the heading "Main Message" that the tight

      timetable set for the November 2018 trial would not be departed from and the

      parties would need to cooperate through their legal advisors to achieve this.

      Failure to do so would result in "draconian costs orders", (i.e. the Court will

      order payment of substantial costs to the other side). The final section of the

      email set out the longer-term implications of the judgment: POL must ensure

      not only that it cooperated with Freeths to promote the expeditious resolution

      of the case (which POL had already been trying to do) but that it was seen to

      be doing so. Doing otherwise would irritate and alienate Fraser J, who would

      be presiding over the trials in the case. This must be kept firmly in mind as POL

      planned and resourced the next 12 months of the case.


1549. I have not seen any minutes from the 20 November 2017 Steering Group

      meeting which took place after the judgment was received (POL00024446).

      However, given the Steering Group's responsibilities, I would be surprised if

      the Judge's comments were not discussed.


1550. I did not read the judgment at the time. It is apparent from the minutes at
                                   Page 669 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      (POL00021552) that Jane Macleod briefed the POL Board that the Judge had

      made clear that Court hearings would not be scheduled around counsel

      availability. I cannot recall whether she addressed Fraser J's comments, but I

      would be surprised if she did not do so.


1551. I recall Jane telling me during a one-on-one meeting between us that the Judge

      had been critical of both sides' legal advisors. When I asked for clarification, I

      recall Jane explaining that the Judge had given the parties a "shot across the

      bows" (or words to that effect). Although I cannot recall the conversation in any

      detail, I am sure Jane told me that Fraser J had stated that the parties needed

      to improve in terms of timing, preparation, and courtesy of response to each

      other.


151.2. Did you, the Board or senior management at POL consider changing

litigation strategy following this iudgment? If not, why not?


1552. As far as I can recall, Jane did not present the Judge's comments as calling

      into question POL's litigation strategy. They were presented to me as criticisms

      of the parties' legal advisors, which needed to be taken on board going

      forwards. That was also essentially the message in the email from Rodric

      Williams to Jane and others on 9 November 2017 at 09:47 attaching the draft

      of the judgment (POL00041527). I do not recall having any further concerns

      about POL's approach until I was made aware, in October 2018, that Fraser J

      had criticised POL's conduct and attitude in his judgment dismissing POL's

      application to strike out parts of the Claimants' evidence (this is the judgment

      referred to in Question 173).


1553. (POL00090630) suggests that POL did take on board the Judge's comment
                                   Page 670 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      when it was preparing for a disclosure hearing on 2 February 2018. The

      document is a noting paper on POL's strategy for that hearing, which Bond

      Dickinson prepared for a Steering Group meeting on 2 February 2018.

      Paragraph 5.1 of the paper states that, in preparing for the hearing, POL had

      been conscious of the Judge's criticisms at the last hearing and had taken a

      different approach. Rather than taking the traditional position of a defendant of

      "counter-punching" the Claimants' proposals, POL had proactively engaged

      with Freeths. The skeleton arguments of both parties for hearing on 2 February

      2018 highlighted the high level of cooperation between the parties. POL hoped

      that this approach had mitigated the risk of further judicial criticism.


1554. Although I cannot recall it, it is possible that I was informed about POL's

      approach to the disclosure hearing on 2 February 2018. On 31 January 2018

      at 18:21, Rodric Williams emailed a summary of the parties' skeleton

      arguments     to   Jane    Macleod      and     others,   including   Tom   Moran

      (POL00041650). One of his headline points was that both parties' skeleton

      arguments acknowledged the constructive and cooperative approach taken

      since the Case Management Conference, which had resulted in substantial

      agreement between the parties. Within the same URN, Tom Moran suggested

      that Rodric's email should be shared with me and Al Cameron. Jane responded

      that she would share with me, but that she had already had a long discussion

      with me about the hearing over the weekend.


152. Please consider POL00021552 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 23

November 2017). Please describe the update given to the Board on the GLO

proceedings.


                                    Page 671 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1555. I have set out my evidence about the update at the POL Board meeting on 23

      November 2017 above.


153. Please consider POL00024292 (email chain with Jane Macleod and others

on 5 December 2017). Please describe any discussions you had concerning

settling the discrete groups of claims mentioned in the email.


1556. On 5 December 2017 at 07:54, Jane Macleod sent an email to me and Al

      Cameron to inform us that the Steering Group would consider two issues at its

      meeting on 6 December 2017 (POL00024292). The first of these issues was

      a proposal to initiate settlement discussions with Freeths in relation to two

      groups of Claimants:


      a. Serving SPMs, of which there were 45 in the group, and whose claims were

         less than 5,000 in value.


      b. Claimants who had previously signed settlement agreements with POL, of

         whom there were around 120. POL had counter-claimed against these

         Claimants for the return of any settlement monies paid to them, on the basis

         that the settlement agreements were expressed to be final and binding.

         POL argued that the Claimants should not retain the benefit of the

         settlement payments if they wished to re-open matters via the GLO

         Proceedings. Generally, the amounts of the settlement payment exceeded

         the amounts claimed by these Claimants in the GLO Proceedings.


1557. Jane believed there was both financial and tactical value in attempting to settle

      these claims. Because of the specific facts of these cases, any settlements

      would not impact the wider issues. It would also help to demonstrate to the

                                   Page 672 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




     Court that POL was seeking to resolve issues, rather than being obstructive.


1558. It appears that Jane's email on 5 December 2017 was prompted by emails

     between members of the Steering Group in the chain at (POL00024326). On

     4 December 2017 at 22:27, Mark Underwood emailed to the Steering Group a

     decision paper on settlement (POL00022880) and a draft letter in advance of

     a call on 6 December 2017.


1559.Tom Moran replied at 23:35 on 4 December 2017. He was supportive of the

     approach set out in the settlement paper, "but this feels like a very big decision

     and one that could be seen as a significant change of direction. The paper is

     very good and I would like us to share it with PV and AC (could Jane do this?).

     I don't feel it would be right for them, or the Board, to hear of this decision after

     the fact." At 09:29 on 5 December 2017, Tom Wechsler agreed with Tom

     Moran that "this needs socialising with PV and AC".


1560.1 replied to Jane's email (in the same URN) at 08:05 on 5 December 2017. I

     said that the proposal seemed sensible, but I would appreciate the chance to

     speak to her. Al Cameron replied at 08:52 to ask whether any settlement with

     existing SPMs could create an incentive for a separate class action by any

     other SPM who had ever paid a loss to POL.


1561.At 09:11 on 5 December 2017 (again in the same URN) Jane forwarded the

     email chain I have summarised above to Andrew Parsons and Rodric Williams.

     She assumed that the answer to Al's question was technically "yes", but that it

     must be considered unlikely and would be subject to the outcome of the GLO

     Proceedings.


                                   Page 673 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1562.1 do not recall any discussion with Jane following our emails on 5 December

     2017. My attitude at the time was that I was supportive of settlement

     discussions with the Claimants: as I stated in my email to Jane, the proposals

     set out in her email seemed sensible. However, as Jane had indicated in her

     initial email, the proposal was a matter for the Steering Group to decide. I do

     not recall receiving any further updates about this proposal.


154. Please consider POL00024182 (Jane Macleod's email to you on 28

January 2018).


154.1. Please set out the extent of your involvement in how POL approached

its disclosure obligation in the GLO Proceedings.


1563. (POL00024182) is an email exchange between Jane Macleod, me, Alisdair

     Cameron and others on 28 January 2018 in advance of a POL Board meeting

     on 29 January 2018. The first email in the chain is from Jane at 12:24 on 28

     January 2018, in which she set out her speaking notes for the POL Board

     meeting the following day.


1564. One of the topics Jane was to cover with the POL Board was a hearing

     scheduled for 2 February 2018 to decide the scope and the timing of POL's

     disclosure. In her email, Jane summarised the position:


     a. POL had offered to provide "some c.175,000 documents relating to Post

          Office policies and processes, technical and operational aspects of Horizon

          (80,000), the 12 Lead Claimants, and the 27,000 documents reviewed by

          Second Sight which have already been provided."


     b.   However, Freeths were asking POL to disclose everything immediately,
                                  Page 674 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




          including documents which went beyond the scope of the November 2018

          Common Issues Trial. Jane described their approach, which potentially

          required the disclosure of millions of documents, as a fishing trip.


     c.   POL's position reflected new Court protocols for disclosure, which were

          designed to avoid the problems presented by the Claimants' wide-ranging

          requests.


1565.As far as I can recall, I was not involved in making any decisions about POL's

     disclosure. At the time, I regarded disclosure as a procedural matter for the

     lawyers to handle. My understanding was that disclosure was an obligation and

     that identifying the material that POL was required to disclose was a task for

     lawyers. I also understood that POL was taking its disclosure duties seriously.


1566. I was given updates and information about disclosure. Jane's email on 28

     January 2018 is an example of this. I have a recollection of the Claimants'

     approach to disclosure being described as "fishing", but I cannot say whether

     that memory derives from Jane's email or a conversation about disclosure.

     Other examples include:


     a. Jane emailed me on 20 October 2017, the day after the Case Management

          Conference, with an update on the hearing. She informed me that the Court

          had made orders for disclosure, stating that while the Claimants had asked

          for wide-ranging disclosure, the orders made by the Court required more

          limited disclosure: (POL00103314).


     b. My CEO Report for the POL Board meeting on 31 October 2017 (starting

          at page 20 of (POL00103898)) stated on page 7 that POL's work, following

                                   Page 675 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




   the Case Management Conference, would focus on a number of issues,

   including disclosure. This information would have come from POL's legal

   team.


c. In her email to me and Al Cameron on 5 December 2017 at

   (POL00024292), Jane mentioned that the Steering Group would discuss

   proposals for the extent of POL's e-disclosure at its meeting on 6 December

   2017. Jane stated that this was a procedural step but would set in train

   significant work to recover the relevant files that POL would need to

   disclose in the GLO Proceedings. In my reply to Jane, I asked to speak to

   her and asked: "How much are we are [sic.] likely to need to consider?" This

   was the same email chain in which Jane described the potential settlement

   proposals discussed in Question 153. I do not know whether I wished to

   speak to Jane about settlement and disclosure, or only about the settlement

   aspect. I also cannot remember whether my question to Jane related to the

   extent of disclosure or to potential settlement figures.


d. In an email to Tom Moran and others on 31 January 2018 (POL00041650)

   Jane stated that she had held a long discussion with me about the

   disclosure hearing on 2 February 2018 over the preceding weekend.


e. On 4 February 2018, Jane sent an update to me and others on the outcome

   of the    disclosure   hearing   on   2     February   2018   (POL00006520;

   POL00103333).      She reported that Fraser J had made the orders for

   disclosure in the terms sought by POL and made clear to the Claimants

   that, while they may seek further disclosure, any such request must be a

   properly focussed request, and not a "fishing expedition".

                             Page 676 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




154.2. Why did POL not seek a preliminary advice on the merits of the claim

prior to the close of pleadings?


1567. In her email to me and Al Cameron on 28 January 2018 (POL00024182), Jane

     also mentioned that POL would obtain an Opinion on the merits of POL's case

     once pleadings for the Common Issue Trial closed in April 2018 (the Opinion).

     She explained that the close of pleadings meant that the parties had completed

     their Particulars of Claim, Defences, and Replies. The Opinion would be

     reviewed once witness statements had been exchanged in September 2018.

     The outcome of these reviews would inform whether POL should consider

     settlement discussions - either across all or only some of the issues.


1568. This section of the email was followed by a note addressed to Al that POL now

     had two QCs working on the case - Anthony de Garr Robinson QC and David

     Cavender QC. As part of Mr. Cavender QC's on-boarding, POL had asked him

     to consider how he would approach the case if he were advising the Claimants.

     This had given POL additional perspective into the way it should approach the

     case. Based on the information available to him, Mr. Cavender QC had flagged

     Horizon, training, the agent appointment process and the suspense accounts

     as the areas he would probe most if he were advising the Claimants. I cannot

     say for certain, but it seems likely that this part of the email was addressed to

     Al alone because I was already aware of this information.


1569. I cannot say for certain why POL did not obtain a merits advice from the

     barristers before the close of pleadings. I was not involved in (or aware of) any

     decision within POL to wait until that stage before seeking a merits advice.


1570. When I asked in May 2016 for an analysis of the balance of power between
                                   Page 677 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      POL and SPMs, the answer that came back from Jane was that this issue was

      best examined through an analysis of the legal case advanced by the

      Claimants in their letter before claim (see the email chain at (POL00103200)).

      I knew that the purpose of pleadings was for each party to set out its legal and

      factual case. It is possible that the legal team took the view that it would have

      been premature to ask the barristers to give an opinion on the merits until both

      sides had set out their case in full in their pleadings.


155. Please consider POL00021440 (minutes of POL's Audit, Risk and

Compliance Committee's meeting on 29 January 2018).


155.1. Please describe the discussion on the GLO Proceedings at this meeting.

In particular, what was said regarding STIP and LTIPs?


1571. I can see from the minutes at (POL00021440) that I attended the latter parts of

      meeting of the ARC on 29 January 2018. The version of the minutes disclosed

      by the Inquiry is heavily redacted. There are two sections of the minutes which

      record discussions about the GLO Proceedings.


1572. The first is on page 3 under the heading "Classification of Group Litigation

      Costs". The comment immediately underneath this section ("PV, TP and JH

      joined the meeting") shows that I was not present for this part of the meeting.


1573. The minutes record that, at the POL Board's request, EY was reviewing the

      accounting classification of the expenditure associated with the GLO

      Proceedings. To date, litigation costs had been accounted for as an operating

      cost and charged to EBITDA. However, it was the view of the POL Board that

      litigation was not a cost of trading. The Chairman of the ARC (Carla Stent)

                                    Page 678 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      noted that POL's Remuneration Committee would need to consider the impact

      of any decision in this area on both short and long term incentive plans.


1574. The other section of the minutes which deals with the GLO Proceedings is on

      page 8 under the heading "Litigation". This part of the minutes appears to be a

      record of an update by Al Cameron and comments by Ken McCall (the senior

      independent NED) and Carla Stent. Al seemed to have reported that, as a

      result of the GLO Proceedings, the recovery of agent losses and prosecutions

      had become significantly more challenging, thereby increasing the risk that

      their deterrent effect would be diminished. However, he advised that more

      targeted audits had resulted in issues being identified earlier. In response to a

      query by Ken McCall as to where agent losses figures should be reported, Al

      Cameron advised that they were covered by detail in the Conduct Report which

      would be presented at the March 2018 Board meeting. Carla Stent stated that

      she was happy for the figures to be reported wherever thought appropriate, so

      long as they were reported.


1575. As stated above, I was not present for the part of the meeting when STIPs and

      LTIPs were discussed. Nevertheless, I have a broad understanding of the

      issue. The budget update for the GE meeting on 16 January 2018 states (at

      page 34 of (POL00027267)) that the POL Board had asked the GE to explore

      accounting and target options to exclude the costs of the GLO Proceedings

      from trading EBITDAS. POL had reached an agreement in principle with its

      auditors to treat the 9 million of litigation and project support in 2018/2019 as

      an exceptional item.


1576. POL's incentive plans were based on profit and EBITDAS targets. If the cost of

                                    Page 679 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      the GLO Proceedings were removed from the profit and loss account and

      treated as an exceptional item, the targets would need adjusting. Based only

      on what is said in the minutes, I believe that the point that Carla Stent was

      making about STIPs and LTIPs was that the Remuneration Committee should

      take into consideration the accounting effect of removing litigation costs from

      the profit and loss accounts. This was to ensure that the targets were adjusted.


155.2. Please explain why the recovery of "agent losses and prosecutions"

was perceived to be more challenging because of the GlO Proceedings.


1577. I do not now recall this part of the meeting. Paragraphs 29-30 of the Annual

      Risk Review Report for 2017 to the ARC Committee (POl00104316) contain

      a fuller explanation of the effect of the GLO Proceedings on the recovery of

      shortfalls. It states that the issue arose whenever a SPM relied on allegations

      in the GLO Proceedings to dispute a debt (e.g., that the loss was caused by

      the Horizon system). Any formal action against an SPM in these cases would

      most likely be stayed pending the outcome of the GLO Proceedings. In terms

      of numbers, this issue affected 318 cases with a combined value of 1.14

      million. One SPM, who had improperly processed 400,000 of Parcelforce

      transactions had now frustrated the investigation into those transactions (and

      any consequential criminal or civil legal activity) by joining the GLO

      Proceedings as a Claimant. The outcome of the Common Issues Trial starting

      in November 2018 might enable POL to take a more proactive position on the

      recovery of branch losses.


155.3. Please describe the discussion on the "more targeted audits" that had

been trialled. Did this provide any reassurance that POl's business did not

                                   Page 680 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




face existential crisis if it was unsuccessful on some of the terms sought by

the claimants?


1578. I do not recall this part of the meeting. However, I do recall concerns that had

      been expressed in a previous meeting that if POL was unsuccessful on some

      of the terms of the contract it might become difficult to recover shortfalls from

      SPMs. I do have some recollection that more targeted audits on the basis of

      data analytics had been introduced in order to give early warning of problems

      in branches. I do not recall any mention in this meeting of an "existential crisis"

      or a connection with targeted audits.


156. Please consider POL00021553 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 29

January 2018), POL00117892 (note titled Postmaster Litigation Advisory

Subcommittee) and POL00117894 (Womble Bond Dickinson briefing note

dated 22 March 2018).


156.1. Please describe the update provided to the board on the GLO

Proceedings.


1579. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 29 January 2018 (POL00021553)

      record on page 10 under the heading "Postmaster Litigation Update" that Jane

      Macleod gave a verbal update on the GLO Proceedings. She noted that there

      was a procedural hearing on 2 February 2018 to determine to scope of POL's

      disclosure for the trial starting in November 2018, i.e. the Common Issues Trial.


1580. The POL Board noted the update and resolved to establish a sub-committee

      for the purpose of monitoring the development in and strategy for the litigation.

      The members of the sub-committee would be Tim Parker, Ken McCall, and

                                   Page 681 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      Tom Cooper (once he was appointed as a director). Jane Macleod was asked

      to provide the members with the key dates in the litigation timetable so that

      they could be briefed at the appropriate time.


1581. I do not recall the discussion at the meeting beyond what is set out in the

      minutes. I note, however, that Jane Macleod's email to me and Al Cameron

      on 28 January 2018 (POL00024182) contained what Jane described as her

      speaking notes for the POL Board meeting on 29 January 2018.


156.2. Why did the Board establish a formal sub-committee to monitor "the

development in and strategy for the litigation"? Why had it not done so before?


1582. I had suggested to Tim Parker some time prior to this that we establish a formal

      Board Sub-Committee to oversee the litigation because I did not have the

      expertise to challenge and scrutinise the litigation process and preparation

      myself. As the GLO Proceedings progressed towards trial, it was occupying

      increasing amounts of time at the ARC and at POL Board meetings. My

      recollection is that Tim considered that it would now be useful to establish a

      dedicated Sub-Committee.


1583. The terms of reference for the Sub-Committee (POL00117892) stated at

      paragraph 1.2 that the purpose of the Sub-Committee was to receive legal

      advice on POL's Defence in the GLO Proceedings as it proceeded to final

      resolution. Paragraph 3.1 stated that the Sub-Committee should meet as often

      as required, and paragraph 3.4 stated that meetings could be convened by the

      Secretary, the Chairman, or by any member at any time. Other POL employees

      and relevant external consultants and lawyers could attend meetings at the

      Chairman's invitation.
                                   Page 682 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




156.3. Please explain the reasoning behind the choice of persons appointed to

the subcommittee.


1584. The members of the Sub-Committee were chosen following consultations

      between me, Tim Parker, and Jane Macleod.


1585. Tim was appointed Chairman as he was keen to oversee the sub-committee

      personally.


1586. Ken McCall was the senior independent NED. He was extremely well-

      respected within the business and had IT experience.


1587. Tom Cooper was the UKGI NED designate at the time the Sub-Committee was

      formed. He was appointed because it was seen as critical to keep the

      government's representative informed. I note that in the minutes of the first

      meeting of the Sub-Committee on 26 March 2018, Tom Cooper was recorded

      as being in attendance rather than as a member (POl00117899). I suspect

      this was because he was not appointed a Director until the POL Board meeting

      on 27 March 2018 (see the minutes of that meeting at (UKGI00018134)).


1588. Al Cameron was appointed because the finance function was involved in the

      GLO Proceedings in various ways. Its processes and operations were part of

      the subject matter of the GLO Proceedings, it was involved in the funding of

      POL's legal costs, and it would be impacted in the event of an adverse

      judgment.


157. Please consider POl00117899 (minutes of the Postmaster litigation

Subcommittee on 26 March 2018).


                                 Page 683 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




157.1. Please set out your recollection of the meeting of the subcommittee. To

what extent did the subcommittee challenge those in the executive and/ or the

legal advice received on the approach to the GLO Proceedings?


1589. The agenda for the Sub-Committee meeting on 26 March 2018 is at

      (POL00006765). It shows that I was present along with Tim Parker, Tom

      Cooper, Ken McCall, Al Cameron, and that Jane Macleod, Veronica Branton

      (as the minute secretary), Rodric Williams, and Mark Underwood also

      attended. It does not appear that any papers were provided in advance of the

      meeting other than the terms of reference and a timetable for the GLO

      Proceedings and future meetings of the Sub-Committee (copies of which were

      attached to the agenda).


1590. The minutes of the meeting at (POL00117899) record, firstly, that the terms of

      reference were noted and approved for recommendation to the POL Board at

      the next meeting. Further, it was explained that day-to-day decisions on the

      litigation would be taken by the executive, but that the POL Board would be

      consulted in advance of any significant decisions being taken. I believe this

      refers to the delegation of the management of the GLO Proceedings by the GE

      to the Steering Group.


1591. Second, the Sub-Committee noted the litigation timetable and suggested dates

      for future meetings, which had been scheduled around key dates in the

      litigation, as well as being close to Board meetings. The remainder of the

      minutes contained updates on a number of topics since the January 2018 POL

      Board meeting: scope of disclosure, the scope of the Horizon Issues Trial; the

      appointment of an IT expert; POL's application for security for costs; the

                                  Page 684 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      protocol for the sharing of information about the GLO Proceedings between

      POL and UKGI; contingency planning; and the CCRC.


1592. I do not recall the discussion at the meeting, and I do not recall the Sub-

      Committee challenging the executive or the legal advice. However, the

      members of the Sub-Committee were all prepared to ask questions and

      challenge the business when they thought it appropriate.


157.2. Please expand on "Nevertheless, Post Office considered it unlikely that

a decision would be made public before the conclusion of the Horizon trial".

What was the basis for this?


1593. The update in the minute on the CCRC records that 33 former SPMs had

      applied to the CCRC to review their convictions. Rodric Williams noted that

      POL was cooperating fully with the CCRC and believed they were nearing the

      end of their investigations. Nonetheless, POL considered it unlikely that a

      decision would be made public before the conclusion of the Horizon trial. I do

      not know for certain what the basis was for POL's belief that the CCRC would

      not make any decision public until after the Horizon trial.


1594. Although I do not recall whether Rodric gave a fuller explanation at the meeting,

      I suspect that it was thought that, since the issue of the safety of convictions

      and the issues to be decided in the GLO Proceedings were related, the CCRC

      might decide to await Fraser J's judgment before making any decision. This

      seems to be the point made by POL in paragraph 5 of a briefing note to the

      BEIS Permanent Secretary dated 10 May 2018 (POL00006524).


158. Please consider POL00021445 (minutes of the POL Audit. Risk and

                                   Page 685 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




Compliance Committee on 27 March 2018). Please describe the discussion of

the GLO Proceedings at this meeting.


1595. The ARC met on 27 March 2018 (POL00021445), the day after a meeting of

     the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee, which I address directly in this

     witness statement. This ARC meeting was on the same day as the POL Board

     meeting which I discuss in response to the next question in this witness

     statement.


1596. The POL Board meeting took place at 11 :00am (POL00027257). That was two

     hours after the ARC meeting.


1597.1 cannot locate the papers for the ARC meeting amongst the documents which

     have been disclosed by the Inquiry. It may well be that these documents are in

     batches which are still to be disclosed. I do not specifically remember that

     morning's ARC meeting. I therefore can only go on what is in the ARC minutes

     in describing the discussion of the GLO proceedings.


1598. The version of the ARC meeting minutes disclosed by the Inquiry is heavily

     redacted. The only substantive passage not redacted is part of the section

     under the heading "External Audit Update". There is therefore little in the

     minutes for me to use to refresh my memory of the meeting more generally.


1599. Peter Mciver from EY provided an update to the ARC regarding the audit work

     relating to the GLO. Peter Mciver made the ARC aware that the Claimants in

     the GLO had not yet valued their claim and stated the amount of damages that

     they were seeking.


159. Please consider UKGI00018134 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 27
                                 Page 686 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




March 2018). Please describe the discussion on the GLO Proceeding at this

meeting. To what extent did the full Board discuss the GLO Proceedings

following     the   establishment      of   the    formal     Postmaster      litigation

Subcommittee?


1600. Of the nine Board members who were present for the 11 :00 am meeting, eight

      of us had attended the ARC that morning. The only member of the POL Board

      who did not attend that morning's ARC was Virginia Holmes, a NED.


1601. I also note that the whole Board would receive ARC minutes when they were

      prepared, as a matter of course.


1602. At Item 12, it is briefly stated that the Board (emphasis in the original) "NOTED

      that the Subcommittee established at the previous meeting had met the

      previous day and had been updated on the case" and that "[t]he Board

      RESOLVED to APPROVE the terms of reference for the Postmaster Litigation

      Subcommittee". That Sub-Committee meeting by context must be the one on

      26 March 2018 which I have addressed above.


1603. The "heavy lifting" in terms of keeping key Directors updated on the GLO

      Proceedings was done in the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee and the

      ARC. The Board set up the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee so that

      appropriate attention and time could be devoted to its oversight of the litigation.

      Despite the relatively brief mention in these minutes, I am confident that the

      POL Board was actually up to date in March 2018, as I have described above:

      the litigation was significant and was treated as such.


160. Please consider POL00025892 (opinion on common issues dated 10 May

                                    Page 687 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




2018). Did you read this advice? If so. please state when you did, what your

views were of it and whether you took it into account when considering POL's

approach to the GLO Proceedings.


1604. I am asked by the Inquiry to consider (POL00025892) which is a legal Opinion

      jointly written by four counsel for POL, dated 10 May 2018: Anthony de Garr

      Robinson QC, David Cavender QC, Owain Draper and Gideon Cohen. Before

      addressing that advice, I wish to highlight some matters which took place

      between the meetings on 27 March 2018 and this Opinion being sent to POL.


1605. On 25 and 26 April 2018, Tim Parker and Diane Blanchard (his Executive

      Assistant) exchanged emails about possibly rescheduling the Postmaster

      Litigation Sub-Committee meeting scheduled for 15 May 2018 so that it did not

      clash with commitments which Tim had with other Chairman roles. Diane said

      that "the difficulty is that we have timed this meeting because of the merits

      opinion being issued on the 30 th April and needing the Sub Committee and

      briefing for UKGI before Board on the 24th May". I understand that "merits

      opinion" is a reference to the Opinion I describe in the previous paragraph

      (albeit it is dated later than anticipated). The meeting was not moved and Tim

      said "if plane arrives on time, I can dial in, no problem" (POL00110906).


1606. On 8 May 2018, Rodric Williams emailed Andrew Parsons, Jane Macleod and

      Veronica Branton stating that the meeting on 15 May 2018 was likely to be

      "dominated by the Merit's Opinion" and that he and Andrew would "review an

      advanced working draft as soon as it is available, and prepare a precise of what

      is sure to be a long document" (POL00041771). That precis would aim to:


               "summarise the Opinion for you and your communications to your
                                  Page 688 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




                 GE colleagues;


                act as the QC's speaking note at the meeting (which we will ask

                 David Cavender to lead);


                possibly be provided to UKGI as an update, but only once the

                 information sharing protocol is agreed."


1607. Further to this proposal from Rodric that he and Andrew Parsons would prepare

      a summary, Bond Dickinson prepared a "Summary of Counsels' Opinion on

      the Common Issues" (12 May 2018) (POL00023972). This summary was four

      pages long. The summary described itself as "a useful aid to the key points but

      it is not a substitute for a careful reading of the Opinion which explains the full

      complexity and nuances of the Common Issues".


1608. The full Opinion and the shorter summary were sent by Andrew Parsons to

      Rodric, Jane and Mark Underwood on 12 May 2018 (POL00024257). This was

      a Saturday. Andrew Parsons described his summary as a "useful crib sheet"

      but "strongly" suggested that it should not be circulated outside this original

      email group.


1609. The Steering Group had a call at 9.00am on the Tuesday morning (15 May

      2018). Top of the agenda was a "general impression" of the Opinion

      (POL00024196).


1610. There was also a Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting arranged for

      15 May (POL00041773) for which there were no papers, but there was an

      agenda. That meeting was to be attended by the Leading Counsel who had

      prepared the Opinion. The agenda was circulated by Diane on 14 May 2018
                                   Page 689 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      (POL00110935) to a list of recipients including me.


1611. I have now seen, but did not see at the time, counsel's speaking note for the

      Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting (POL00006382). The document

      is not signed, but is written in a different format from that which was typically

      used for POL or Bond Dickinson documents, and so I infer it was written by

      counsel.


1612. While my memory is not detailed, I recall that I read the advice document and

      attended a meeting with counsel at which the Opinion was discussed. I think it

      is likely to have been the meeting of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee

      on 15 May 2018. I remember that the barrister asked whether the attendees of

      the meeting had read the document. I said that I had but there were some

      dense passages of case law and there were some areas on which I had

      questions. I have a memory about the Maitland and necessary cooperation

      points, but I cannot recall precisely what I asked or what the answers were. I

      have re-read the advice document recently. There are sections which look

      familiar, and on which I would have wanted more detail, and indeed on some,

      taken comfort: paragraphs 7, 9, 12, 13, 27-41 and 59b ).


161. Please consider POL00006754 (minutes of the Postmaster litigation

Subcommittee meeting on 15 May 2018).


161.1. Please describe your recollection of what was said at this meeting


1613. I do not recall what was said at the meeting beyond what is in the minutes. The

      minutes record that David Cavender QC "explained his thoughts on the interim

      opinion on the Merits Case" by which I understand that he explained the advice

                                   Page 690 of 861
                                                                                          WITN01020100




      which he and the other three counsel had given in the Opinion. Comparing the

      minutes with the speaking note (POL00006382), it appears that David

      Cavender QC followed the speaking note when he set out his advice in the

      meeting.


1614. From page three of the minutes, I see that POL Board members asked

      questions and these were answered by counsel.


1615. Tim Parker said "from our perspective there are no decisions we are being

      asked to take now? Will come back to us before the trial". By this I understand

      that the purpose of the meeting was not to get the Sub-Committee to make

      decisions on the litigation, but rather for the Opinion of counsel to be explained

      and for there to be an opportunity for questions.


161.2. What did you consider POL's prospects of success were in following this

meeting?


1616. The minutes record that David Cavender QC said in respect of prospects of

      success: "Overall view is that the PO has the better of args in most 23 args." I

      understand "args" to mean "arguments". This is reflective of the speaking note,

      which says (POL00006382):


                 6.   "- Outcome of litigation of this type is notoriously difficult to

                 predict. In particular, need to keep in mind that the way they are

                 putting the case now - is likely to be refined and reformulated after we

                 exchange evidence and start preparations for trial.


                 7.   - But our view is that PO has the better of the argument on many

                 of the 23 issues - but it is also likely to lose on a number of them."
                                    Page 691 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1617. The speaking note continued:


                8.   "- But given the uncertain state of the law - we think that there is

                material here - should be Judge be so minded, to imply a duty of good

                faith. Risk that he might. If he did so we would advise that an appeal

                be brought. Represents an important and novel point which is likely to

                radically effect the approach to the construction and operation of the

                express terms of the contracts. Indeed, whichever side loses this point

                is likely to see to appeal."


1618. This last part is not minuted, but I recall the use of the word "novef' which was

      new to me in the legal context. I have no reason to think it was not said.


1619. I formed a view of the merits consistent with this advice: I was generally positive

      about POL's chances of success, although I entirely recognised that there were

      some issues.


1620. I note that at the next Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting, the merits

      advice was summarised in this way: "the QCs had presented their opinion on

      the merits of the case at the last meeting, and had concluded that, based on

      the information available to them at the time, on balance Post Office had the

      better arguments" (POL00006763).


162. Please consider POL00021555 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 24

May 2018). Please set out your recollection of the update provided to the Board

at this meeting.


1621. A POL Board meeting took place on 24 May 2018. Item 12 on the agenda was

      the GLO Proceedings (POL00103335). It was included in my CEO Report that
                                    Page 692 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      a verbal update would be provided on the litigation (at page 23 of

      (POL00103335)).


1622. The minutes (POL00021555) show that Jane Macleod provided an update on

      the GLO, and an update on the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee held on

      15 May 2018. The minutes are brief. No decision was requested from, or made

      by, the POL Board.


1623. I do not have any other independent recollection of this meeting.


163. Please consider BEIS0000079 (UKGI/Post Office Limited Information

Sharing Protocol).


163.1 Please explain the background of this protocol and your involvement in

agreeing the same.


1624. UKGI and POL entered into an Information Sharing Protocol on 11 June 2018

      (BEIS0000079). The protocol was itself said to be subject to legal professional

      privilege and set out how "information about the Postmaster Complaints will be

      shared with the Secretary of State and UKGI so as to promote their common

      interest and preserve privilege and confidentiality''.


1625. I had no involvement in agreeing that protocol, except that I was asked two, or

      maybe three times, by Tom Cooper and possibly Tom Aldred about why the

      process of agreeing the protocol was taking so long on the POL side. I think

      that the reason for the delay was that Jane Macleod took her responsibilities

      in respect of confidentiality and privilege very seriously, and wanted to make

      sure the protocol was entirely suitable. However, I was aware it took rather a

      long time for agreement to be reached.
                                    Page 693 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1626. I was not involved in the substantive matters of the protocol.


163.2 What was the purpose of the distinction between transmitting

information to the shareholder representative and reporting matters to the

Secretary of State/UKGI pursuant to paragraphs 5 - 9?


1627.1 read the protocol but cannot recall today how I understood the distinctions

      that the POL and BEIS legal advisers were attempting to describe. I do recall

      that   these    distinctions    concerned      not    breaching   the   Shareholder

      Representative's obligations regarding confidentiality and legal privilege as a

      Director of the POL Board, whilst wanting to ensure that the legal

      representatives of the Secretary of State in BEIS were kept informed and

      allowed to feed back any questions or concerns.


164. Please consider POL00021446 (minutes of the POL Audit, Risk and

Compliance Committee on 28 June 2018). Please describe the discussion on

the GLO Proceedings at this meeting. On what basis did POL consider that the

disclosure of the estimated aggregate claim value in the claimants' skeleton

argument did not represent a "reliable and fair reflection" of the value of the

claim?


1628. By the time of the 28 June 2018 ARC meeting, as recorded in the minutes,

      "disclosure had become a substantive issue" (POL00021446). In order to give

      context to this sentence in the minutes, and to answer the Inquiry's question in

      this regard, I will start earlier in the narrative.


1629. On 1 June 2018, Jane Macleod sent an email to the POL Board, under the

      subject "Postmaster Litigation - Confidential and subject to Legal Privilege -

                                      Page 694 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




Do not Forward", an update on the litigation (POL00103336). It began by

stating that a further Case Management Conference was listed for the

afternoon of 5 June 2018. Jane continued:


         9.   "The purpose of the hearing is to make orders in relation to

         disclosure of documents relating to the March 2019 hearing on the

         Horizon issues, and cost management. In accordance with normal

         procedure, Skeleton Arguments have now been fifed with the Court

         by both sides. The purpose of this note is to flag that Freeths have

         made reference in their skeleton argument to the potential value of

         the claims as being 80-90 million. The relevant statement is:


              10.    'The likely aggregate value of the case is estimated to be

              of the order of 80 to 90 million (or in excess therefore, subject

              to further quantum analysis and formulation). The Claimants have

              not been directed to produce detailed schedules of loss, though

              the Schedules of Information contain detailed information on

              relevant heads of loss. The range give here derives from the

              Claimant's solicitors' analysis of the information contained in the

              Schedules of Information. By its nature, it is an estimate based

              upon present information. There are inherent difficulties to setting

              out the quantum of these claims at this stage and the figures

              should be relied upon solely as a suitable guide for the purposes

              of proportionality considerations on costs budgeting.'


         11 . It is possible that this figure will be picked up by the press, and

         therefore we wanted you to be aware. Should there be any press

                             Page 695 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




               commentary, our response will be:


                   12.     'We note the claimants' solicitors have provided an

                   estimated value of claims of 80-90 million in a hearing

                   regarding potential costs. That estimate recognised that no

                   detailed schedules of loss have been produced to date by the

                   claimants and that the number is therefore speculative. Post

                   Office continues to vigorously defend the claims, and welcomes

                   the opportunity to have these issues finally addressed through the

                   Court process'


               13. I will shortly send a similar briefing to the UKGI lawyers in

              accordance with the draft Information Sharing Protocol.. [sic] I will also

              flag the above statement to EY. Given the qualifications around the

              statement, we continue to believe that no provision should be

              required, and as the statement is speculative, we do not believe that

              any reference to this should be included in the disclosure in the draft

              accounts."


1630. Jane sent a further email on 25 June 2018 to Andrew Parsons, Mark

     Underwood, Rodric Williams and Mark Davies flagging that the question of

     disclosure would be considered by the ARC that week, and that the ARC

     should also receive any appropriate advice on "the legal and reputational risks

     of including" a statement in respect of this in the draft accounts. The individuals

     on the email chain proceeded to discuss the wording of such a statement in

     the draft accounts, if this were to be chosen as the appropriate course of action

     (POl00024156). The conversation continued (POl00024230). I was not

                                  Page 696 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      involved.


1631. The ARC meeting then took place on 28 June 2018. In considering the value

      of the claim, and discussing why the claimants had valued the claim at 80 -

      90 million, the ARC noted:


           a.      "That the claimants' estimate did not itself profess to be a formal

                   valuation of damages, but was an estimate prior to the production of

                   schedules of loss;"


           b.      "That the claimants had noted that 'there are inherent difficulties to

                   setting out the quantum of these claims at this stage and the figures

                   should be relied upon solely as a suitable guide for the purposes of

                   proportionality considerations in costs budgeting"; and


           c.      That the figures were "within a reasonably appropriate range, and

                   indeed potential damages once quantified could be materially larger

                   or smaller"


1632. After the ARC meeting, Jane sent an email (POL00041840) to Andrew

      Parsons, Rodric, Mark Underwood, Mark Davies, Patrick Bourke and Melanie

      Garfield saying that:


                  "There was a lively debate at the ARC today about the extent of

                  disclosure required, and the pros and cons of the various options. In

                  particular:


                        It was recognised that 'quoting' the number, gave it a credence

                         that it wouldn't otherwise have

                                     Page 697 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




                      The risk of over-stating the quantum was as great as the risk

                       of understating it


                      It is relevant that no 'statement of claim' has yet been received

                       setting out the quantum of damages, and it was recognised that

                       this may not be received before the end of the financial year.


                      It was important that some context be provided to protect the

                       directors so that it is clear that they are not ignoring the

                       potential impact."


1633. Attached to Jane's email were two alternative draft wordings for the 2018

      annual report, depending on whether or not it was decided to disclose the figure

      for quantum (POL00041841). Both versions of the wording included the form

      of words 'Tw]hife the Directors recognise that an adverse outcome [in the

      litigation] could be material" to describe the nature of the risk, and neither form

      of words put a figure on POL's quantification of likely damages.


1634. I was not involved in this email chain. However, I had been on an email chain

      earlier that day in which Jane and others discussed whether disclosure ought

      to be made (POL00041836).


1635. Jane said on 3 July 2018 that she would circulate the draft wording for the draft

      accounts to me and Al Cameron (POL00041849). That happened the same

      day (POL00041865). The draft wording was also sent to various UKGI

      individuals, on a chain to which I was copied on 4 July 2018 (UKGI00008203).

      Discussion continued the following day. Bond Dickinson were then asked on 4

      July 2018 to confirm to EY whether POL's Directors' current assessment of the

                                    Page 698 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      liabilities in the GLO proceedings was reasonable (POL00041871 ).


1636. EY sent a detailed email to Al, Jane and Michael Passmore on 12 July 2018,

      saying that they wanted to understand the merits of the claim in more granular

      detail, posing various specific questions to this effect (POL00041884). Jane

      responded with a paper on 17 July 2018 (POL00041885). By 20 July 2018 a

      second paper had been produced, and both sent to EY (POL00111017). EY

      wished to speak to POL and Bond Dickinson, and a conversation was arranged

      by Diane Blanchard. It took place on 27 July, after which Jane reported to

      Andrew, Rodric, Mark Underwood, Mark Davies, and Melanie (POL00041896)

      saying that "it appears to have been successful!" and that EY "decided not to

      include an emphasis of matter statement in their Audit report, however they

      have asked if we could strengthen the contingent liability statement" with

      proposed wording being included in the email.


1637. There followed EY's Audit Results Update Report to the ARC dated 27 July

      2018 (EY00000001). The GLO Proceedings were considered at (at page 8 of

      (EY00000001 )). EY stated in summary:


            a.   That EY had reviewed POL's paper which gave a detailed

                 assessment of the claim, including its strength and merits;


            b.   External counsel for POL considered it reasonable that POL could

                 not currently estimate the amounts of the ultimate liabilities that may

                 be incurred; and


            c.   EY had consulted internally on these matters.


1638. They concluded:
                                    Page 699 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




              "Based on the above we concur with management's conclusion that

              the claim constitutes a contingent liability. Further we consider the

              disclosures to be adequate and that no Emphasis of matter is required

              in the auditor's report."


165. Please consider POL00006763 (minutes of the Postmaster litigation

Subcommittee meeting on 10 July 2018). To what extent, if at all, did the

subcommittee discuss POL's approach to the preparation of its witness

evidence?


1639. The discussion at the Sub-Committee meeting on 10 July 2018 in respect of

     witness evidence and disclosure was minuted in this way (POL00006763):


              "Witness statements in relation to the Common Issues trial were due

              to be exchanged during September and once received, the Claimants'

              statements would be carefully reviewed. There had been ongoing

              discussion with the Claimants' lawyers as to the scope and extent of

              disclosure, however, the Post Office view was that we had complied

              with the narrower approach mandated by the Court.


              Information continued to be exchanged in relation to the Horizon trial

              and we were responding to a significant number of technical

              questions, although a number of these questions appeared to be

              either out of scope or would require identification and disclosure of an

              unmanageable large or wide ranging number of documents.


              All technical documents were being reviewed and the IT experts were

              working with assistance from Fujitsu."

                                  Page 700 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1640. I know that the minutes are not comprehensive because I have, in preparing

      this witness statement, seen Jane Macleod's email to herself of 9 July 2018

      (which she sent to Angela Van Den Bogerd the following day, before the

      Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting) with her speaking note for the

      Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee (POL00090608). Andrew Parsons also

      prepared a speaking note for the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee, and

      sent it to Jane (POL00024176; POL00024177).


1641. Jane sent a risk assessment table to the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee

      in advance (POL00024166; POL00024167).


1642. I do not have any recollection of this meeting which goes beyond these minutes

      and notes, which refer to the timetable for filing the witness statements.


1643. A week earlier, Bond Dickinson had written to Angela, Nick Beal and Mark

      Underwood, giving "an indication of the timings for the phases of witness

      statements below" (POL00041866). This rough timeline had the work of

      witness statements commencing in the week beginning 9 July 2018, with final

      drafts being signed in the week commencing 30 July 2018.


1644. A note from WBD, dated 9 July 2018, sets out the proposed list of generic

      issues witnesses     and   the   matters on    which    each   might comment

      (POL00121166).


166. Please describe any involvement you had in the preparation of witness

statements for the GLO Proceedings, including discussing the strategy,

approach or content of evidence with any witnesses.


1645. I knew that it would have been wholly inappropriate for the business to seek to
                                   Page 701 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      influence the witnesses who would give evidence in any way; those witnesses

      were to make their own statements and should respond as they saw fit, telling

      the truth.


1646. I have some recollection of saying to Jane Macleod at some point that I wanted

      to thank the witnesses for the work they were putting into their witness

      statements, and being told by Jane that I should not speak to them about their

      evidence, even in that way. So it was not until after the Common Issues trial

      that I met with them, I think separately in two groups, and thanked everyone

      for their hard work.


1647. I note that the Board on 31 July 2018 received an update on witness

      statements, it being minuted in these terms (at page 7 of (POl00021556)):


                   " witness statements were being gathered and were due to be

                   exchanged during early August


                    Following receipt and review of the witness statements our QCs

                   would be able to update the Merits Opinion."


1648. I did not have any involvement in preparing the witness statements. My only

      involvement in strategy in this regard was in meetings such as the 10 July 2018

      Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee, and then only with a very light touch and

      at a level of generality. I note for completeness that I also received emails sent

      to multiple recipients with general updates in respect of witness evidence (such

      as, for example, (POl00111281 )).


1649. I am reminded by (POl00154359) that I was approached by the POL legal

      team to help in connection with a Fujitsu employee who had been asked, but
                                   Page 702 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      was reluctant, to give evidence in the GLO. I do not now remember what that

      witness was going to give evidence about and I do not think that I ended up

      having to speak with Fujitsu. I did not speak to the witness at any point.


167.Please consider POL00021556 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 31

July 2018) and UKGI00008345 (update to UKGI on 8 August 2018).


167.1. Please describe the update to the Board on 31 July 2018 concerning the

GLO Proceedings. In particular, please address whether the claimants'

criticism of the adequacy of POL's disclosure was raised.


1650. On 15 June 2018, Freeths wrote to Andrew Parsons "generally in respect of

      disclosure provided on behalf of your client, in ref ation to which there are a

      number of areas of concern" (POL00003348). This is not a letter I ever recall

      seeing.


1651. Bond Dickinson replied on 22 June 2018 (POL00041859). I do not recall seeing

      that letter either.


1652. The Inquiry directs my attention to the POL Board minutes for 31 July 2018

      (POL00021556) and asks me whether the Claimants' criticism of the adequacy

      of POL's disclosure was raised in that meeting. The Inquiry asks the question,

      I understand,         because in the minutes at item       11   ("POSTMASTER

      LIT/GA TION') there is no mention of disclosure criticisms.


1653. I do not recall what was said in that meeting that is not in the minutes.


1654. That discussion at item 11 was based on an update paper prepared by Jane

      Macleod (POL00090612). That paper began by confirming that no decisions


                                     Page 703 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      were required from the POL Board, but rather Jane would provide verbal

      updates on four matters: the status of the Court's process; disclosure in the

      accounts; contingency planning; and review of settlement options. The only

      topic which might realistically have included discussion of criticisms of

      disclosure is the first: the status of the Court's process. There is nothing in that

      update paper to indicate one way or the other whether Jane discussed

      disclosure.


1655. I believe, from the documents disclosed by the Inquiry, however that the topic

      was discussed at the Sub-Committee on 10 July 2018. The speaking note for

      Bond Dickinson for that meeting states at paragraph 1.1.3 (POL00024177):


                "The Claimants have begun attacking Post Office's disclosure on the

                Common Issues, saying that insufficient disclosure has been given.

                WBD feel confident that we have satisfactory responses to their

                complaints, especially given that Post Office has now disclosed over

                200,000 documents (whereas the Claimants have disclosed less than

                5,000)."


167.2. Please explain what steps you, the Postmaster litigation Subcommittee

and/ or the Board took to investigate the concerns raised by the claimants as

to the adequacy of POL's disclosure.


     1656. I do not recall what steps the PLSG and/or the Board and/or I took to

            investigate the concerns raised by the claimants as to the adequacy of

            POL's disclosure. I do not recall what steps the PLSG and/or Board

            and/or I took to investigate the concerns raised by the claimants as to the

            adequacy of POL's disclosure. Both before, and during, the GLO, the
                                Page 704 of 861
                                                                                          WITN01020100




            legal team briefed the Board and the Subcommittee on matters of

            disclosure when they needed to, for example when it related to the Sift

            Review, the Second Sight Interim report, the expert witness issues and

            the GLO. Whilst I have a lay person's understanding of what disclosure

            means, I was not a legal expert and could not investigate these concerns

            myself. The legal team assured us that they were complying with POL's

            duties of disclosure at all times. I took confidence from the fact that the

            work that they were doing was subject to external scrutiny from

            Cartwright King,       Brian Altman      QC,   Bond   Dickinson      and   other

            experienced QCs.


168. Please consider UKGI00008372 (email between Tom Aldred and you on 31

August 2018) and POL00111095 (your briefing for meeting with Kelly Tolhurst

MP on 3 September 2018). Please describe your conversation with the Minister

on 3 September 2018 and 17 October 2018.


1657. It was arranged that I would meet the new Minister, Kelly Tolhurst MP, on 3

      September 2018. In advance of this, I spoke with Patrick Bourke and Alice

      Cookson on 24 August 2019 for them to brief me. I asked that Jane Macleod

      also be invited to give her thoughts on what I should say to the Minister

      (POL00024179). Jane sent a detailed email to Alice with her comments,

      copying it to Patrick, Andrew Parsons, Mark Underwood and Rodric Williams.

      My team dissuaded me from doing anything other than noting the fact of the

      ongoing litigation, and advised that I should not talk about it in any detail without

      lawyers attending.


1658. On   31    August    2018,    the   Minister     received   a   briefing   document

                                     Page 705 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      (UKGI00008369). I of course did not see this at the time. This document

      (UKGI00008370) recognised that this was "an introductory meeting" and the

      Minister was advised to be "largely in listening mode". The "most important

      thing to impress upon Paula", said the briefing document, "is the need for POL

      to submit in writing their contingency plans for handling the Horizon litigation in

      advance of briefing you and the Permanent Secretary orally on 17 October".


1659. That same point which Kelly Tolhurst MP was advised to "impress upon" me

      was the subject of a standalone email from Tom Aldred, Executive Director in

      UKGI, to me on the day that the briefing note was sent to the Minister

      (UKGI00008372). I was told it would be "helpfuf' if I could "share your material

      in advance so we can make the most of the relatively short time that we have

      in the meeting itself" before meeting the Permanent Secretary and the Minister

      on 17 October 2018. I was also told by Tom Aldred that I should not expect the

      Minister to raise the litigation "in any detaif' on 3 September. I responded to

      Tom Aldred, asking him to pick this up with Jane.


1660. My briefing document for 3 September was detailed, but reminded me that I

      "should avoid any detailed conversation on" the litigation and save it for 17

      October in a specific meeting arranged for that purpose (POL00111095). One

      reason for this was to maintain privilege.


1661. In the meeting on 3 September 2018, I ran through the briefing note which my

      colleagues   had    prepared    for me.      We   spoke   particularly about the

      transformation of the Post Office and how POL had managed to keep post

      offices open and continued to serve communities across the UK, whilst

      improving service for customers. The Minister was, in general, very pleased

                                     Page 706 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      with that outcome and had a number of questions on other business matters.

      It was a good meeting.


1662. I included a brief note on my meeting with Kelly Tolhurst MP in my CEO Report

      for the 25 September 2018 (at page 15 of (POL00103345)). I said that the

      Minister "was engaged and showed interest in championing our interests in

      Government and beyond''.


1663. I shall now move on to discuss the preparation for the meeting on 17 October

      2018. Jane emailed Al Cameron and me on 27 September 2018 to say

      (POL00105467):


               "I have a somewhat unsatisfactory conversation with Tom Aldred

               yesterday regarding the PO attendees at the meeting on 17 October.

               Tom explained that the 'direction' that there should be only 2-3 POL

               attendees came from Alex Chisholm and therefore will be difficult to

               change, although a representation directly from Paula may work to

               increase the representation to 4."


1664. Jane then discussed whether Tim Parker should attend. He had been intending

      to do so but was willing to stand down.


1665. On 11 October 2018, Jane sent briefing notes to me, Al, Mark Davies, Rodric

      and Tom Cooper concerning each of the lead claimants and their cases

      (U KGI00008494 ).


1666. A briefing paper was prepared for the meeting (POL00111218). This briefing

      note was detailed and should be read in full in conjunction with this section of

      my witness statement to show precisely what I was told immediately before the
                                  Page 707 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      meeting.


1667. On 15 October 2018, Fraser J handed down judgment on POL's application for

      strike out. The Court refused the application. A chain of emails followed

      (POl00042063) between POL's internal and external advisors in which Rodric

      observed on 16 October 2018:


                 "We designed our Information Sharing Protocol with UKGI so that

                 there would be "no surprises". They should therefore hear about the

                 judgment from us rather than any source, and as soon as possible

                 given how quickly word of the judgment could travel.


                 I would therefore like to get a briefing over to UKGl's lawyers

                 tomorrow, whether by phone, email or combination of both.


                 I would be happy to email the judgment to UKGI with a summary of

                 the good and bad points as outlined [in Andrew Parsons' email

                 above], preceding it with a phone call given that they are likely to see

                 this as bad news, but I am conscious that the meeting between Paula,

                 Al, Jane and Mark D and our Minister and other government

                 representatives is on Wednesday, and I don't want to do anything that

                 gets in front of that."


1668. A BEIS document which seems to have been prepared in advance of the

      meeting confirms the attendees on 17 October 2018 (UKGI00008519): Jane,

      Al, Mark and I attended for POL. Government attendees were the Minister, the

      Permanent Secretary, Gavin Lambert (Post Office Policy Champion, BEIS),

      Gareth Evans (Deputy Director, BEIS Legal Advisers), Tom Cooper (Director,

                                      Page 708 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




      UKGI) and Richard Watson (GC, UKGI).


1669. A draft read out of the meeting, prepared by UKGI, describes in detail who said

      what (UKGI00008554).


1670. I recall the meeting as being challenging. I got the impression that the UKGI

      staff wanted to show the Minister that they were serious about challenging

      POL. In light of that, it is important to note that in an internal Government email

      on 2 November 2018, UKGI General Counsel Richard Watson wrote that the

      Minister should be updated that "we were pleased with how the meeting went

      and POL were also glad to have had the opportunity to provide their

      perspective of the litigation" (at page 1 of (UKGI00008606)).


169. Please consider POl00006757 (minutes of the Postmaster litigation

Subcommittee meeting on 24 September 2018). Please describe the update

given at this meeting, in particular whether there was any discussion on

disclosure.


1671. The Inquiry asks me to consider the minutes of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-

      Committee on 24 September 2018 (POl00006757) and asks me to describe

      the update given at this meeting in respect of the litigation, in particular whether

      there was any discussion on disclosure. I recognise that there is no mention of

      disclosure in those minutes.


1672. I do not specifically recall any discussion on disclosure. I recall being aware

      generally at the time that POL was responding to directions for disclosure, but

      that it was taking a lot of time to respond to directions because of the volume

      of documents which POL held.

                                     Page 709 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




170. Please consider POL00021557 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 25

September 2018). Please describe the update that was given on the GLO

Proceedings and the status of prosecutions whilst the litigation remained

unresolved.


1673. I do not specifically recall the POL Board meeting on 25 September 2018. The

      minutes, at item 4(b ), state (POL00021557):


                "The position on former agents' losses was discussed. It was noted

                that we were not bringing prosecutions currently where these related

                to the Horizon system because of the ongoing litigation. The increase

                in cash in branches further increased the risks. We had improved our

                ability to identify branches with potential fraud issues and target them

                for audits. Prosecutions could potentially start against after the

                Horizon Trial (assuming a positive outcome), however as matters go

                "stale" after c6 months, it is unlikely that we would be able to prosecute

                retrospective cases."


171. Please consider POL00024170 (email chain on 1-4 October 2018). Please

describe any conference you had and the advice you received in the lead up

to the Common Issues trial.


1674. I have very little independent recollection of any legal conferences I attended

      or any advice I received in the lead up to the Common lssuestrial. This includes

      the email chain on 1-4 October 2018 at (POL00024170 ), and a litigation

      contingency planning meeting on 5 October 2018 which relates to the chain.


1675. However, to assist the Inquiry, I have set out below the documents which

                                    Page 710 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




record the advice I received between 25 September 2018 and the start of the

Common Issues trial , or which appear to be relevant to the email chain on 1-

4 October 2018:


a.         Jane Macleod attended the POL Board meeting on 25 September 2018 to

           give   an   update    on    the   litigation.   The   minutes   of the   meeting

           (POl00103345) record that:


      i.          Witness statements for the Common Issues trial were being gathered

                  and were due to be exchanged in early August. Once witness

                  statements had been received and reviewed, the QCs would update

                  their merits advice, to be expected in September 2018. The IT experts

                  continued to review documents relating to the Horizon trial. POL

                  expected the scope of the Horizon trial to be agreed in the next month.


     ii.          Jane informed the Board that POL was developing a contingency

                  planning paper. This would allocate to each identified risk four

                  potential responses: (i) contractual changes; (ii) communications; (iii)

                  operational changes (e.g., training) and (iv) system changes (i.e.,

                  Horizon). The paper would identify those responses that could and

                  should be implemented ahead of the judgment and those responses

                  that would only be implemented if the judgment was adverse to POL.


b.         (POl00111095) is a briefing note for me to use at a meeting with Kelly

           Tolhurst MP (the newly appointed Postal Affairs Minister) on 3 September

           2018. There is a section on the litigation at page 6 of the note, in which the

           key risks are said to be:


                                       Page 711 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




       i.        The Court's decision on one or more of the Common Issues has a

                 material   adverse    impact on        POL's   operations   and/or these

                 operational issues create cash flow concerns.


      ii.        The Court determines that there are systemic issues with the Horizon

                 system, such that transactions between SPMs and POL are not seen

                 to be reliable.


     iii.        Public opinion goes against POL as a result of any Court decision

                 such that POL loses both the trust of the public and its key

                 government and commercial stakeholders.


c.          (POL00042037) is an email thread containing an email from Rodric

            Williams to Jane and others on 18 September 2018. In his email, Rodric

            sets out a briefing for management on the issues to be decided at a Case

            Management Conference on 19 September 2018, which were (a) POL's

            application for security for costs and (b) the timetable for the Common

            Issues Trial. Jane replied to Rodric that she would send the email to me. I

            am reminded by reading the document today that the issues it covers were

            known to me, whether in such detail I cannot recall. I have not yet seen any

            email in which I was sent the briefing, and I cannot remember receiving it.


d.          (POL00022943) is a Bond Dickinson note dated 20 September 2018

            entitled "Post Office Group Litigation: Mitigations". The note provided

            advice to POL on three issues: (a) the general effect of a court judgment;

            (b) potential changes to the SPM contracts to "harden" POL's rights to

            recover shortfalls, in the event of an adverse judgment; and (c) potential

            legal routes to make contractual changes to the SPM contracts. I do not
                                      Page 712 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




           recall this document, but I understand that Angela Van Den Bogerd

           emailed me a copy on 27 September 2018, in advance of a litigation

           contingency planning meeting on 28 September 2018 (POL00024157). I

           can see from Angela's email that Andrew Parsons of Bond Dickinson was

           to join the meeting to discuss the contractual issues.


e.         (POL00006757) are the minutes of the meeting of the Litigation Sub-

           Committee on 24 September 2018. I attended the meeting but have no

           independent recollection of what was discussed. The minutes record that

           the Sub-Committee was given the following updates:


      i.        Jane gave a report on the Common Issues trial. She reported (i) that

                POL had asked for inadmissible evidence to be struck out; (ii) that

                POL had succeeded in its application for costs, and (iii) that POL had

                been told that time had been set aside for the trial in November 2018.


     ii.        There was an update on the Horizon Issues trial, which I assume was

                given by Jane. The trial would start in March 2019 and last 20 days.

                The themes for the trial had been agreed. They included the

                robustness of the system, remote access, and the facilities available

                to SPMs. Fraser J would answer 15 questions about the Horizon

                system. The outcome would be on a spectrum rather than a single

                determination on whether the system was robust. The Judge would

                take a view on how the system operated in the past, and his

                conclusions would be of fact and not law. POL faced the challenge of

                explaining the system in plain English and the Judge would need to

                choose between the views of the two experts. The experts would be

                                   Page 713 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




                 in constant dialogue in advance of the trial, and their primary duty was

                 to the Judge. POL's expert's view was that Horizon was a robust

                 system which had some "bugs", but these did not have a material

                 impact on the operation of the system.


     iii.        Mark Davies told the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee that a

                 team would be monitoring press and communications in advance of

                 trial and were preparing for different scenarios. POL was working with

                 external consultants, Portland, to assess POL's approach from an

                 external perspective. Portland would be available throughout the trial

                 and understood the issues.


f.          (POl00111165) is a draft update for the Litigation Sub-Committee meeting

            on 24 September 2018. Although I recall it was around this time that I heard

            about the top line view of POL's Horizon expert (who was referred to in

            paragraphs 2.9 and 2.10 of the draft update), I have no memory of this

            document, and I do not know whether it was provided to the Postmaster

            Litigation Sub-Committee: the minutes of the meeting at (POl00006757)

            do not mention the document, and they record that the updates from Jane

            and Mark were given "verbally".


g.          On 25 September 2018, Jane sent an email to the members of the Sub-

            Committee with details of the timetable for the Common Issues trial

            (POl00117991 ). This had been requested by the Postmaster Litigation

            Sub-Committee at its meeting on 24 September 2018.


h.          (POl00022669) is an update dated 28 September 2018 to the barristers'

            Opinion on the Common Issues. The authors of the update are listed as
                                    Page 714 of 861
                                                                                WITN01020100




     being "Anthony de Garr Robinson QC, David Cavender QC, Owain Draper,

     and Gideon Cohen". While I do not recall the document today, I do believe

     I read it as there are passages about the Judge's approach to the request

     to strike out evidence and counsel's view that he was "inconsistent", which

     having re-read them, seem familiar. The barristers stated in the

     introduction that they saw no reason substantially to change the views set

     out in their Opinion on the Common Issues. Their overall view on the merits

     was unchanged, and the risks they identified in their Opinion remained

     present. The remainder of the update addressed three main issues: (i)

     POL's application to strike out inadmissible evidence submitted by the

     Claimants; (ii) the burden of proof; and (iii) implied terms of the SPM

     contract.


i.   Paragraphs 4 to 9 of the update deal with POL's application to strike out

     parts of the Claimants' evidence for the Common Issues trial on grounds

     of admissibility. The barristers summarised how the Judge had dealt with

     the application to date and advised that: "our view is that the Managing

     Judge is likely to decide the Strike Out Application largely in Post Office's

     favour". They also advised:


           "We consider that the Strike Out Application, however precisely it is

           determined, will achieve the objective of bringing the issue of

           admissibility to the fore and enabling the court to tackle it head-on,

           rather than it becoming a distraction at trial. We do not consider that

           there was or is now any sensible approach for Post Office to take

           given the Lead Claimants' approach and the Managing Judge's


                              Page 715 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




      understandable desire not to be seen to 'shut out' their wish to 'tell

      their story' (the language he used at the hearing on 11 September).

      Ultimately, we expect the Managing Judge to realise that the

      November trial could become unworkable unless he provides a

      strong and clear ruling on admissibility, and we are confident that he

      will then do so. There is always scope for argument about the status

      of particular passages of evidence, but we remain of the view that it

      is likely that the Managing Judge will agree with Post Office's

      submissions as to the principles by which admissibility is to be

      determined in this case and will thus accept the basic thrust of the

      application."


ii.   On the burden of proof issue, they advised that it would be prudent

      for POL to accept that a Horizon-generated loss would not qualify as

      a "loss" which was recoverable from the SPM under the SPM

      contract. In most cases, the fact that there was a shortfall would

      ordinarily be sufficient to establish a genuine "loss", without the need

      for POL to identify and prove directly the actual cause of the loss.

      However, the inference of a "loss" from a shortfall would be

      undermined where there was some reason to believe that the loss

      may have been generated by Horizon. In their view, this would

      depend on the factual circumstances, including the likelihood of the

      alleged Horizon error having generated the shortfall, and evidence

      indicating that other causes for the shortfall were comparatively more

      likely. The effect of this may be to shift the evidential burden to POL

      where the SPM can provide reasonable evidence that the shortfall

                         Page 716 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




                  was caused by Horizon. It was unclear precisely what threshold

                  would have to be crossed before the burden shifted to POL: the

                  barristers believed that the "possibility" (their emphasis) of a Horizon

                  error did not come close to the required level of evidence.


     iii.        On implied terms, the barristers advised that the Managing Judge

                 may look for some points on which to give the Claimants a small

                 victory, especially if (as the barristers anticipated) he decided most of

                 the construction and implication issues in POL's favour. In that

                 context, they recommended that POL should not push back against

                 a case that SPMs should have a meaningful opportunity to seek

                 repayment of remuneration after a period of suspension. They also

                 recommended that POL conceded (or at least did not strongly argue

                 against) the Claimants' case that there was an implied term of the

                 SPM contract that POL's discretion as to the remuneration paid to

                 suspended SPMs would not be exercised dishonestly or in an

                 arbitrary, capricious, or irrational manner.


i.          On 1 October 2018, Jane wrote to Andrew Parsons, Rodric, Avene Regan,

            and me, suggesting that David Cavender QC should attend the litigation

            contingency planning meeting on 5 October 2018 (POL00024170). Jane

            suggested that he would provide an update on his view of the merits, which

            would provide helpful context for our contingency planning discussion.


j.          On 2 October 2018, Jane sent Rodric, Andrew Parsons and Angela a list

            of the topics that David Cavender QC could address (POL00024170).

            These were:

                                     Page 717 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




         i.   His overall view of POL's prospects of success on the Common

              Issues and a high-level view of POL's strengths and weaknesses.


        ii.   A more detailed view on the "shortfalls/burden of proof' issue,

              given that this was the area which would have the greatest

              operational impact in the event of an adverse ruling.


       iii.   Any areas POL should think about appealing.


       iv.    Any other material risk areas in the conduct of the case.


k.   On 4 October 2018, Rodric sent Jane, Angela and Andrew Parsons a

     summary of a discussion with David Cavender QC on what Rodric called

     "the all-important 'burden of proof' issue" (POL00024170). In summary,

     both versions of the SPM contract required a "loss" before the SPM could

     be liable. POL's position that a "loss" was established when a SPM

     submitted an account containing a shortfall was a reasonable position to

     take, given (i) the SPM's control over branch activity; and (ii) Horizon's

     general reliability. This position could be challenged by the SPM in an

     individual case on cogent evidence.


I.   The contingency planning meeting took place on 5 October 2018

     (POl00024158). I attended the meeting, but I have no memory of what

     was discussed, or of David Cavender QC's contribution to the meeting.


m. (POl00111214) is a POL briefing paper for a meeting on 17 October 2018

     with the Postal Affairs Minister, Kelly Tolhurst MP, and Alex Chisholm, the

     Permanent Secretary for BEIS. I attended the meeting together with Jane

     and Al. The paper provided an overview of the litigation and contained a
                              Page 718 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




     summary of the barristers' advice on the Common Issues at paragraph 1.4.

     In short, the barristers believed that POL had the better of the arguments

     on most of the Common Issues, but was unlikely to be successful on each

     and every issue. The areas that were most problematic for POL related to

     the clauses of the SPM contract dealing with suspensions and terminations

     of SPMs, withholding remuneration during periods of suspension and

     imposing liability for branch losses. The issue between POL and the

     Claimants in relation to liability for shortfalls was set out in paragraph 3.3

     of the briefing. The Claimants argued that POL was required to show that

     an SPM's actions had caused POL to suffer a net economic detriment.

     POL's position was that, if a shortfall was shown in the branch accounts,

     the SPM was liable absent any cogent evidence to the contrary, as they

     were responsible for conducting the transactions recorded in the accounts.


n.   (UKGI00008554) is a note of the meeting. I can see from the note that Jane

     addressed most of the legal issues, and that I addressed POL's general

     approach to the litigation and business contingency planning. It was agreed

     towards the end of the meeting that POL would share its legal advice on

     the litigation with the government.


o.   (POL00111257) is a briefing note on the litigation ahead of a POL Board

     meeting on 30 October 2018. It provided an overview of the status of the

     litigation at that point and recorded that David Cavender QC and Andrew

     Parsons of Bond Dickinson would attend the Board meeting to provide an

     update on the Common Issues trial, which was scheduled to begin on 5

     November 2018. This may have been a briefing note prepared for Jane


                              Page 719 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




          who was due to update the POL Board. I do not recall the document.


     p.   On 29 October 2018 Veronica Branton sent the POL Board a message on

          my behalf (POL00103360). I noted in my message that Jane had flown to

          Australia because her father had died the week before. In Jane's absence,

          I had invited David Cavender QC and Andrew Parsons to come to the POL

          Board and brief us on the following matters: (a) POL's application to strike

          out parts of the Claimants' evidence; (b) the Judge's challenge on POL's

          tone of voice during the strike out application; (c) the Claimant's draft

          opening submissions; and, if time allowed, (d) Horizon Trial preparation.


     q.   On 31 October 2018, Rodric Williams sent UKGI a summary of the

          discussion about the litigation at the POL Board meeting on 30 October

          2018 (POL00042106). In relation to the Common Issues trial, it stated that

          the strike out judgment had not changed the substance of POL's legal case

          but had demonstrated the unpredictable nature of the Judge; that the

          Claimants' opening submission had not added clarity to their case or raised

          new issues; and that the Judge's comments about POL's "tone" had been

          taken on board.


     r.   (POL00042122) is an email dated 6 November 2018 from Andrew Parsons

          to Rodric containing a draft note to me on what the parties may say in their

          oral opening submissions. I have no reason to doubt that Rodric offered to

          send the note, but I do not recall it now. My lawyers have been unable to

          establish whether the note was finalised and sent to me.


172. Please consider POL00006388 (Bond Dickinson note on the admission of

further implied terms for a meeting on 12 October 2018). To what extent were
                                  Page 720 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




you involved in the decision on whether to admit further implied terms?


1676. (POl00006388) is a paper prepared by Bond Dickinson for the Steering Group

      meeting on 12 October 2018. The purpose of the paper was to explain to the

      Steering Group a recommendation from the barristers and Bond Dickinson that

      POL should accept two of the implied terms proposed by the Claimants. These

      were:


      a.   A term (called the "Suspension Term") which limited POL's right to

           suspend SPMs to cases where there was a reasonable basis or grounds

           for the suspension on one or more of the grounds for suspension set out

           in the SPM contracts.


      b.   A term (called the "Back-pay Term") providing that POL's contractual

           power to withhold or not to pay remuneration during a period of

           suspension must not be exercised dishonestly or in an arbitrary, capricious

           or irrational manner.


1677. The basis of the recommendation was that the barristers had advised that there

      was a medium to high risk that the implied terms would be approved by the

      Court: there was therefore a tactical advantage in accepting them, rather than

      fighting them and losing at trial. Bond Dickinson had investigated whether the

      implied terms, if accepted, would have an adverse impact on the business. The

      feedback they had received was that their effect would be minimal, because

      the business was in practice already complying with them. The barristers had

      also advised that by conceding the two implied terms, POL would appear more

      reasonable and not lose credibility with Fraser J. They felt they would be in a

      better position to defend the other more onerous implied terms, both in relation
                                   Page 721 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      to suspensions, and more generally. The concession would also assist Fraser

      J to find some points on which to give the Claimants a small victory.


1678. I recall it was suggested by counsel that POL should accept some implied

      terms, which were likely to be imposed. This was described as a concession,

      i.e. being seen to "give" something. I remember taking the advice and not

      having any issue with what was suggested. I have read the paper when

      preparing my witness statement, but it triggers no recollection of my being

      involved in any debate or decision as to whether POL should concede any

      implied terms.


173. Please consider POl00023117, the judgment of Fraser Jin Bates & Others

v. Post Office Limited [2018] EWHC 2698 (QB), POl00103355 (emails between

Jane Macleod and Tim Parker on18 October 2018), POl00103356 (email from

Jane Macleod on 18 October 2018) and UKGI00008549 (your email of 19

October 2018).


173.1 Please describe any discussions you had concerning this judgment.

What. if any, discussion arose from paragraphs 13 and 56 - 57 of the iudgment.


1679. Jane Macleod emailed a copy of Fraser J's judgment dismissing POL's strike

      out application to Tim Parker, Diane Blanchard, and me at 12 :52 on 18 October

      2018 (POl00103355; POl00103349; POl00103351).


1680. In her covering email (which Jane addressed to Tim) Jane mentioned that she

      understood that Tom Cooper had recommended that Tim should read the

      judgment, and provided an explanation of Fraser J's decision:


      a.   Jane explained that POL's application was decided on case management
                                  Page 722 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




     grounds, which gave Fraser J a considerable discretion. Applying those

     grounds, Fraser J had set a very high standard to strike out the Claimants'

     evidence. He had decided that POL had not established that the parts of

     the Claimants' evidence that POL was seeking to strike out could never be

     relevant to the case, given the number of Common Issues. However, he

     confirmed that the law on the admissibility of evidence would be applied at

     the Common Issues Trial. He also confirmed that, at the Common Issues

     Trial, he would not rule on any matters relating to Horizon or whether POL

     had breached its duties to SPMs: Jane noted that most of the disputed

     evidence went to these two issues.


b.   Jane stated that the Judge's ruling on the application was consistent with

     his approach of allowing the Claimants their day in Court, while applying

     orthodox legal principles. That said, POL had lost the application and

     should expect the Claimants to be awarded their costs, which were

     estimated at 120,000.


c.   Jane stated that: "However in deciding the application, the Managing

     Judge was very critical of our conduct of the case, intimating that we were

     not acting cooperatively and constructively in trying to resolve this litigation

     (which criticism was levelled equally between the parties); and that we had

     impugned the court and its processes by making the application for

     improper purposes. This response is extremely disappointing as this has

     not been our intention, and his challenge as to the purpose for which we

     had applied for strike out is at odds with comments he had made during

     various procedural hearings over the past year."


                               Page 723 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      d.   Finally, the judgment had been the subject of an article in the Law Gazette.

           In light of Fraser J's remarks, Jane was now engaging with Portland and

           POL's internal communications function to refine POL's preparation for

           trial, including a reactive communications plan.


      1681. Tim replied to all on the same day at 14:53 (in the same URN) stating

            that he had read the judgment. He went on:


              " ... the judge does seem to somewhat negative about our efforts to take

              out elements of the evidence, even if he does acknowledge that both

              sides have been uncooperative with each other in the management of

              the case. My worry is that some of his points at the end betray what

              looks like an inherent dislike of our "aggressive" approach to the

              individual claimants as well as an "aggressive" approach to litigation, as

              well as a rap over the knuckles regarding what the judges sees as using

              negative PR as part of our argument. Interesting to know if this initial

              response from him suggests any change of tack on our part."


1682. Jane responded to Tim in a reply to all email at 18:31 on the same day. She

      stated, in response to Tim's concerns:


             "Paula and I have discussed this at length this afternoon. The

              commentary in the judgement is unfortunate. There is obviously a fine

              balance between doing everything that we can to achieve a legal victory,

              and maintaining the right public image - not helped when the judge is

             linking activity from 15 years ago, and assuming by extrapolation that

              this must underpin our behaviour today. We will work with Portland and

              the Comms team to manage the lines going forward, and will discuss
                                    Page 724 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




             with our external advisors how best to position the language so that we

             do not inadvertently influence the Judge adversely. Fortunately the

             decision in the Common Issues trial should be made on the basis of

             legal analysis-which is less subjective, and also appealable if we believe

             the judge arrives at the wrong decision."


1683. At 18:41 on 18 October 2018, Jane sent the text of her initial email to me, Tim,

      and Diane as an update to the POL Board (POl00103356).


1684. In her email to Tim at 18:31 on 18 October 2018, Jane mentioned that she had

      spoken to me about the judgment at length earlier that day. I have some

      recollection   of the   meeting   and    I can     see   from   (UKGI00008549;

      POl00103357) that I emailed the POL Board on 19 October 2018 with a list of

      the action points that Jane and I had discussed and agreed during the meeting.


1685. Although I cannot recall reading the judgment at the time, I believe that I did

      so, because I stated in my email to the POL Board on 19 October 2018 that

      Jane and I had gone through the judgment and Fraser J's challenge on POL's

      tone of voice. I have re-read paragraphs 13 and 56-57 while preparing my

      witness statement. They contain serious criticisms of what the Fraser J

      described as an aggressive approach to litigation tactics and what he called

      POL's "tenor' or "tone". At the end of paragraph 57, Fraser J was clearly

      sending a message to POL when he said: "/ wish to make one point entirely

      clear, so that this cannot be misunderstood. An aggressive and dismissive

      approach to such major Group Litigation (or indeed any litigation) is entirely

      misplaced."


1686. The severity of Fraser J's criticisms came as a shock to POL's management.
                                   Page 725 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      Our belief at the time was that POL had taken on board what Fraser J had said

      previously, and we had not picked up that there was anything aggressive to

      POL's tactics and approach.


1687. I wanted to sit down with Jane to go through what had gone wrong and what

      we could do to put things right. It was not an easy conversation. It was serious

      and concerning that POL had greatly annoyed the Judge who was dealing with

      the whole of the Group Litigation. I had to make this clear to Jane. However, I

      also wanted to reassure her that I was there to listen and would support her in

      taking steps to respond to the Judge's criticisms.


1688. I remember that Jane was extremely upset because it had not been her

      intention to be aggressive. I recall her telling me that some of the lawyers

      involved (I remember Jane mentioning Andrew Parsons and Rodric) felt bad

      about how they had handled some of the documents for the application. I also

      recall her being frustrated about aspects of Fraser J's approach. He had read

      and made negative comments about some of the correspondence between

      POL and the Claimants from the time they were dismissed as SPMs - in some

      cases more than a decade ago. Jane's concern was that the Judge appeared

      to be conflating or reading across POL's conduct many years ago with its

      conduct in the present. She was also frustrated that, at one point, he appeared

      to have accepted that he should make a definitive ruling on the evidence before

      the start of the trial but had changed his mind.


1689. I understood Jane's perspective and that it can be difficult to get the tone right

      where one of the parties is a large organisation and the other is a group of

      individuals who, no matter that they were bringing the litigation were people

                                    Page 726 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




     whose lives had been so seriously affected, as we have heard many times in

     this Inquiry. It was clear that we needed to take steps to correct what the Judge

     regarded as POL's inappropriate tone towards the litigation, the Claimants, and

     their case. I left the conversation satisfied that Jane understood that the

     situation was serious and that we needed to implement a plan to avoid a

     repetition of the kind of approach that had irritated the Judge.


1690. In my email to the POL Board on 19 October 2019 (UKGI00008549;

     POL00103357) I set out what I described as "remedies" to Fraser J's criticisms.

     Although, as I mentioned in my email, Jane was understandably frustrated, the

     onus was on POL to change tack. Jane and I had therefore agreed that she

     would implement five steps as soon as possible:


     a.   She would speak to the entire team working on the litigation to emphasise

          that they should take a step back and consider not only what they did, but

          how they did it.


     b.   Jane had already spoken to Rodric who had reviewed POL's written

          submission but had not spotted a section which had drawn criticism from

          the Judge.


     c.   Future submissions would have a second legal check and POL in-house

          communications would review them for their tone. Jane would also read all

          future submissions.


     d.   Jane would meet Mr Parsons, the solicitor at Bond Dickinson who had

          drafted the evidence for POL which had been criticised by the Judge. Jane

          was to ensure that he understood the issue we were concerned about.

                                  Page 727 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




      e.   Jane would meet POL's two QCs to agree how they would redress POL's

           tone.


1691. I informed the POL Board that I would support Jane and follow up on each of

      these actions with her next week. I would then call one of the managing

      partners at Bond Dickinson (who I knew well) to obtain some personal

      reassurance. This was a reference to Simon Richardson, who was Andrew

      Parsons' boss. I have a recollection of speaking to him and him telling me that

      Andrew Parsons felt bad about the comments he had put in his statement

      which the Judge had criticised.


1692. Ken McCall replied to me and the rest of the POL Board on 19 October 2018

      (UKGI00008549; POL00103358) stating that he fully agreed with my views and

      approach.


1693.1 can see from the email from Veronica Branton to the POL Board on 29

      October 2018 (POL00103360) and the agenda for the POL Board meeting on

      30 October 2018 (POL00026936) that David Cavender QC and Andrew

      Parsons attended part of the meeting to discuss the litigation and that one of

      the items on the agenda was the "'tone of voice"' challenge from Fraser J.


1694.1 cannot recall what was discussed at the meeting, but I can see from a

      summary of the discussion that Rodric emailed to UKGI on 31 October 2018

      (POL00042106) that the Judge's comments in the strike out judgment about

      POL's tone had been taken on board. I assume the statement about taking the

      Judge's comments on board had come from David Cavender QC and Andrew

      Parsons.


                                  Page 728 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




173.2. Please explain why POL continued to adopt a litigation strategy that was

criticised by Fraser J for a second time. Who was responsible for this?


1695. I do not wish to conflate what I have read when preparing this witness

      statement with my recollection from the time. As I have said above, although I

      do not recall clearly, I think I may have read the barristers' update to their

      Opinion   on   the Common      Issues at (POL00022669),        in which   they

      characterised the strike out application as a sensible application for POL to

      bring and which was likely to mainly succeed. However, I do not recall any

      suggestion or perception that the strike out application was an aggressive step

      in the litigation. As I have mentioned above, Fraser J's criticisms of the

      application came as a surprise to POL management.


173.3. Did you, the Board or senior management at POL consider changing

litigation strategy following this iudgment? If not, why not?


1696. As I have mentioned above, it was clear from the Fraser J's criticisms that POL

      needed to take active steps to change its tone. However, the POL Board and

      senior management did not consider a general change in litigation strategy.

      The approach of the POL Board was that strategy was a matter for Jane

      Macleod (who had been tasked with the management of the litigation), the two

      QCs, and the senior lawyers at Bond Dickinson. I think there was an

      assumption that the specialist litigation lawyers would know how to respond

      effectively to the Judge's concerns. There was a reluctance to create any

      tension or lack of trust between management and the lawyers so close to the

      start of the Common Issues trial.


173.4 Why did you not copy Al Cameron or Jane Macleod into UKGI00008549
                                  Page 729 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1697.1 did not copy Jane Macleod into my email to the Board on 19 October 2018

      (UKGI00008549) because she and I had just had a very difficult conversation

      about Fraser J's judgment. I knew from that conversation that Jane was upset,

      and I did not want to embarrass or demoralise her. That is also why I did not

      copy her colleague Al Cameron. However, I am as sure as I can be that I spoke

      to him about it: Al and I sat together and worked as a very close partnership.

      He was my de facto deputy and I kept him closely in the loop, especially on

      POL Board matters.


173.5. Please describe the steps you took to address the criticisms made by

Fraser J.


1698.1 have described above the steps I took to address the criticisms made by

      Fraser J. I spoke to Jane Macleod and agreed with her a plan of action to

      ensure that POL's presentation of its case did not alienate the Judge. I spoke

      to a senior lawyer at Bond Dickinson to gain direct reassurance. I invited David

      Cavender QC and Andrew Parsons to the POL Board meeting on 30 October

      2018 to discuss the tone in which POL argued its case.


174. Please consider POL00103360 (email from on your behalf to the POL

Board on 29 October 2018) and POL00021558 (minutes of the POL Board

meeting on 30 October 2018).


174.1. Please describe the update that was given on the GLO proceedings, in

particular the briefing that "The claimants' IT expert had found that Horizon

was not a robust system but this assessment was founded on identifying a

large number of small problems with the system which our expert was

confident could be rebuffed".
                                  Page 730 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1699. As I have mentioned above, at my request, David Cavender QC and Andrew

      Parsons attended the Board meeting on 30 October 2018. I stated in my email

      to the POL Board on 29 October 2018 (POL00103360) that I had asked them

      to brief the POL Board on (a) POL's application to strike out inadmissible

      evidence; (b) Fraser J's challenge to POL about its tone of voice; (c) the

      Claimant's opening submissions for the Common Issues trial; and if time

      allowed, (d) preparation for the Horizon Issues trial. I can see from an email

      from Angela Van Den Bogerd to me and others on 1 November 2018

      (POL00111283) that I spoke to David Cavender QC on 29 October 2018, but I

      cannot recall what we discussed.


1700. (POL00111257) is a briefing note prepared ahead of the POL Board meeting

      on 30 October 2018. It set out a suggested agenda for the discussion with

      David Cavender QC and Andrew Parsons, comprising (1) the trial timetable

      (allocated to Andrew Parsons); (2) preparations for the Common Issues trial

      (David Cavender KC); (3) communications and media handling (Mark Davies);

      and, if time allowed, (4) an update on the Horizon Issues trial (Andrew

      Parsons). The briefing set out at paragraph 4 is a summary of what the current

      position was in relation to the Horizon Issues trial:


         a. "The legal team is also preparing for the Horizon Issues Trial, which will

             begin in March 2019. The majority of the issues to be determined at this

             trial will be determined via expert opinion evidence but some require

             factual evidence.


         b. The claimant's expert (Jason Coyne of IT Group) has now submitted his

             expert report. Absent finding a 'smoking gun' he has listed out a number

                                    Page 731 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




             of bugs, without analysis of their effect or extent, before concluding 'it

             was highly likely for bugs/errors/defects to have the potential to' cause

             shortfalls and undermine the reliability of Horizon.


          c. Post Office's expert (Dr Robert Worden of Charteris) has until 30

             November 2018 to submit his report, supported by Fujitsu, the legal

             team and Post Office more generally.


          d. Witness evidence has also been exchanged. The claimants submitted

             9 statements - 3 from witnesses who have previously criticised Horizon

             (Richard Roll - an ex Fujitsu employee who appeared on Panorama;

             Charles McLachlan - defence expert in the Misra prosecution; and Ian

             Henderson - Second Sight) and 6 statements from former postmasters.


          e. Post Office has until 13 November to provide its response to these

             statements."


1701. The appendices to the briefing gave further detail on the issues which had been

      discussed during a contingency planning meeting on Friday 26 October 2018.

      I do not recall the meeting, but I can see from (POL00024158) that I am listed

      as an attendee.


1702. The first issue was contingency planning. Three areas of the Common Issues

      had been identified as being greatest concern in terms of business impact.

      These were shortfalls, liability for losses, and POL as agent. While POL

      believed that it had the stronger of the arguments in these areas, the business

      impact of an adverse finding would be material. Mitigating actions were in place

      or being considered to address these concerns:

                                   Page 732 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      a. A variation to the contracts, which would be made only if the judgment went

           against POL.


      b. An end-to-end investigation process had been designed, beginning with an

           issue or discrepancy being identified to the findings of POL's investigation

           being produced and shared with the SPM.


      c.   It was considered unlikely that the Common Issues trial would change the

           basic principle that SPMs have to make good any losses they cause.

           However, an adverse judgment may require POL to do much more than it

           currently did to demonstrate that the SPM (and not something outside the

           SPM's control, such as a bug in Horizon) caused the loss before they were

           asked to make it good. There was therefore a risk that an adverse judgment

           may lead SPMs to change their behaviour. Most SPMs made good their

           losses immediately and accepted liability for any shortfall recorded in their

           branch accounts. If the judgment on the Common Issues was adverse,

           these SPMs might begin to demand that POL show positively what caused

           the loss and/or discount any other possible causes for it, irrespective of

           value or the SPMs' knowledge of what caused the loss. This would require

           POL to review the branch accounts and Horizon reports thoroughly to

           confirm that only the SPM could be liable for the loss. This would be a

           significant exercise. Scenario planning was underway to model the impact

           of such behavioural changes.


      d.   Owing to cost and complexity, CCTV would only be installed in all Post

           Offices if the judgment went against POL.


1703. Another topic covered in the briefing was mediation of the Group Litigation.
                                    Page 733 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




      POL's current thinking was that a mediation prior to a judgment on the Horizon

      Issues trial was unlikely to resolve the dispute or even narrow the issues. At

      the most recent hearing on 10 October 2018, the Judge himself had said that

      any mediation was highly likely to fail.


1704. The final topic in the briefing note was settlement. The possibility of settlement

      had been regularly considered both by the legal team and by the Postmaster

      Litigation Sub-Committee at each of its meetings. However, to date,

      management and the POL Board had taken the view that settlement would not

      satisfactorily address the issues at stake as there was a series of issues which

      made settlement problematic:


      a. As the Claimants' legal costs were being met by a litigation funder (which

            would normally expect to recover at least three times the costs under any

            settlement or award) and the Claimants had not yet been required to

            articulate their claim for damages, POL had no clear view of the amount

            that might be acceptable through a settlement.


       b.   It was unlikely that the terms of any settlement would remain confidential.

            A settlement was likely to be construed in the media as a capitulation and

            was therefore likely to give rise to further claims. In that context, any

            settlement would only be binding on the parties to the action.


      c.    Settlement would not resolve the issues raised by the Claimants about the

            correct interpretation of the SPM contract and the robustness of Horizon.

            Therefore, SPMs would continue to challenge the veracity of the data from

            Horizon on which POL relies to recover losses and will perpetuate the

            current issues POL faces whereby branch losses are increasing
                                    Page 734 of 861
                                                                                           WITN01020100




               significantly. It was unlikely that any single SPM would be able to afford the

               costs to have the Horizon issues fully determined, whereas the Group

               Litigation and the funding structure allowed those issues to be addressed.


     d.        POL currently enjoyed the confidence of both customers and the clients to

               whom it provided services. An outcome which did not address the robust

               operation and resilience of Horizon risked undermining that public and

               commercial confidence in POL.


1705. The minutes of the POL Board meeting on 30 October 2018 (POl00021558)

     record that David Cavender QC gave an update on the Common Issues trial:

     "We had lost our application to limit the evidence being presented at the trial to

     the common issues. This judgment was discussed at it was noted that during

     the trial we would politely but persistently challenge the claimants' case where

     there were inaccuracies or contradictions." Andrew Parsons provided an

     update on the second trial on the Horizon system: "The claimants' IT expert

     had found that Horizon was not a robust system but this assessment was

     founded on identifying a large number of small problems with the system which

     our expert was confident could be rebuffed."


1706. On 31 October 2018, Rodric Williams emailed a fuller summary of the

     discussion at the Board meeting to UKGI (POl00042106):


     a.        In relation to the Common Issues trial, the lawyers advised that:


          i.        Fraser J's judgment on the strike out application had not changed the

                    substance of POL's case. Although it demonstrated the unpredictable

                    nature of the Judge, he continued to assert that he would follow the

                                        Page 735 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




             law in deciding the Common Issues.


  ii.        The Claimants' written opening submissions for the Common Issues

             trial had not added much clarity to their case and did not raise any

             new arguments.


 iii.        Fraser J's comments in the strike out judgment about POL's "tone"

             had been taken on board. POL may need to press home with the

             Claimants' witnesses certain points that were necessary to POL's

             case.


b. The advice received by the POL Board in relation to the Horizon issues

        was that:


             "The Claimants' IT expert Jason Coyne had produced his first formal

             report on the Horizon system.


             Mr Coyne had not identified any 'smoking gun' to show Horizon has

             a fundamental defect. He has instead Iisted all the bugs he has found

             in the Horizon technical documents to then draw the conclusion that

             "it was highly likely for bugs/error/defects to have the potential to"

             cause shortfalls and undermine the reliability of Horizon.


             Mr Coyne does not however seek to explain the effect or extent of the

             identified bugs/errors/defects, without which there is an analytical gap

             linking the listed bugs etc to Mr Coyne's conclusion.


             This point will be addressed as part of Post Office's expert report,

             which is due to be filed on 30 November 2018."


                                Page 736 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




1707. I do not recall any details of the briefing to the POL Board for its meeting on 30

      October 2018, beyond what is set out in the documents I mention above.


174.2. Please set out when you first were aware of the claimants' expert's

position. What, if any, steps did POL take to investigate the concerns raised

by the claimants' expert outside the litigation. In particular, what, if any, steps

did POL take to determine whether the bugs, individually or cumulatively,

affected the safety of any past conviction?


1708.1 understand from (FUJ00160138) that the Claimants' solicitors sent POL's

      solicitors a copy of Jason Coyne's report on 16 October 2018. On 18 October

      2018, Jonathan Gribben, a solicitor at Bond Dickinson, sent a copy of the report

      to a group including Rob Houghton and Jane Macleod (POL00111231 ).

      Jonathan Gribben gave four headline points about the report:


          "1. it is 225 pages of professionally presented work;


          2. Coyne has not discovered any smoking gun then [sic.] shows that

          Horizon has a fundamental defect. Indeed, you could read parts of his

          report as saying that Horizon is fairly robust.


          3. his general approach is to list out all the bugs he has found in the Horizon

          technical documents and then draw the conclusion that "it was highly likely

          for bugs/errors/defects to have the potential to" cause shortfalls and

          undermine the reliability of Horizon.


          4. Robert Warden's initial view is that there is a lack of analysis of the bugs

          identified by Coyne - Coyne does not seek to explain their effect or extent.

          Without this analysis, Robert believes it is a leap to say that a simple list of
                                    Page 737 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




         bugs justifies Coyne's conclusions."


1709. I have seen a copy of Jason Coyne's report during the preparation of this

      witness statement, but I do not remember being given or reading the report at

      the time. I do not remember when I first became aware of Jason Coyne's views.

      The minutes of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting on 24

      September 2018 (POl00006757) record that the Postmaster Litigation Sub-

      Committee received an oral briefing on the Horizon issues. The minutes do not

      mention Jason Coyne's report, but state that "Our expert's view was that

      Horizon was a robust system which had some 'bugs' but which did not have a

      material impact on the operation of the system". It is possible, but I do not

      remember, that Jason Coyne's view was mentioned at the meeting. Based on

      the documents I refer to in my answer to Question 174.1, I was made aware of

      Jason Coyne's views in broad terms by the time of the POL Board meeting on

      30 October 2018.


1710. I do not recall any discussion at the POL Board nor any advice being given by

      the lawyers that POL should investigate Jason Coyne's concerns outside the

      litigation, including in relation to past prosecutions. The position at that time

      was that POL's expert, Dr Robert Worden, was in the process of preparing his

      response to Jason Coyne's report. The Board was told that Dr Worden was

      confident that Horizon was a robust system and that Jason Coyne's views

      could be rebuffed. As a non-IT expert, I was not in a position to challenge the

      views expressed by either expert, but I think the POL Board took comfort that

      Horizon was now being looked at by an independent expert, and who was of

      the opinion that Horizon was robust.


                                   Page 738 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




175. Please consider POL00111281 (email from Angela Van Den Bogerd to you

and others on 1 November 2018), POL00117998 (email exchange between you

and Rodric Williams on 7/8 November 2018), POL00118001 (email from Mark

Underwood to you on 9 November 2018), POL00026954 (email from Rodric

Williams to you and others on 13 November 2018), POL00111405 (email from

Rodric Williams to you and others on 20 November 2018), POL00042151 (email

from Rodric Williams to you and others on 21 November 2018), POL00111475

(email from Rodric Williams to you and others on 5 December 2018) and

POL00107162 (email chain between you and Rodric Williams on 4-6

December).


175.1. Please set out what involvement or oversight you had over POL's

conduct of the Common Issues trial.


1711. I had limited involvement in the Common Issues trial. The steps I took in terms

      of what I would consider to be involvement were:


      a.   I spoke to Jane Macleod, Bond Dickinson, and David Cavender QC about

           taking steps to correct POL's "tone" in advance of the Common Issues trial.


      b.   I invited David Cavender QC and Andrew Parsons to attend the POL Board

           meeting on 30 October 2018 to brief the Board on the litigation. I also had

           a call with David Cavender QC on 29 October 2018. The relationship and

           communications with the external lawyers were usually managed by Jane

           Macleod. However, as I mentioned in my email to the Board on 29 October

           2018 (POL00103360) Jane's father had died the previous week and she

           had flown to Australia. I was therefore stepping in for Jane at this meeting.


                                    Page 739 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      c.   There were regular contingency planning meetings and Group Litigation

           update meetings in the lead up to the Common Issues trial. I cannot recall

           these meetings, but I can see from (POL00024158) that I was listed to

           attend contingency planning meetings on 5 October 2018, 12 October

           2018, 19 October 2018, 26 October 2018 and 2 November 2018, and

           Group Litigation update meetings on 7 November 2018, 9 November 2018,

           16 November 2018, 23 November 2018, and 30 November 2018.


      d.   On 17 November 2018, I attended a meeting with Kelly Tolhurst MP (the

           BIS Minister with responsibility for postal affairs) and Alex Chisolm (the BIS

           Permanent Secretary) to brief them on the Group Litigation. An annotated

           copy of the briefing paper for the meeting is at (POL00111208) and a note

           of the meeting is at (UKGI00008554).


1712. I can see from an email dated 1 November 2018 from Angela Van Den Bogerd

      (POL00111281) that a planning meeting I was to attend on 2 November 2018

      was cancelled as there had been no material updates since the POL Board

      meeting on 30 October 2018. Angela reported that POL had now completed its

      preparations for the Common Issues trial, and that it was now over to the legal

      team, and principally David Cavender QC, to ensure that he was fully prepared

      ahead of opening submissions on 7 November 2018. Aside from a call

      scheduled with David Cavender QC for 2 November 2018, POL's attention

      would focus on making sure that POL's 14 witnesses for the Common Issues

      trial were fully supported and had everything they needed ahead of giving

      evidence.


1713. I was not involved in the Common Issues trial once it started on 5 November

                                    Page 740 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




      2018, and I had no role in overseeing the Common Issues trial. It did not occur

      to me that I should have any involvement or any oversight role. The trial

      process was in the hands of experienced and highly regarded lawyers, who

      were, as I understood it, well prepared and on top of the detail.


1714. I was kept informed of the progress of the trial, as shown by the documents to

      which the Inquiry has referred in Question 175:


      a.   (POL00117998) is an email chain about the opening submissions at the

           Common Issues trial on 6 and 7 November 2018. On 6 and 7 November

           2018, Rodric Williams sent a group of senior managers, including me,

           bullet point summaries of the Claimants' and POLs opening submissions.

           On the evening of 7 November 2018, I sent an email to Rodric asking what

           would happen if we thought that Fraser J had misunderstood or

           misinterpreted or not read POL's submissions properly. My question may

           have been triggered by an observation in Rodric's email in the chain at

           23:09 on 7 November 2018 that there had been some confusion between

           David Cavender QC and the Judge about how the clauses of the SPM

           contracts which made SPMs liable for branch losses applied. Rodric

           replied to me on 8 November 2018, stating that POL would have

           opportunities to revisit the point during trial and could look to appeal if we

           believed the Judge had got the issue wrong.


      b.   (POL00118001) is an email to me from Mark Underwood on 9 November

           2018 containing a note that I could share with the POL Board which

           summarised the events of the first week of the Common Issues Trial.


      c.   The Inquiry has referred to (POL00026954). This is not, as described in
                                    Page 741 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     Question 175, an email from Rodric to me and others on 13 November

     2018 but a POL GE agenda for a meeting on 12 November 2018. It is

     possible that the Inquiry intended to refer to (POL00118002), which is an

     update email from Rodric to me and others on 13 November 2018 in which

     he summarised the evidence given by two of the lead Claimants, Pamela

     Stubbs and Mohammad Sabir.


d.   (POL00111405) is an email dated 20 November 2018 from Rodric to me

     and others with a summary of Patrick Green QC's cross-examination of

     Angela.


e.   (POL00042151) is another update email from Rodric to me and others,

     dated 21 November 2018. It summarised the final day of Angela's evidence

     and the evidence of the next three witnesses, Tim Dance, Helen Dickinson,

     and Michael Shields.


f.   (POL00107162) is an email chain on 4 and 5 December 2018, beginning

     with an update from Rodric to myself and others with a summary of Patrick

     Green QC's closing submissions. Rodric reported that Patrick Green QC

     had spent very little time on the main issues being tried, namely the terms

     of the SPM contracts, and instead focussed on his overarching narrative

     that POL's relationship with SPMs was deeply unfair and biased towards

     POL. The main risk, therefore, was that the Judge would "fill in the gaps"

     in the Claimants' analysis: David Cavender QC would look to address this

     in his closing submissions. I replied on 5 December 2018 stating that this

     was helpful and "more reassuring than of late". I then asked Rodric what

     he would write in addition to what Patrick Green QC had said in his closing

                             Page 742 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




    submissions if he were the lawyer for the Claimants. Rodric responded

    later that day with his thoughts:


    " ... if I was the claimants' lawyer, the points I would make following Patrick

    Green QC's closing would be:


     We (i.e. the Claimant's) were able to air in courl all of our concerns about

     Post Office and how it behaved towards us;


     - We also raised enough law to give creditability to our case;


-    Even if not a 'slam dunk', we have done enough to convince the Judge

     that he should find a way through the law to come down on our side.


     From that same perspective, the points I would make from the first day of

     David Cavender QC's closing could be:


-    Post Office is very sensitive about evidence which casts it in a bad light,

     and is trying to tie the Judge's hands from using that evidence;


     The Judge likes the "relational contract" concept, so may want to use that

     to imply good faith concepts into the postmaster contracts; and


-    Post Office wants to make postmasters strictly liable for branch losses,

     when the contracts' words (or at feast the pre-NT version) require proof of

     fault, and they know that losses can be caused by things outside the

     postmaster's control, e.g. bugs in Horizon or inaccurate Transaction

     Corrections.


     I hope that's helpful, but please let me know if you would like me to expand


                             Page 743 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




             on any points."


       g.   (POl00111475) is an email on 5 December 2018 from Rodric to me and

            others with an update on the first day of David Cavender QC's closing

            submissions. Rodric reported that David Cavender QC believed that the

            Judge had understood POL's case on the terms of the SPM contracts

            which held SPMs liable for losses.


175.2. Please consider your email stating that Mr Williams' email of 4 December

2018 was "more reassuring than of late". To what were you comparing Mr

Williams' email?


1715. I have read the email chain at (POl00107162) and the other documents the

       Inquiry has referred to in Question 175 to attempt to refresh my memory. I

       cannot recall now exactly what I had in mind when I wrote to Rodric Williams

       on 5 December 2018 that his email on 4 December 2018, in relation to Patrick

       Green QC's closing submissions, was more reassuring than of late. However,

       having re-read some of his earlier emails sent as summaries during the

       Common Issues trial, I expect I found it more reassuring than, for example

       (POl00042151 ), where Rodric explained why it could be thought that "our

       witnesses have not been helpful" or "characterised as our witnesses being

       defensive."


176. Please consider POl00021559 (minutes of POL Board meeting on 27

November 2018).


176.1. Please describe the update on the GlO Proceedings and the Common

Issues trial.

                                    Page 744 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1716. I attended the POL Board meeting on 27 November 2018. Section 7 of the

      minutes (POL00021559) records an update by Jane Macleod on the Group

      Litigation, including the Common Issues trial and preparation for the Horizon

      Issues trial. The Common Issues trial had not concluded at the time of the POL

      Board meeting, as the barristers were due to give their closing submissions the

      following week.


1717.1 do not recall what Jane said during the meeting, but I can see from the minutes

      that the tone of Jane's update is in some respects more pessimistic than the

      feedback POL had received before the start of the Common Issues trial. The

      minutes contain a number of references to POL making an appeal from Fraser

      J's judgment on the Common Issues, and that Jane anticipated that Fraser J

      would criticise some of POL's behaviour in his judgment, leading to adverse

      publicity. I cannot recall any details of the criticisms that Jane anticipated

      Fraser J would make in his judgment.


1718.1 should add that it is possible that I was given additional feedback on the

      Common Issues trial at the Group Litigation update meetings scheduled for; 9

      November 2018, 16 November 2018, 23 November 2018, and 30 November

      2018 (see (POL00024158)). I cannot recall any of these meetings, and I have

      not seen any notes of these meetings.


176.2. Did you have, or were you aware of, any concerns as to whether Fraser

J was, or appeared to be, biased against POL in his handling of the GLO

Proceedings at this stage or earlier. If so, was this discussed at the Board?


1719. My information and knowledge about how Fraser J handled the trial, and the

      earlier stages of the Group Litigation came to me in reports from and
                                  Page 745 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      discussions with the legal team. I do not recall any concern that Fraser J was

      biased against POL being communicated to me or to the POL Board, until after

      POL received a draft copy of his judgment on the Common Issues in March

      2019.


177. Please consider POL00006471 (Bond Dickinson note for Steering Group

Meeting on 28 November 2018).


177.1. Please explain to what extent. if at all, you were involved in the

preparation and/ or strategy for the deployment of expert evidence in the GLO

Proceedings.


1720. I was not involved in the preparation of, nor any strategy for, the deployment of

      the expert IT evidence in the GLO Proceedings. At the time, I would not have

      thought it possible for POL to have had a strategy in relation to the expert

      evidence. I regarded Dr Robert Worden as being the specialist authority on the

      IT issues, and I understood that he owed a duty to assist the Court.


1721. I was kept informed of the developing views of the two experts as they went

      through the process of investigating Horizon and preparing their reports prior

      to the Horizon Issues trial:


      a.   I attended the meeting of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee on 24

           September 2018. The minutes (POL00006757) record in section 4 that

           POL's expert's view was that Horizon was a robust system which had some

           "bugs", but which did not have a material impact on the operation of the

           system.


      b.   I attended the meeting of the POL Board on 25 September 2018. The
                                     Page 746 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




     minutes (POL00021557) record an update from Jane Macleod that two

     experts (one for each party) had been appointed to provide their view of

     the Horizon system and had a series of questions to answer from the

     Judge. In effect the Judge's decision would reflect the expert he believed.


c.   I attended the meeting of the POL Board on 30 October 2018. The minutes

     (POL00021558) record a briefing on the litigation from David Cavender QC

     and Andrew Parsons from Bond Dickinson. Andrew Parsons gave an

     update on the Horizon Issues trial. He reported that the Claimants' IT

     expert had found that Horizon was not a robust system, but this

     assessment was based on identifying a large number of small problems

     with the system, which POL's expert, Dr Robert Worden, was confident

     could be rebuffed.


d.   I attended the meeting of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee on 28

     January 2019. The minutes (POL00006756) summarise the views of the

     two experts on page 1 . Jason Coyne was of the view that Horizon had

     bugs, that there could have been more bugs, and that these bugs could

     have caused the errors / losses in the Claimants' branches. Dr Robert

     Warden's view, however, was that while there were bugs in the Horizon

     system (as was the case with any IT system) it seemed improbable, given

     the volume of transactions processed through the system, that these could

     have caused the errors or losses in the branches.


e.   I attended the meeting of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee on 21

     February 2019. The minutes (POL00006753) record on page 1 an update

     from Anthony de Garr Robinson QC, who summarised the views of the

                             Page 747 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




             experts as follows:


        i.        The Horizon Issues trial would focus on 15 questions covering three

                  core issues: whether Horizon was robust, the cause of shortfalls in

                  branches (including remote access) and miscellaneous issues.


       ii.        The key issue was robustness and "our view'' (I am not certain

                  whether this refers to POL or the legal team) was that it was critically

                  robust. The Claimants' expert had identified system errors, but his

                  report lacked balance.


      iii.        POL was not seeking to prove that the system could not have been

                  improved. No-one had found a fundamental flaw in the system.

                  Where there were system issues, the systems and processes to

                  address these had worked well in practice. Several of the bugs

                  identified by the Claimants' expert were not in fact system bugs and

                  several would not have affected branch accounts. Several bugs had

                  been triggered by an unusual combination of events. For the vast

                  majority of the time, Horizon was a reliable system.


      iv.         Jason Coyne argued that there could be thousands of undetected

                  bugs in Horizon.


      v.          Dr Robert Worden argued that there could not be a sufficient volume

                  of bugs to have generated the losses alleged by the Claimants. The

                  error rate was low when assessed against the number of users and

                  50 million transactions per week.


177.2. What were your views when you learnt of the content of Mr Warden's
                                     Page 748 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




report? Please set out any steps you or POL took to disclose the fact that Mr

Worden considered that there had been "672 bugs in Horizon over the last 18

years" to SPMs convicted on the basis of evidence generated by the Horizon

IT System.


1722. The Inquiry has referred me to (POL00006471 ), which is a Bond Dickinson

      noting paper on Dr Robert Warden's expert report for a Steering Group meeting

      on 28 November 2018. Paragraph 3.1 of the document sets out what they

      describe as Dr Warden's "central conclusion", namely, that Horizon was

      reliable and extremely unlikely to be the cause of the Claimants' shortfalls. He

      had taken a quantitative or statistical approach to the existence of bugs, on the

      basis that the question of the extent that Horizon contained bugs was a form of

      risk analysis. The figure of 672 bugs appears in section 5 of the document:

      through a statistical analysis, Dr Robert Worden had calculated that at the

      absolute worst there had been 672 bugs in Horizon over the last 18 years. This

      was based on a "worst case assumption" methodology. In Dr Robert Warden's

      view, this was not a large number. He had calculated that Horizon would have

      needed to contain around 64,000 bugs before the Claimants could show that

      their losses had been caused by the system.


1723. The document was prepared for the Steering Group. I do not recall the

      document and have found no indication in disclosure that it was sent to me. An

      email from Rob Houghton to Rodric Williams on 14 February 2019

      (POL00107155) appears to contain a reference to a request by me for a copy

      of Jason Coyne's supplemental expert report dated 1 February 2019, which

      dealt with Dr Robert Warden's report at length. I cannot remember this request


                                   Page 749 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      or whether I read Jason Coyne's supplemental report.


1724. I understood, however, from the information I have set out above that it was

      common ground between the experts that the Horizon system contained bugs.

      The debate between the experts focussed on the extent of the bugs (including

      potentially undetected bugs) and whether these could have caused the losses

      in the Claimants' branches.


1725. I have a recollection of being aware of a suggestion that Horizon contained

      hundreds of bugs, but also of Dr Robert Warden's view that there would have

      needed to have been around 64,000 bugs to have caused the Claimants'

      losses. I spoke to Rob Houghton because I wanted to understand the

      argument. Rob's view was that Dr Robert Warden's analysis was a valid way

      of approaching the issue and proved a high reliability threshold for Horizon. He

      added that the key issue would be whether the Horizon system "self-reporled''

      the bugs. I understood this to mean that it was important that bugs were

      identified by the Horizon system's own processes.


1726. I do not recall receiving any legal advice that POL should consider whether Dr

      Robert Warden's views on the existence of bugs in Horizon should be disclosed

      to convicted SPMs. If I had been given such advice, I would have ensured that

      POL acted upon it.


178. Please consider POL00103372 (email from Jane Macleod to the Board on

21 December 2018) and POL00103373 (attachment to prior email}. Were there

any concerns regarding Fraser J's impartiality at this stage?


1727. I do not recall any concerns about Fraser J's impartiality, in the sense of bias

                                    Page 750 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




         against POL, until POL received the draft of his judgment in the Common

         Issues trial in March 2019.


Personal circumstances at the time


1728. My husband was taken seriously ill over Christmas 2018 I stepped back from

         my duties at POL from mid-January 2019 to be with him and then assist with

         his care. I had handed Tim Parker my resignation in November 2018 (see

         Question 184) and by the time I stepped back in January, he had identified Al

         Cameron as my likely successor. Tim wanted to appoint him as Acting CEO

         and was trying to get Al's appointment ratified by BEIS. Al was my de facto

         deputy in any event. I continued to be involved at POL when I could but when

         I was unavailable due to my husband's illness, Al took over my role and

         responsibilities.


179 Please consider POL00006756 (minutes of the Postmaster Litigation

Subcommittee on 28 January 2019).


179.1 Please describe the discussion on the preparation for the Horizon Issues

trial.


1729. I am asked to look at the minutes of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee

         on 28 January 2019 (POL00006756). This is a meeting I attended. It lasted for

         one hour. The minutes record discussion of:


                a.   The date on which the trial would start;


                b.   The importance of expert evidence;


                c.   The Claimants' expert evidence, and that some "counter evidence"
                                       Page 751 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




                  would be required from Fujitsu; and


            d.    Further advice would be sought from Leading Counsel.


      1730. The proposed agenda for the meeting is at (POL00042244 ), sent by Jane

            Macleod on 18 January 2019. In relation to the Horizon Issues Trial,

           Jane wrote:


                 " - at present we don't have another scheduled Litigation Committee

                 meeting before the commencement of the Horizon trial on 11 March.

                 We believe it would make sense to schedule an additional committee

                 meeting for the second half of February by which time the final

                 experts' reports will have been filed, and therefore our QC - Tony de

                 Garr Robinson, would be able to discuss the trial, the reports of each

                 expert and provide an assessment of the issues (which will be

                 predominantly fact based and therefore there will be more emphasis

                 at the trial on the credibility of the expert witnesses and the findings in

                 their reports)."


1731. There was a POL Board meeting on 23 January 2019 which I did not attend

      (POL00021560). From the minutes, I understand that there was no discussion

      of the Horizon Issues Trial. That was an additional meeting, rather than a

      regular POL Board meeting, convened specifically to discuss back-office

      transformation.


1732. Jane emailed the POL Board on 25 January 2019 saying that there was not yet

      any indication of when the embargoed judgment would be received

      (POL00118020).

                                     Page 752 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1733. In parallel to preparation for the Horizon Issues Trial, there was internal

      discussion about mediation with the Claimants, which the Claimants wanted to

      defer until after that trial (POL00042253).


1734. I have not identified, in the documents disclosed by the Inquiry, any internal

      emails regarding evidence, or other related issues, in the lead up to this

      Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting. I do not know whether the

      emails exist and have not yet been disclosed, or whether there were none.


     1735. I have no independent recollection of the meeting other than from the

            minutes and the documents I describe above.




179.2 Were you aware of witness evidence provic:lec:I by Fujitsu employees on

the issue of remote access? What were you views on the same?


1736. Following the POL Board meeting on 28 January 2019, at which it was

      discussed that some of the Claimants' expert evidence might necessitate

      responsive evidence from Fujitsu, I was included in a small number of emails

      which related to this evidence. I did not read the witness evidence, as I have

      described elsewhere in this statement.


1737. The first was on 14 February 2019, where Jane set out the witness timetable

      for the trial, including "Richard Roll (formerly of Fujitsu and the source of the

      remote access allegations)" (POL00118022). A reply to that email from Rodric

      mentioned two witness statements from "Fujitsu's Torstein Godseth; 2x from

      Fujitsu's Steve Parker" (POL00118023).



                                   Page 753 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




1738. I was aware that some new evidence had emerged from the claimants, as I

      replied saying "You flagged on Monday ... the supplementary statement from

      Coyne contained 'new news"'. Although I had stepped back because of my

      husband's illness and because I was due shortly to leave the business, I

      continued to support and challenge as much as possible. The email exchange

      at (POL00111672) added to a discussion regarding the claimants' evidence.


1739. Looking back at those email chains, I see that I was made aware that Richard

      Roll, Torstein Godseth and Steve Parker were giving evidence, but there is

      nothing there to suggest I was aware of the detail of the evidence they would

      give.


1740. Another email chain begins with Rob asking Rodric for a copy of his comments

      on Jason Coyne's Supplemental Report, saying that Al and I wanted copies of

      it (POL00107155). This was also on 14 February 2019. I have not been able

      to find an email to show that these comments were sent to me.


1741. On 20 February 2019, I received an email from Jane which had an attachment

      called "DRAFT HIT Risk Assessment table 20-9-2019.docx". This is said to be

      a draft risk assessment prepared by the external legal team "of the likelihood I

      impact of the different outcomes on the questions being posed through the

      Horizon Issues Trial which we can discuss at the Board sub-Committee call

      tomorrow'' (POL00028045). Given the title and date of the document, I believe

      this attachment was the version of the Bond Dickinson Risk Assessment Table

      dated 18 February 2019 (POL00028071 ). This contained some analysis of the

      expert evidence which would be heard at trial. Page 4 of that document

      analyses the evidence on the Remote Access issue.

                                  Page 754 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




1742. I do not recall whether I read this attachment at the time, nor what my views

      were if I did.


179.3 Had you reviewed or been briefed on the evidence by the Claimants?


1743. I was aware of some of the evidence, but I do not now recall being briefed on

      it or recall reviewing any of it.


179.4 To what extent, if at all, did POL investigate and I or consider disclosing

any new issues raised within the evidence it had received to SPMs convicted

on the basis of data generated by Horizon?


1744. I did not know the detail of the extent to which POL was investigating and/ or

      considering disclosure of any new issues raised within the evidence it had

      received, to SPMs who had been convicted on the basis of data generated by

      Horizon. I would have assumed that something of that nature would have been

      handled by POL's GC, Jane Macleod, with the assistance of Rodric Williams.

      In any event, at this time, matters of that nature were on a day-to-day basis

      under the leadership of Tim Parker and Al Cameron, and I had taken a step

      back. As above, I contributed with questions when I could, but it would have

      been inappropriate to take a lead at this stage.


180 Please consider POL00006756 (minutes of the POL Board meeting on 29

January 2019). Please describe the update on the GLO Proceedings.


1745. (POL00006756) are the minutes of a meeting of the Postmaster Litigation Sub-

      Committee on 28 January 2019 (not of the full POL Board meeting, which was

      on 29 January). At item 2 it is noted that Jane Macleod had reported that the

      Common Issues trial judgment had not yet been received and that it was not
                                     Page 755 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




      known when it would be published. An update was given in relation to the

      Horizon trial, as follows:


      "The Horizon trial would start on 11 th March 2019. The trial would be largely

      decided on expert evidence. The claimants' side have posted some witness

      evidence. We had some issues with the evidence submitted by the claimants'

      expert witness and would like Fujitsu to be able to submit some counter

      evidence but would need permission to serve an additional witness statement.

      The main reports of the expert witnesses had already been filed and

      supplementary reports were due to be filed at the end of the week. The pre-

      trial review would be held on 22nd February 2019.


      A further briefing from the QCs on their view of the evidence and a further

      briefing for BEISIUKGI was requested.


      The claimants' position was that the Horizon system had bugs, that there could

      have been more bugs and these bugs could have caused the errors/losses in

      the claimants' branches.


      Our expert witness was saying that there were bugs in the Horizon system as

      would always be the case in IT systems, but given the volume of the

      transactions through the system it did not seem probable that these could have

      caused the errors/losses in these branches."


An update was also given on the breach trial and the mediation.


1746. The minutes of the full POL Board meeting on 29 January 2019 are at pages 3

      to 14 of (POL00026934).



                                   Page 756 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1747. Item 12 of the minutes is headed "Postmaster Litigation (Verbal). Jane would

      have given an oral update to the Board of the matters discussed at the previous

      day's Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee meeting. This is noted as follows:




                "Jane MacLeod reported that the judgement on the common issues

                trial had not yet been issued. A Case Conference would be taking on

                31 st January 2019 but it was difficult to progress matters further in

                advance of the judgement. Our communications had been prepared.


                "Conversations had been taking place about mediation, which was a

                standard request by the court, and we were considering our "red line"

                issues."


1748. There was also mention of the litigation in respect of POL's financial position

      (see footnote 1 on page 4 of the minutes).


1749. I have not seen my CEO Report for this meeting in documents disclosed by the

      Inquiry and so have not been able to consider this document.


1750. The minutes are followed by an email which Jane sent on 31 January 2019,

      which said ''.As flagged at the Board on Tuesday, we had a Case Management

      Conference this morning. At the end of the hearing, the Judge advised that the

      formal judgement in the Common Issues trial will not be handed down before

      the end of February" (POL00103381 ).


1751. I have no recollection of the meeting on 29 January 2019 which goes beyond

      what is in these documents.


                                    Page 757 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




181 Please consider POL00111672 (your email chain with Jane Macleod on 14

February 2019).


181.1 Please explain why Rob Houghton was being brought into the

preparation for Horizon Issues.


1752. On 19 November 2018, Jane Macleod emailed Rob Houghton, POL's Chief

      Information Officer (who came to the role in 2016). This followed the draft

      evidence of POL's expert witness being prepared, and WBD requesting that

      somebody from the POL IT team review it. Jane approached Rob on the basis

      that it would likely be "you and Catherine" to conduct that review. Rob replied

      "Yep definitely and FJ??" which I understand to be confirmation that he and

      Catherine would conduct the review, and that he was questioning whether

      Fujitsu should also see the draft document. Jane replied (POL00042147):


          "FJ will be asked to review relevant sections of the report - the legal team

          are in the process of doing this at the moment. FJ have filed witness

          statements already, but probably can't comment on the matters that we are

          concerned about. At this stage, I wanted to give you a heads up on the

          challenge. The legal team will be in touch about solutions."


1753. Jane went on to discuss how POL might provide evidence of the commercial

      context from the relevant time, given that most of the team currently in roles

      with responsibility for commercial contracts had not been in post for more than

      two and a half years.


1754. Jane then forwarded the discussion to Andrew Parsons, Mark Underwood and

      Rodric Williams. Rodric said he would speak to Andrew in the morning. I was

                                  Page 758 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




      not involved in this discussion.


1755. A month later, Rodric sent the reports of Jason Coyne and Dr Robert Worden

      to Rob. The date of Dr Robert Warden's report, finalised after the 19 November

      2018 correspondence with Rob, was 7 December 2018 (POL00119590).


1756. Rob continued to assist Rodric in February 2019, providing notes on Fujitsu's

      commentary on Jason Coyne's supplementary report (POL00107155).


1757. On 14 February 2019, Jane sent an update on the litigation to Al Cameron and

      me (copied to a number of colleagues, including Rob) (POL00111672).

      Amongst other things, the update included a rough timetable for the Horizon

      Issues trial, the Judge's view that Ian Henderson's cross-examination should

      not last more than one hour, and a summary of the position on expert evidence.

      Jane said that "Rob has also commented on the issues raised, and will be

      meeting with the Counsel team on Monday to assist with strategic positioning".


1758. I replied on 14 February 2019, thanking Jane "for expediting Rob's meeting

      with the QC". From the email, it is apparent that I had spoken to Rob earlier

      that week. I wrote that I had said to him that whilst he could not (and must not)

      steer legal strategy, he should understand and be comfortable with the

      approach being taken and feel that he has had the opportunity to feed in any

      other thoughts or challenges, whether or not that is "welcome news to our legal

      advisers" because "it's important in two respects: managing internal board

      confidence and secondly, because he knows what he's talking about". I was

      encouraging Rob to be robust and honest with our legal team because I trusted

      his knowledge and judgment, and knew that the legal team would only benefit

      from such input.
                                   Page 759 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




1759. Rob was CIO. He was well qualified, being a computer scientist. He also had

      the confidence of the POL Board and therefore his involvement gave

      reassurance to the POL Board that POL was preparing to do as well as it might

      in the litigation. Additionally, he was familiar with the GLO as he was one of the

      GE members of the Steering Group.


181.2 In relation to your comment "can we talk about how we are preparing our

witnesses", please explain what type of preparation you envisaged or

expected.


1760. I am asked specifically about my fourth numbered paragraph in my email of 14

      February 2019: "can we talk about how we are preparing our witnesses"

      (POL00111672).


1761. This is not a discussion I remember. I do not think that I was referring to the

      content of the evidence that the witnesses would give; the statements had

      already been prepared and exchanged with the Claimants. As was the case

      throughout the litigation, I had had very limited involvement in the detail of our

      evidence, because I was not an expert in those matters. I also knew that we

      were not to influence witnesses in any way. I believe I was talking about the

      welfare of the witnesses.


181.3 Please describe any conversation you had with Ms Mcleod on these

issues.


1762. In response to my email, which raised a number of questions, Jane replied

      (before going on to give an answer "on a couple of points'? "It would probably

      be better to discuss this face to face as there are a number of nuances". She

                                   Page 760 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      asked if I had any time tomorrow (i.e. 15 February 2019).


1763. I do not have any recollection of meeting Jane on that day and cannot see a

      reply to the email. That is perhaps no surprise, since Jane sent her email to me

      at 10:30pm. It is likely that I did speak with her. I cannot be more specific,

      except to say that we are likely to have discussed the issues raised in each of

      our emails of 14 February 2019.


182 Please consider POl00006753 (minutes of the meeting of the Group

litigation Subcommittee on 21 February 2019) and POl00111694 (emails

between Tom Cooper and you on 21 February 2019).


182.1 Please describe the content of the discussion on 21 February 2019

concerning the GlO Proceedings and any legal advice received.


1764. On 20 February 2019, in advance of the meeting, Jane sent an email with a

      "draft risk assessment prepared by our external legal team of the

      likelihood/impact of the different outcomes on the questions being posed

      through the Horizon Issues Trial which we can discuss at the Board sub-

      Committee call tomorrow" (POL00028045).


1765. That attachment was prepared by Bond Dickinson. The Inquiry has disclosed

      a draft version dated two days earlier, which I have assumed did not change

      substantively in the final version. It "summarises our views on the strength of

      the evidence for the Horizon issues so that Post Office may make decisions

      about how to mitigate any related risks. By its very nature it is a simplistic

      assessment of over 1,200 pages of expert reports and witness statements"

      (POL00028071 ). The advice went on to note:

                                  Page 761 of 861
                                                                                          WITN01020100




                " .. .this trial turns heavily on the performance of witnesses in giving

                evidence. Given that witnesses are being asked to comment on

                intricate points within a complex topic, sometimes going back more

                than a decade and sometimes being asked to speculate on unusual

                scenarios, there is a real risk that any one of either party's witnesses

                may not come up to proof. The risk assessment will therefore need to

                be kept under review as the trial progresses."


1766. A second Bond Dickinson document prepared for the meeting is headed

      "Speaking note" (POl00006496). It is a detailed twelve-page document. From

      a note on the last page, addressed to "Tony", it appears that Bond Dickinson

      prepared this note for Anthony de Garr Robinson QC to use when addressing

      the Postmaster Litigation Sub-Committee.


1767. The minutes of the meeting on 21 February 2019 (POl00006753) state that

      Anthony de Garr Robinson QC "briefed the Sub-Committee on the Horizon

      Trial". The minutes broadly follow the shape of the twelve page speaking note,

      but of course, the minutes are less detailed. I therefore think it likely that, at the

      very least, Anthony de Garr Robinson QC said everything which is in the

      speaking note.


1768. I do not believe that we had a copy of the speaking note. I do not remember

      this meeting and defer to the documents I identify above as to what was said

      and what legal advice was given.


1769. After the meeting, I exchanged emails with Tom Cooper, who asked about

      POL's press strategy for managing press reporting where journalists were

      "overstating the evidence re Horizon". Tom wanted to know what POL could do
                                     Page 762 of 861
                                                                                    WITN01020100




      proactively to balance what he saw/anticipated as difficult coverage for POL

      and Post Offices generally. I replied to Tom saying that we should not be

      aggressive but we should be robust, doing our best "to minimise coverage" by

      not   engaging     in   public   debates    unless   "circumstances     dictate"

      (POL00111694 ). I brought Mark Davies into the conversation in case he had a

      different view or anything to add.




182.2 What were your views on the various issues raised, in particular (a) the

system issues on which Mr Coyne had opined (b) the alleged disclosure failings

by POL and (c) the issue of remote access?

1770. I trusted the advice of Dr Robert Worden as the IT Expert and Anthony de Garr

      Robinson QC and was led by that. I do not recall disagreeing with this advice.

182.3 Were there any concerns regarding Fraser J's partiality at this stage?


1771. At 4:21 pm on 11 February 2019, Andrew Parsons emailed Rodric Williams

      commenting on a message received from Fraser J that morning, that the

      Claimants had asked that the CMG on 12 February 2019 start two hours late,

      at 12:00pm instead of 10:00am. Fraser J delayed the hearing by one hour. The

      request had been made by Leading Counsel for the Claimants, Patrick Green

      QC. Andrew drew conclusions from the fact that Fraser J delayed the hearing

      by one hour, but not two as requested: "This does give me a little more

      confidence in Fraser. He clearly must have recognised at the last hearing that

      Green was playing games. This plays into the theory that Fraser does see what

      is going on but is going to give the Cs maximum leniency." Rod replied that this

      had "crossed my mind too".


                                   Page 763 of 861
                                                                                        WITN01020100




1772. I am not sure that this email between Rod and Andrew reaches the threshold

      of a discussion of Fraser J's "partiality". In any event, I am not aware of anything

      from any POL Board directors or GE members discussing Fraser J's

      impartiality at this stage.


183. Please consider POl00103409 (email from Jane Macleod to you on 8

March 2019) and POl00103416 (email from Jane Macleod on 11 March 2019).


183.1. What were your views of the Common Issues judgment and POl's

handling of the litigation?


1773. I did not read the Common Issues judgment at the time. I was provided with

      David Cavender QC's note summarising the judgment and giving advice on

      next steps, by email from Jane Macleod on 11 March 2019 (POl00103416). I

      do not recall exactly when I read that summary, but it is most likely that I did so

      before joining the call on the morning of 12 March 2019. It would be very

      unusual for me to join a meeting without at least familiarising myself with the

      key papers.


1774. I see from looking at emails disclosed by the Inquiry that we received the

      judgment under embargo on the morning of 8 March 2019, following which

      Jane sent round a very short bullet point summary of the decision with the

      caveat that she has "not yet read it completely or fully understood all the

      arguments". Tim Parker noted that it was "very disappointing: we now need to

      look at the detail" (POl00103411 ). I received that chain of emails.


1775. I have not seen any emails disclosed by the Inquiry by which I was sent a copy

      of the judgment, and nor do I recall one.

                                    Page 764 of 861
                                                                                         WITN01020100




1776. I was largely not present in the business at this time because of my husband's

       health, hand in hand with the fact that Al Cameron was very soon to be formally

       appointed as Acting CEO (and was already doing a very capable job as

       unofficial interim CEO, as he was my deputy). Al was deputising for me whilst

       I was absent. For example, when a press statement was being prepared in

       respect of the litigation, Tim and Al agreed that it should be in Tim's name

       because "Paula is off the set" (POL00103426).


1777. On the afternoon of 10 March 2019, Jane emailed Andrew Parsons saying that

       she thought the POL Board should have a second opinion on the merits of any

       appeal, suggesting that other counsel should be instructed (POL00023817).


1778. That day, David Cavender QC wrote a note on the prospects of success in an

       appeal (POL00023878).


1779. Also, that evening, Andrew Parsons sent an "Initial summary of the judgment"

       by email to Jane, Mark Underwood, and Rodric Williams (POL00022685).


1780. The next day, 11 March 2019, Jane sent an email to the POL Board, which I

       received. David Cavender QC's note dated 10 March 2019 was attached.

       These were in preparation for a call at 10:30am on 12 March 2019.


1781. I joined that call, but I was late. I recall not wanting to express a view on matters

       discussed on the call because I knew I was not sufficiently up to speed on the

       issues.


183.2. Please explain the legal advice you received on how to respond to the

Common Issues judgment.



                                     Page 765 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




1782. I personally received very limited legal advice in respect of the Common Issues

      judgment because I was not properly involved in POL's response. For example,

      I have no recollection of seeing the "Observations" of Lord Neuberger, dated

      14 March 2019 (POL00006398) which concerned a possible recusal

      application.


1783. Jane Macleod prepared a paper for the Board, dated 18 March 2019, which

      was marked as being subject to legal privilege (POL00006700). It called for the

      Board to consider four matters:


                     Should we appeal the Common Issues Judgment?


                       Why would we consider an application for the Judge to recuse

                       himself?


                     What are the risks & benefits of such a proposal?


                     Should we consider changing our legal advisers?"


1784. The paper represents the legal team's early view, and it is said that a "more

      considered view will be discussed at the Board meeting on Monday 25 March"

      as to the merits of appealing.


1785. I do not recall seeing this document at the time either.


1786. I was on the call on 12 March 2019 with David Cavender QC and the POL

      Board, but my involvement was limited.


184. Please state when you notified POL of your intention to resign. Please

explain to what extent you were involved in matters relevant to the Inquiry's


                                   Page 766 of 861
                                                                                      WITN01020100




terms of reference following the hand down of the Common Issues judgment.


1787. I resigned by way of a handwritten letter dated 6 November 2018.


1788. Tim Parker and I had had a conversation early in 2018 about what my thoughts

      were regarding future plans. I had been approached about new jobs for many

      months, and had had various conversations with other organisations. I

      resigned when I had secured roles which I wanted: non-executive Chair at

      Imperial College Healthcare Trust, and NED at the Cabinet Office.


1789. The Common Issues judgment was handed down on 15 March 2019. I am

      asked by the Inquiry what involvement I had in matters relevant to the Inquiry's

      terms of reference after that date. I had very limited involvement in such

      matters. For example, I received an email from Jane Macleod in respect of the

      recusal application on 3 April 2019, after the argument had been heard that

      day (POL00103484), confirming that the Judge had reserved his decision. I did

      not attend the next POL Board meeting on 30 April 2019 (POL00104219).


1790. Al Cameron became interim CEO on 5 April 2019. He had already been

      deputising for me, and the Chairman had treated Al as interim CEO for some

      time, when it was obvious that I was not going to be reliably or regularly around.

      This situation could only be formally announced once Tim had received

      clearance from the Secretary of State.


185. Please set out whether you consider POL's approach to (a) reviewing past

convictions and I or disclosing information regarding the integrity of Horizon

and (b) the GLO Proceedings was appropriate. Please provide reasons for your

answers.

                                   Page 767 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1791 . I do not know whether POL's approach to reviewing past convictions and

      disclosing information regarding the integrity of Horizon and its approach to the

      GLO Proceedings was appropriate. It seems to me that this issue engages

      questions of law and the professional judgment of the firms and individual

      lawyers who acted for POL. There will be others who are far better qualified

      and informed than I am to answer these questions.


186. In so far as you relied on legal advice, do you consider the advice you

received to have been appropriate. If not, please identify (a) the specific parts

of the advice you consider to be inappropriate and (b) why you believe it to be

inappropriate.


1792. My view at the time was that it was appropriate for POL to rely on the advice it

      received from its lawyers. I understood that Brian Altman QC and Cartwright

      King were overseeing issues arising from past prosecutions, and that POL was

      cooperating with the CCRC. POL took advice from Linklaters, by reputation

      one of the best law firms in London, on the terms of the SPM contract. We

      instructed Bond Dickinson and two highly respected QCs to act for POL in the

      Group Litigation. As I have mentioned above, one of the key roles of the

      management of a business engaged in high value litigation is to engage

      suitability competent and qualified legal advisors. That is what I believed POL

      had done.


1793. However, I do not feel I have the expertise to say whether the legal advice POL

      relied upon was inappropriate.


187. Insofar as it is not already addressed in response to earlier questions

within this request, please set out in detail discussions that you had with
                                   Page 768 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




Fuiitsu regarding (a) BEDs in the Horizon IT system (b) a lack of integrity in the

same or (c) complaints addressing BEDs or concerns with integrity.                  You

should identify which individuals you spoke to and your views as to the level

of information that you were being provided with.


1794. I set out below the documents which contain, or may refer to, discussions I had

      with Fujitsu about potential faults in the system and SPM complaints. From

      recollection, the only individuals from Fujitsu that I spoke to, certainly with any

      regularity, were Duncan Tait (the CEO of Fujitsu Europe) and Simon Blagden

      (the Chairman of Fujitsu Europe). Our discussions were, generally, high-level

      discussions about the commercial relationship between POL and Fujitsu, and

      operational issues that had been escalated to me within POL. As the

      documents I summarise below record, one of the issues we discussed was the

      Second Sight investigation, including the allegations made by SPMs that

      Horizon was at fault:


      a.   (FUJ00168538) is an email from Stephen Long of Fujitsu to Duncan Tait

           on 22 October 2012 which contains a speaking note for Duncan Tait for a

           call with Sue Barton. One of the bullet points mentions the ongoing review

           by Second Sight "as part of Paula's attempt to quash (once and for all) the

           class action taken being taken by about 70 sub-postmasters. We have

           been impacted by various media reports quoting sub-postmasters, some

           of whom are blaming Horizon for their financial irregularities". This email

           contains Stephen Lang's summary of my objectives in engaging Second

           Sight and I very much doubt that the word "quash" came from me. I did not

           meet Stephen Long and "quash" is not a word I would have used in this


                                   Page 769 of 861
                                                                                  WITN01020100




     context. I hoped, by carrying out the Second Sight review, that SPMs would

     be reassured, including those who had made allegations about Horizon.


b.   On 10 December 2012, Simon Blagden, the Chairman of Fujitsu Europe,

     informed two Fujitsu employees that he was meeting me for a festive drink

     and asked whether there were any key issues and anything that he should

     raise with me: (FUJ00174556). He received a reply from James Davidson

     in the same URN that "one other key thing to note is that we are supporting

     Post Office with their 'forensic' audit through a company called second

     sight. This is all related to allegations of systems issues relating to the old

     horizon [sic] system and fraud prosecutions. It is important to note that no

     issues have been identified and previous allegations have been tested in

     court and not substantiated".


c.   (FUJ00174662) is a Fujitsu briefing note for a meeting between me and

     Duncan Tait on 10 June 2013. It states at point (6) that the Second Sight

     forensic due diligence was an issue that might arise. The note stated that

     a number of queries had been raised, all of which had been answered and

     no irregularities identified. One allegation that was proving more

     challenging related to a suggestion that alterations could be made from

     Fujitsu premises to the branch databases holding sub-postmaster

     balances. I note that this seems to have been a reference to the claims

     made to Second Sight by Michael Rudkin about what he had seen at

     Fujitsu's facility in Bracknell. The note went on that Fujitsu had been asked

     to provide further details relating to system controls and access and audit

     records for balance corrections. (FUJ00168649) is a Fujitsu readout from


                              Page 770 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




            the meeting. It does not mention the Second Sight review.


d.          (FUJ00174708) is a Fujitsu readout of a meeting between me and Duncan

            Tait on 4 July 2013. The purpose of this meeting was to discuss the role of

            Horizon in POL's future strategy. The note records that Duncan shared the

            contents of his brief with me, including that Horizon was an invested and

            stable platform and that "Second sight had shown it to be safe, secure".

            The note records that there was quite a lot of discussion, and that I had

            said "that all sounds good by [sic] why do my team tell me that working new

            reference data through the system takes a long time and the platform is

            not agile". I remember this conversation. My comment was not to do with

            BEDs or lack of integrity, but with the cumbersome way in which price

            changes had to be fed into the system.


e.          On 26 July 2016, Jane Macleod emailed a number of senior POL

            managers following a briefing to the GE about the progress of the litigation:

            (POL00030006). During the briefing she had commented in particular on

            the remote access issue. I had suggested that I speak to Duncan Tait, and

            Jane set out in her email her suggestions for what I would say:


       i.        I should alert him to the fact and timing of POL's letter in response to

                 Freeths, which would address remote access.


      ii.        I should note that the question of remote access was still a live issue

                 and a major concern to the Claimants.


     iii.        I should note the work being undertaken by Deloitte to review access

                 rights and controls.

                                     Page 771 of 861
                                                                                       WITN01020100




     iv.          I should express the desire that Fujitsu worked constructively with

                  Deloitte.


     v.           Finally, I should flag that if the Deloitte work uncovers a different

                  position from that which POL and Fujitsu had stated publicly for years,

                we would need to consider how to manage the impact, since the

                  outcome of the work would become public.


f.         I have no recollection of whether I in fact spoke to Duncan Tait about these

           issues. I can see from (PVEN00000418) that I had a meeting with Simon

           Blagden on 17 October 2016, but I am very doubtful that we discussed the

           remote access issue: this was an issue that I would have raised with the

           CEO.


g.         (FUJ00083833) is an internal Fujitsu email chain on 17 December 2018.

           Matthew Lenton asked Christopher Jay to forward copies of the Fujitsu

           witness statements from the GLO Proceedings to Graham Goulden (a

           Fujitsu Public Relations Manager). Matthew Lenton stated that this action

           appeared to result from a recent meeting between me and Duncan Tait. I

           have no recollection of this discussion or its connection to Fujitsu's witness

           statements. It is possible that the email relates to a discussion referred to

           in an email from Ben Foat to the Board on 3 October 2019 (POL00006740).

           Ben Foat stated that I had flagged to Duncan Tait a serious concern about

           the fragility of Fujitsu's witness statements, which had either been

           disproved or had changed.




                                     Page 772 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




1795. The Inquiry has asked me to provide my views on the information I was given.

      Whilst I raised the SPMs' allegations about the Horizon system with Duncan

      Tait and Simon Blagden, as these were serious concerns, I did not engage at

      a detailed level because I knew that technical conversations were taking place

      from 2012 onwards-following the engagement of Second Sight-between the

      POL IT staff and the Fujitsu IT specialists who operated Horizon. The detailed

      workings of the Horizon system were not within my knowledge or expertise,

      and I do not believe I could have had a useful discussion with Fujitsu on

      technical matters.


1796. The emails set out above accord with my recollection that both Simon Blagden

      and Duncan Tait assured me that the Horizon system was safe and secure and

      not at fault. In this context, I also refer to the conversation I had with Duncan

      Tait about remote access during which he assured me that the system was like

      "Fort Knox" (see paragraph 1299 Error! Reference source not found.above).


1797. Neither Simon Blagden nor Duncan Tait told me that Fujitsu knew that Horizon

      contained a large number of bugs. Duncan told me during a conversation on

      13 April 2021 that Horizon had contained lots of bugs in 1995, although this

      was no different to any computer system, and the number of bugs reduced over

      time: see my note of the conversation at (PVEN00000386). That conversation

      took place after I had left POL, and after Duncan had left Fujitsu.


1798. Clearly, reassurances by Fujitsu that the Horizon system was safe were wrong,

      although I cannot say any more than that.


188. To what extent, if any, do you consider Fujitsu to be responsible for the

matters that led to the issues which have resulted in the establishment of this
                                   Page 773 of 861
                                                                                     WITN01020100




statutory Inquiry?


1799. I understand why this question arises. Ultimately, Fujitsu designed and

      operated the Horizon system, which has been found to have been at fault.

      However, I would need to know a great deal more than I do about the technical

      details of the system, Fujitsu's management of the system, and the information

      about the system that Fujitsu provided to POL, together with the impact of any

      failings by Fujitsu before I could make any useful observation about the

      responsibility of Fujitsu for the issues which led to this Inquiry.


GENERAL


1800. I have been asked to reflect on my time at POL and to set out whether there is

      anything I would have handled differently, with hindsight. I have also been

      asked if there is anything further relevant to the Inquiry's terms of reference of

      which I think the Chair should be aware. I am keen to answer these questions

      in as full a manner as possible in order to assist the Inquiry.


1801. As a result of my commitment to this statement and to the work of the Inquiry,

      which has been my priority, I have had much to consider. With the benefit of

      hindsight, there are many things I and the Post Office should have done

      differently. I am now reflecting with care on these matters and I will expand

      upon them and answer them as fully as possible when I give my evidence to

      the Inquiry in May. Those reflections will demonstrate my deep remorse. They

      will set out the lessons I have since learnt.


1802. My intention was always to do my best and to try to get to the bottom of the

      issues that were raised with me. I am genuinely sorry I was not able to do so.

                                    Page 774 of 861
                                                                                   WITN01020100




       I finish this statement by repeating my apologies to the subpostmasters and

      their families and to all who have suffered so much from this terrible

       miscarriage of justice. Their lives were torn apart by being wrongly accused

       and wrongly prosecuted as a result of the Horizon system. I am truly sorry and

      will so for the rest of my life.


Statement of Truth


  I believe the content of this statement to be true .
            .-------------
            ;



  Signed:   J GRQ
            !




            08 March 2024
   Dated:
       ------------




                                         Page 775 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




                Index to Witness Statement of Paula Vennells




1.    POL00043805     Post        Office      Organogram   POL-0065551
                             Presentation
2.    FUJ00157278     High    Level Blueprint - Cheque POINQ0163472F
                             Acceptance and Cheque issue
                                End-To-End Operational
                             Review V2.0.
3.    WITN09010100    First Witness Statement of Lynn      WITN09010100
                            Hobbs        WITN0901
                            WITN09010100
4.    POL00105417     Note re Post Office Ltd 2008/2009    POL-0104525
                           Objectives and supporting
                           papers     re     compliance,
                           conformance, losses and debt
5.    POL00006123     Letter template from Lynn P Hobbs VIS00007191
                           to Subpostmaster RE: The
                            Post Office branch standards
                           booklet
6.    POL00021422     Risk and Compliance Committee        POL-0018052
                           Minutes of 26/03/2008
7.    POL00005580     Letter from Lynn P Hobbs to VIS00006648
                           colleague re Post Office
                            Branch Standards booklet
8.    POL00005872     Email from CN Marianne Burges to VIS00006940
                           Branch     Standards    re:
                           Branch standards
9.    POL00021496     Meeting Minutes: minutes of the      POL0000029
                           Board meeting held on 21 st
                           January 2008
10.   POL00021497     Meeting minutes: Board meeting POL0000030
                           minutes held on 20th October
                           2008
11.   POL00021498     Meeting minutes: minutes for Board POL0000031
                           meeting held on 19th January
                           2009
12.   RMG0000007 4    Royal Mail Holdings pie - Audit & VIS00009933
                           Risk Committee
13.   POL00031322     PO Risk & Compliance Committee       POL-0028224
                          Report



                                 Page 776 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




14.   POL00000168    Terms of Reference of the Post VIS00001142
                         Office Risk & Compliance
                         Committee (Approved July
                         2016)
15.   POL00026973    Collection of documents in relation    POL-0023614
                          to Post Office audit, risk and
                          compliance sub-committee
16.   POL00095532    Operations functional       report - POL-0095115
                         POLB(09)04                  dated
                         01/01/2009.
17.   RMG00000029    Minutes: Royal Mail Holdings pie VIS00007 437
                          Minutes of Board of Directors
                          meeting of 06/02/2007
18.   POL00090428    Annex to Second         Supplement POL-0087397
                         Agreement
19.   FUJ00118186    POCL and ICL Pathway 'Third            POINQ0124350F
                        Supplemental Agreement
20.   POL00041564    Bankruptcy,    prosecution    and      POL-0038046
                         disrupted     livelihoods
                         Postmasters tell their story;
                         reported by Rebecca Thomson
                         - Article
21.   POL00021486    POL Board Minutes                      POL0000019
22.   POL00021421    Risk and Compliance Committee          POL-0018051
                          Minutes of 06/09/2006
23.   WITN08390100   First Witness Statement of John WITN08390100
                           Scott
24.   POL00030800    RMG    Policy - Prosecution     (S3)   POL-0027282
                           Version 3.0
25.   POL00030580    Post Office Ltd - Security Policy:     POL-0027062
                          Fraud     Investigation and
                          Prosecution Policy v2
26.   POL00030578    S02 Royal Mail Group Criminal          POL-0027060
                         Investigation and Prosecution
                         Policy December 2007
27.   POL00114930    Email from Michele Graves to           POL-0113918
                          Valerie Stanley Re: Letter from
                          BERR Re challenge to horizon
                          integrity




                               Page 777 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




28.   POL00027890    Letter from Robert Porteous to Alan POL-0024531
                          Cook (POL) RE: Instructions
                          from Pat McFadden to look into
                           Rebecca Thomson's Horizon
                          investigation       (Reporter-
                          Computer Weekly)
29.   POL00112816    PO Group Litigation: Judgment No. POL-0110233
                         6 "Horizon issues" before Mr
                         Justice Fraser.
30.   POL00030241    Email from Brian Trotter to Sandra   POL-0026723
                          MacKay re Callendar Square
                          FAD 160868
31.   WITN04650100   WITN04650100     -   Gary   David WITN04650100
                         Blackburn
32.   WITN04640100   WITN04640100 - Shaun Turner          WITN04640100
33.   FUJ00121071    Email chain from Ian Oakley to POINQ0127263F
                          Gareth Jenkins, Ray Jackon
                          and others re: Fw: T30
                          Release - Impact on Stock
                          Rems
34.   POL00039463    Network Functional Report            POL-0035945
35.   POL00028838    Responsive                Notes POL-0025320
                         (Receipts/Payments Mismatch
                         issue)
36.   POL00001573    ET Action Log                        VIS00002587
37.   POL00033200    Horizon Next Generation Release 1: POL-0030135
                          End Programme Report (V.0.1
                          - draft)
38.   POL00021500    Meeting minutes: minutes of Board    POL0000033
                          meeting held on 4th July 2011
39.   POL00117863    Fujitsu Appendix 1 & 2 to G's POL-0118393
                           Responsive Note Re: receipts
                           and payments mismatch issue
                           notes & Correcting Account for
                           "lost" discrepancies
40.   POL00030217    Ernst & Young Management letter to   POL-0026699
                          POL for year ended 27 March
                          2011
41.   FUJ00086923    Email from Don M Burgess to Bill     POINQ0093094F
                          Membery and Mark Arnold,
                          RE: Summary of Audit 2010


                              Page 778 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




42.   FUJ00086922   Briefing note on Audit findings for POINQ0093093F
                          Post Office and Fujitsu Senior
                          Management.
43.   RMG00000005   Minutes: Royal Mail pie Audit and VIS00007 413
                         Risk Committee Minutes of
                         20/05/11
44.   POL00095550   Post office limited board status      POL-0095133
                        report for 2011
45.   POL00030365   Post     Office Limited Board of POL-0026847
                           Directors Meeting Minutes of
                           22/09/2011
46.   POL00021502   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board     POL0000035
                         meeting    held    at   10th
                         November 2011
47.   POL00021431   Post Office Limited Audit, Risk and   POL-0018061
                         Compliance          Committee
                         Minutes of 23/05/2012
48.   POL00030261   Audit Results Report by Ernst and     POL-0026743
                         Young for year ended 28
                         March 2010
49.   FUJ00086924   Email chain between Bill Membery POINQ0093095F
                         (Fujitsu), Andy J Jones (Post
                         Office), Don M Burgess, and
                         others Re: Management Letter
                         response.
50.   POL00021499   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000032
                         meeting held on 27th May
                         2011
51.   POL00029438   Post Office LTD Board, POL IT Audit POL-0025920
                         Update
52.   FUJ00086948   Post Office Presentation on Audit POINQ0093119F
                         Steering Group.
53.   RMG00000003   Minutes: Royal Mail Holdings pie VIS00007 411
                         Audit and Risk Committee
                         Minutes of 08/12/11
54.   POL00109892   Email from Avene O'Farrell to POL-0111104
                         Belinda Crowe and Alisdair
                         Cameron, cc Chris Aujard and
                         Gavin Lambert re Second
                         Sight meeting with finance
                         team to discuss suspense
                         accounts

                              Page 779 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




55.   POL00109933    Email chain with Paula Vennells and    POL-0111120
                          Alisdair    Cameron,       with
                          forwarding emails from Paula
                          Vennells and Ron W at Second
                          Sight RE: Mediation Scheme
56.   POL00117080    Email from Mark R Davis to Melanie POL-0117913
                          Garfield, Rodric Williams, Jane
                          Hill and others RE: update -
                          briefing for Paula Vennells for
                          appearance       before     BIS
                          Parliamentary            Select
                          Committee
57.   POL00117096    Email from Jane Hill to Paula          POL-0117929
                          Vennells, Avene O'Farrell,
                          Mark R Davies and others re:
                          Addendum and key facts
58.   POL00117097    Addendum to Q&A re Post Office's POL-0117930
                         position on claims, suspense
                         accounts,   SS     information
                         requests and remote access
59.   POL00063428    Susan Rudkin case study: File Note     POL-0059907
                         of meeting between POL and
                         Second Sight 4/3/2015 at 1pm
60.   POL00102388    Email from Alisdair Cameron to         POL-0101971
                          Mark Davies Re: Sparrow
61.   POL00107689    Karen Wilson/Julian Wilson Case POL-0105981
                          Study - Letter from Shoosmiths
                          to The Post Office re: Our
                          Client: Julian Wilson.
62.   POL00107695    NOTE OF CONFERENCE WITH POL-0105986
                        RICHARD         MORGAN
                        QC MAITLAND
                        CHAMBERS IN THE MATTER
                        OF POTENTIAL CLAIMS BY
                        SCOTT    DARLINGTON   &
                        OTHERS     AGAINST POST
                        OFFICE LIMITED
63.   POL00021503    Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000036
                          meeting held on 21 st January
                          2012
64.   UKGI00016088   Post Office Ltd Board of Directors UKGI026881-001
                          Meeting Minutes of 15/03/2012



                               Page 780 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




65.   POL00096033   Post Office Limited Matters - Dispute POL-0095616
                         Resolution: Claims over 500K
                         or those of a sensitive nature -
                         references Horizon claims.
66.   POL00058211   Briefing note re: The current status   POL-0054690
                          of claims involving horizon
67.   POL00120458   Email chain from Mike Granville to POL-0126158
                         David Simpson Re: Inside Out
                         Programme
68.   POL00027270   Post Office Minutes of the meeting     POL-0023911
                         of the Board of Directors held
                         on 13th December 2011
69.   POL00095595   Post Office LTD Board - Significant POL-0095178
                         Litigation Report.
70.   POL00001976   Letter from Paula Vennells (CEO, VIS00002990
                          Post Office Ltd) to Mike Weir
                          MP re:      a response to
                         parliamentary questions
71.   POL00120490   Email from Martin Humphreys to POL-0126156
                         Theresa lies cc Mike Granville
                         - Re: Mike Weir MP - PQs on
                         Horizon response for sign off
                         with letter from Paula Vennells
                         to Mark Weir attached
72.   POL00027579   Post Office Ltd Minutes: Meeting of POL-0024220
                         Board of Directors held on 9th
                         February 2012
73.   POL00095835   Post      Office Limited       Litigation POL-0095418
                           Matters             Commercial
                           Litigation - Claims in Excess of
                           5000K and/or Claims with
                           wider significance for business
74.   POL00073165   Email chain between Sabrina POL-0069728
                         Jethwa, Chis Darvill, Alison
                         Bolsover & Emily Springford -
                         case recommendations
75.   POL00085749   Claims against subpostmasters POL-0082807
                         (spmr's) who have raised
                         Horizon issues in the past - key
                         benefits and risks




                               Page 781 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




76.   RMG00000084    Royal Mail Holdings pie audit and VIS00009943
                          Risk Committee - Fines,
                         Compensation and Material
                          Litigation Report - half year
                          update. ARC(11 )XX.
77.   POL00094288    Susan Rudkin case study: Letter POL-0093234
                         from Alan Cook to Mr M Rudkin
                         RE: Suspension and legal
                         proceedings - lbstock Post
                         Office - Fad 223 217 0
78.   POL00090575    Horizon Integrity - Dave Smith       POL-0090096

79.   POL00094820    Letter from Alan Cook to Rt Hon      POL-0093766
                          Jacqui Smith MP re: Mr Julian
                          Wilson and concerns around
                           Horizon computer system
80.   UKGI00013994   House of Commons Parliamentary UKGI024787-001
                         Question:         2010/25945
                         Question from: Nicholas Brown
                         Minister answering: Edward
                         Davey re: assessment of
                         performance of the Horizon
                         computer programme
81.   RLIT0000040    Letter from Paula Vennells, POL's RLIT0000040
                           Managing Director, to Nicholas
                           Brown MP re Parliamentary
                          Question 26688
82.   UKGI00014000   House of Commons Parliamentary UKGI024793-001
                         Question:        2010/7392-95
                         Question from: Michael Weir
                         Minister answering: Edward
                         Davey re: prosecutions and
                         investigations of postmasters
                         instigated by Post Office Ltd
83.   POL00114516    Letter from Mike Weir MP to Paula    POL-0113632
                          Vennells re: Horizon System
84.   UKGI00018222   Post    Office Ltd - Shareholder UKGI028229-001
                            Executive: POL - Summary
85.   POL00029485    IT component of management letter POL-0025967
                          for the year ended 25 March
                          2012




                               Page 782 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




86.   POL00095973    Email chain from Alice Perkins to POL-0095556
                          Susan Crichton re: James
                          Arbuthnot               MP:
                          Subpostmasters and the Post
                          Office
87.   POL00107702    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice    POL-0110803
                          Perkins and Alwen Lyons, re to
                          James Arbuthnot.
88.   UKGI00000050   POL Board of Directors Meeting VIS00001011
                         Minutes
89.   POL00105597    Email from Paula Vennells to Susan POL-0104597
                          Crichton and Alwen Lyons, RE:
                          telephone call with Oliver
                          Letwin     MP      expressing
                          concerns regarding Horizon.
90.   POL00107710    Letter from Paula Vennells to The Rt POL-0110808
                           Hon Oliver Letwin MP re
                          robustness of Horizon and
                          invite to head office to witness
                          how Horizon system works.
91.   POL00112984    Josephine Hamilton Criminal case      POL-0110379
                         study. Post Office Information
                          Pack for James Arbuthnot and
                         Oliver     Letwin   scheduled
                          meeting
92.   POL00021507    Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000040
                          meeting held on 23rd May
                          2012
93.   POL00096640    Post Office Pack for meeting with POL-0096223
                          James Arbuthnot and other
                          MPs Meeting scheduled for
                          18th June      2012,   6pm,
                          Portcullis House.
94.   POL00096660    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice    POL-0096243
                          Perkins, Alwen Lyons, Angela
                          Van-den-Bogerd and others,
                          re: Tonight's meeting.
95.   POL00096052    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula     POL-0095635
                          Vennells, Susan Crichton,
                          Alwen Lyons and others re:
                          James Arbuthnot




                              Page 783 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




96.    POL00105481    Notes of the Meeting with James POL-0104661
                          Arbuthnot, Alice Perkins and
                          Alwen Lyons
97.    POL00021505    Meeting minutes: minutes for Board   POL0000038
                           meeting held on 15th March
                           2012.
98.    POL00105591    Email from Alwen Lyons to Susan POL-0104608
                           Crichton, Kevin Gilliland, Mike
                           Granville, Lesley J Sewell -
                           James Arbuthnot concerns
                           about Horizon
99.    POL00107707    Emails from Paula Vennells to POL-0110807
                          Theresa    lies   re: James
                          Arbuthnot discussion
100.   POL00057623    Briefing Note                        POL-0054102
101.   POL00002000    Deloitte Project Spire - Planning VIS00003014
                           forward
102.   POL00028066    Deloitte      Project       Spire    POL-0023069
                           Supplementary    Information
                           May 2012
103.   POL00057656    James Arbuthnot MP and Oliver POL-0054135
                          Letwin MP Meeting Action
                          Points of 03/05/2012 for
                          meeting on 17/05/2021
104.   POL0009057 4   Horizon - Response to Challenges     POL-0090095
                           Regarding Systems Integrity
105.   POL00088935    Report from Rod Ismay, Head of POL-0085993
                          Product & Branch Accounting
                          to Dave Smith, Mike Moores
                          and Mike Young regarding
                          Horizon        Response    to
                          Challenges         Regarding
                          Systems Integrity.
106.   POL00114518    Email from Mia Porter to Theresa     POL-0113552
                           lies RE: FW: Mr Letwin
107.   POL00105494    Email from Glenda C Hansen to        POL-0104674
                           Theresa lies, Alwen Lyons and
                           Lee Summers re: Rt Hon
                           Oliver Lewin MP and Post
                           Office Ltd's Horizon System




                                Page 784 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




108.   POL00057711   Preparation for Post Office meeting POL-0054190
                         with James Arbuthnot & Oliver
                          Lewtin
109.   POL00105601   Email correspondence between           POL-0104599
                          Susan Crichton, Alwen Lyons
                          and Alice Perkins re: meeting
                          to discuss response to issues.
110.   POL00033825   Meeting Pack for James Arbuthnot POL-0030760
                          and Oliver Letwin for 17th May
                          2012
111.   POL00107719   Email from Paula Vennells to POL-0110814
                          Theresa lies re Briefing in
                          advance    of     Wednesday'
                          James Arbuthnot Meeting -
                          Backgound     information of
                          James Arbuthnot and Oliver
                          Letwin
112.   POL00096748   Notes   of    the    Post   Office POL-0096331
                          Communications Action Group
                          meeting on the 29 May 2012
113.   POL00105491   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula        POL-0104671
                          Vennells and Susan Crichton
                          re James A and Oliver L.
114.   POL00096545   Email from Angela Van-Den-Bogerd       POL-0096128
                          to Mia Porter re: James
                          Arbuthnot - Meeting with MP's
115.   POL00096544   Email from Mia Porter on behalf of POL-0096127
                          Paula Vennells, Glenda C
                          Hansen re: Conference call re:
                          James Arbuthnot - Meeting
                          with MP's brief/timing with
                          Susan C, Angela VDB, Lesley
                          and Alwen
116.   POL00096557   Email from Angela Van-Den-Bogerd       POL-0096140
                          to   Simon      Baker,    Paula
                          Vennells, Susan Crichton and
                          others re: Actions from JA/PMs
                          preparation meeting
117.   POL00096558   Email from Simon Baker to Angela       POL-0096141
                          Van-Den-Bogerd,           Paula
                          Vennells, Alwen Lyons and
                          others re: Actions from JA/PMs
                          preparation meeting


                               Page 785 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




118.   POL0009657 4   Email from Susan Crichton to Alice POL-0096157
                           Perkins,    Paula    Vennells,
                           Simon Baker and others re:
                           Horizon-       Terms        of
                           reference.doc; 2nd Sight -
                           Horizon Matters - Proposal.ppt
119.   POL00096575    Draft - Post Office Limited, Terms of POL-0096158
                            Reference       from     Susan
                            Crichton to Alice Perkins and
                            Paula Vennells
120.   POL00096576    Post Office Limited: Proposal to POL-0096159
                          carry out an Independent
                           Review of Past Fraud and
                          Theft Cases
121.   POL00113792    Email from Alice Perkins to Susan    POL-0112900
                           Critchton and Paula Vennells
                           re: Horizon investigation
122.   POL00096604    Email from Paula Vennells to Susan   POL-0096187
                           Crichton and Alwen Lyons re:
                           2nd Sight TOR
123.   POL00096606    Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen   POL-0096189
                           Lyons re: 2nd Sight TOR
124.   POL00105487    Letter from The Rt. Hon James POL-0104667
                           Arbuthnot to Paula Vennells
                           regarding   Second    Sight
                           meeting.
125.   POL00097030    Email from Paula Vennells to POL-0096613
                           Theresa lies RE: Fwd: Read
                           out of James Arbuthnot/ JFSA
                           meeting.
126.   POL00097115    Email from Simon Baker to Paul       POL-0096698
                           Vennells, Susan Crichton,
                           Lesley J Sewell and others re
                           Update on the Horizon Case
                           review following your meeting
                           with   JFSA      and   James
                           Arbuthnot
127.   POL00097116    Raising Concerns    With   Horizon   POL-0096699
                           Report




                               Page 786 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




128.   POL00097309   Email from Jorja Preston to Alwen POL-0096892
                          Lyons, Paula Vennells, Simon
                          Baker and others Re: 19
                          December 2012 Update on
                          James Arbuthnot       Horizon
                          work.
129.   POL00097310   JA update brief/ MP Cases Review POL-0096893
                          of Horizon
130.   POL00105477   Email from Theresa lies on behalf of POL-0104657
                          Paula Vennells to Susan
                          Crichton    re    2nd    Sight
                          Consultants
131.   POL00021508   Meeting minutes: Board meeting        POL0000041
                          minutes for meeting held on
                          4th July 2012
132.   POL00096810   Email from Alwen Lyons to Simon POL-0096393
                          Baker in re to printed
                          subpostmasters and 2nd sight
                          dated    16/07/2012.  Chain
                          includes email from James
                          Arbuthnot.
133.   POL00096811   Email from Mia Porter to James POL-0096394
                          Arbuthnot,      Alwen    Lyona,
                          Susan Crichton, Theresa lies
                          in re to printed subpostmasters
                          and       2nd     sight   dated
                          16/07/2012
134.   POL00096823   Email from Alwen Lyons to Susan       POL-0096406
                          Crichton      re     PRINTED
                          SubPostmasters      and   2nd
                          Sight. Includes Paula Vennells
                          agreeing to Alan        Bates'
                          involvement.
135.   POL00107750   Email from Paula Vennells to James POL-0110833
                          Arbuthnot,    Alwen     Lyons,
                          Susan Crichton and another
                          RE: SPM and second sight,
                          and MP's request for POL
                          funding forensic accountant to
                          review SS findings
136.   POL00029815   Draft Proposal from Susan Crichton POL-0026297
                           to   Alice    Perkins,   Paula
                           Vennells    re:    Independent
                           Review of Past Cases

                              Page 787 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




137.   POL00105472   Email from Susan Crichton to Alice POL-0104652
                          Perkins and Paula Vennells re
                          Horizon Version 2 & Draft
                          Terms of Reference attached.
138.   POL00096603   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice POL-0096186
                          Perkins, cc'd Susan Crichton
                          and Alwen Lyons re: 2nd Sight
                          TOR
139.   POL00096608   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula POL-0096191
                          Venn ells;   re:   Forensic
                          Accountant reviews - James
                          Arbuthnot
140.   POL00096615   Draft, Post Office Limited, Terms of POL-0096198
                           Reference: Proposal for an
                           independent review of the
                           company's systems relating to
                           the occurrence of apparent
                           shortfalls in individual PO
                           branch accounts
141.   POL00027713   Email from Alwen Lyons to Angela POL-0024354
                          Van-Den-Bogerd,        Simon
                          Baker, Mike Granville and cc
                          others re Horizon TOR Version
                          3
142.   POL00117119   Email from Alwen Lyons to Angela- POL-0117951
                          Van-Bogerd, Simon Baker,
                          Mike Granville and others re
                          Horizon TOR
143.   POL00006484   Summary of Conference with          POL-0017789
                        Counsel at Maitland Chambers
                        about Horizon
144.   POL00096622   Email from Paula Vennells to James POL-0096205
                          Arbuthnot; re: Message from
                          James Arbuthnot to Alice
                          Perkins and Paul
145.   POL00096642   Email from Paula Vennells to Neil   POL-0096225
                          Mccausland to re: Update

146.   POL00096638   Email from Neil Mccausland to       POL-0096221
                          Paula Vennells re: Update
147.   POL00096937   Email chain from Angela Van-Den     POL-0096520
                          Bogerd to Simon Baker re:
                          Post Office Cases.

                              Page 788 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




148.   POL00096665   Email from Alana Renner to Susan POL-0096248
                          Crichton, Alwen Lyons, Paula
                          Vennells and others, re:
                          Message       from    James
                          Arbuthnot to Tadge Channer at
                          Shoosmiths - Post Office/
                          Horizon
149.   POL00026752   Letter to Paula Vennells from James POL-0023393
                          Arbuthnot Re:Post office and
                          second sight. Encloses letter
                          from Alan Bates.
150.   POL00096965   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula      POL-0096548
                          Vennells, re JA Brief (MP
                          Cases review of Horizon)
151.   POL00027553   Post Office Minutes: Board Meeting   POL-0024194
                          held on 21st November 2012
152.   POL00021510   Meeting minutes: Board meeting       POL0000043
                          minutes of meeting held on
                          23rd January 2013
153.   POL00097589   MP   Cases Review of       Horizon   POL-0097172
                          Update March 2013
154.   POL00107889   Email from Theresa lies to Valerie POL-0110853
                          Fisher re James Arbuthnot
                          letter.
155.   POL00097884   Email chain from Martin Edwards to POL-0097467
                          Paula Vennells RE: Second
                          Sight note from meeting 25
                          March.
156.   POL00097588   Letter from The Rt. Hon. James POL-0097171
                          Arbuthnot, M.P. to Alice
                           Perkins re Meeting with
                          Second Sight
157.   POL00097587   Email Chain from Alwen Lyons to POL-0097170
                          Paula Vennells re James
                          Arbuthnot Letter
158.   POL00097592   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula POL-0097175
                          Vennells, re James Arbuthnot
                          letter
159.   POL00097704   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice POL-0097287
                          Perkins and other, Re: James
                          Arbuthnot and 2nd Sight.



                              Page 789 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




160.   POL00097705   Email chain involving Alice Perkins,   POL-0097288
                          Alwen      Lyons and Paula
                          Venn ells.      Re:    "James
                          Arbuthnot and 2nd Sight".
161.   POL00097719   Email from Susan Crichton to Paula     POL-0097302
                          Vennells, Legally Priviledged
                          and Confiedntial
162.   POL00097732   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan     POL-0097315
                          Barton re: Network Update
163.   POL00097781   Email from Martin Edwards to Alice POL-0097364
                          Perkins, Paula Vennells and
                          others re: Draft letter for James
                          Arbuthnot
164.   POL00097879   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen     POL-0097462
                          Lyons and Martin Edwards,
                          RE: Second sight note from
                          meeting 25 March.
165.   POL00097883   Email chain from Martin Edwards to     POL-0097466
                          Paula Vennells, Alwen Lyons,
                          Susan Crichton, and others re:
                          Second Sight note from
                          meeting 25 March.
166.   POL00098158   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula      POL-0097741
                          Vennels, JA meeting
167.   POL00097887   Email chain from Alwen Lyons to POL-0097470
                          Alice Perkins; Paula Vennells;
                          James     Arbuthnot;   Susan
                          Crichton, re: Second Sight
                          note from meeting 25 March.
168.   POL00097952   Email chain involving Janet Walker,    POL-0097535
                          Alwen Lyons and Susan
                          Crichton. Re: "MP meeting".
169.   POL00122393   Second Sight Horizon Investigation     POL-0127557
                         Discussion Paper April 2013
170.   POL00098379   Note of Telephone Conversation         POL-0097962
                         between Paula Vennells and
                         James Arbuthnot
171.   POL00100200   Letter from David Oliver to Paula      POL-0099783
                          Vennells, RE: Second Sight.
172.   POL00115881   Briefing for Paula/ James Arbuthnot POL-0116883
                           call with objectives


                               Page 790 of 861
                                                                       WITN01020100




173.   FUJ00083375   Note authored by Gareth Jenkins POINQ0089546F
                         titled   'Local   Suspense
                         Problem' v0.5
174.   POL00097564   Email from Laura Darby to Anne POL-0097147
                          Chambers, re: Automatic reply:
                          FW: Suspense Data in 14
                          Branches
175.   POL00098151   Email chain from Andrew Winn to POL-0097734
                          Anne Chambers, re: Local
                          suspense     POL      328-
                          explanation.
176.   POL00002188   Draft letter from Andy Winn to The VIS00003202
                           Manger of Lower Regent
                          Street Post Office re: Branch
                           Discrepancies
177.   POL00002217   Letter from Andy Winn on behalf of VIS00003231
                           Product & Branch Accounting
                          to Merthyr Dyfan Post Office re
                           Branch Discrepancies
178.   POL00002226   letter from Andy Winn to Stewart VIS00003240
                           Waldron       re:     Branch
                           Discrepancies     at Wardles
                           Lane Post Office
179.   POL00002242   Letter from Andy Winn to David VIS00003256
                          Cheape         re      Branch
                           Discrepancies at Dundas Post
                          Office
180.   POL00002260   Letter from Andy Winn to Mr A Brook VIS00003274
                          re: Re Branch Discrepancies-
                           Rosyth Terminus
181.   POL00002265   Letter relating to local branch VIS00003279
                          discrepancies and explaining
                           POL's action in response to
                           Horizon error regarding these
                          problems. Letter sent from
                          Andy Winn to Mr D Moore re :
                           Branch Discrepancies
182.   POL00002275   Letter from Andy Winn to Zubeir VIS00003289
                           Patel   regarding  branch
                          discrepancies at Bowness
                           Road.




                              Page 791 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




183.   POL00098186   Email from Andrew Winn to Simon      POL-0097769
                          Baker and Gareth Jenkins,
                          Local suspense POL 238.
184.   POL00098185   Email from Andrew Winn to Simon      POL-0097768
                          Baker re: Local suspense
185.   FUJ00084744   Local Suspense Problem Report for POINQ0090915F
                          2013
186.   POL00029610   Post Office and Fujitsu Report on    POL-0026092
                          HNG-X System Receipts and
                          Payments Mismatch
187.   POL00098283   Email from Gareth Jenkins to Simon   POL-0097866
                          Baker re: Balancing Issues in
                          2010
188.   POL00098176   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen   POL-0097759
                          Lyons, Meeting with James
189.   POL00098179   Email from Alwen Lyons to Simon      POL-0097762
                          Baker, Meetings with James
190.   POL00098180   Email from Alwen Lyons to Simon POL-0097763
                          Baker, re Meeting with James
                          Arbuthnot
191.   POL00098276   Email chain from Alwen Lyons to      POL-0097859
                          Paula Venn ells. Re: "JA".
192.   POL00098278   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula    POL-0097861
                          Vennells, re: Updates
193.   POL00029587   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alwen      POL-0026069
                          Lyons    Re:    In  strictest
                          confidence Horizon
194.   POL00098777   Email from Martin Edwards to Paula   POL-0098360
                          Vennells re JA?
195.   POL00115923   Email from Mark R Davies to Louise   POL-0116925
                          Chatfield re: Fwd: JA Meeting
                          brief
196.   POL00099516   Post Office Limited Extract from     POL-0099099
                          minutes of a Board meeting on
                          1stJuly2013
197.   POL00098321   Email from Paula Vennells to         POL-0097904
                          Theresa lies re Board papers
                          briefing notes
198.   POL00021513   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000046
                          meeting held on 21st May
                          2013

                              Page 792 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




199.   POL00098816    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice    POL-0098399
                           Perkins, Alwen Lyons, Martin
                           Edwards and others re Board
                           Call and SS
200.   POL00098789    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice POL-0098372
                           Perkins, Alwen Lyons and
                           Martin Edwards re next steps
                           on Horizon issues - update
201.   POL00029618    Email from Lesley J Sewell to Simon   POL-0026100
                           Baker and Alwen Lyons and
                           others,   re:   Two System
                           Defects.
202.   POL0009877 4   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan POL-0098357
                           Crichton re Second Sight
                           Investigation - Update
203.   POL00006798    Legal advice on the use of expert POL-0017590
                           evidence
204.   POL00098192    Email chain from Ron Warmington POL-0097775
                           to Simon Baker re:FW: Letter
                           from James re Alan Bates'
                           letter
205.   FUJ00086811    Horizon data, Lepton SPSO 191320,     POINQ0092982F
                           Draft Report by Helen Rose
206.   POL00113369    Second Sight review into Horizon - POL-0110747
                          briefing note on interim report
207.   POL00108163    Email from Rodric Williams to Martin POL-0110958
                           Edwards re CEO's report text
                           on criminal cases review
208.   POL00147248    POL Executive Committee - Expert POL-BSFF-
                          witness proposal                 0006371
209.   POL00030160    Initial     Complaint Review and POL-0026642
                                Mediation Scheme Briefing
                                Report - Part Two prepared by
                                Second Sight
210.   POL00098316    Email chain from Martin Edwards to POL-0097899
                           Paula Vennells and Alwen
                           Lyons, re "Briefing for Paula JA
                           meeting 23rd May 2013"
211.   POL00098317    Briefing for Paula Vennells /James    POL-0097900
                            Arbuthnot Meeting



                                   Page 793 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




212.   POL00115880   Email chain from Alwen Lyons to POL-0116882
                          Paula Vennells cc Martin
                          Edwards, Mark R Davies 'and
                          other' re: Speaking notes for
                          James Arbuthnot meeting
                          tomorrow
213.   POL00105632   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula POL-0104602
                          Vennells re James brief - Bugs
214.   POL00098378   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula        POL-0097961
                          Vennells and others re James
                          Arbuthnot Phone Call
215.   POL00098373   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen POL-0097956
                          Lyons and others re James
                          Arbuthnot call
216.   POL00029589   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen     POL-0026071
                          Lyons re: Thanks - update
217.   POL00098459   Email from Alwen Lyons to Janet POL-0098042
                          Walker re: Post Office update.
                          Email chain includes analysis
                          and   proposal     by James
                          Arbuthnot re interim report and
                          feedback to MPs.
218.   POL00098534   Email from Susan Crichton to Alwen POL-0098117
                          Lyons re: Update from James
                          Arbuthnot MP
219.   POL00098655   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula        POL-0098238
                          Vennells and Lesley Sewell
                          regarding second sight update
220.   POL00029625   Draft Post Office Internal Briefing POL-0026107
                          Note to Paula Vennells:
                          Second Sight review into
                          Horizon - Implications of
                          Interim Report
221.   POL00098878   Notes for Board update on Second POL-0098461
                          Sight Investigation, 1 July
                          2013.
222.   POL00021515   Post Office Limited Board Minutes of POL0000048
                          01/07/2013
223.   POL00021745   Email    chain     between       Ian   POL-0018224
                          Henderson, Simon        Baker,
                          Rodric Williams and others, re:
                          Second Sight Draft Report.


                               Page 794 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




224.   POL00021746   Interim Report into alleged problems POL-0018225
                           with the Horizon system V24
225.   POL00021822   Email     within   POL    seeking POL-0018301
                          awareness of answers given in
                          relation to Second Sight
                          Review. Email from Rodric
                          Williams to Andre Parsons re:
                          Second Sight Review (MP's
                          inquiry)
226.   POL00098797   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin   POL-0098380
                          Edwards re next steps on
                          Horizon issues - update
227.   POL00190016   Email from Lesley Sewell to Simon     POL-BSFF-
                          Baker    RE:    FW:     Local        0028079
                          suspense incident
228.   POL00098877   Email from Mrtin Edwards to Alice POL-0098460
                          Perkins re: Discussion notes
                          for Board on Second Sight
229.   POL00029626   Email from Alwen Lyons to Rodric POL-0026108
                          Williams and Susan Crichton,
                          re: Horizon / Second Sight -
                          draft Briefing Note re Interim
                          Report
230.   POL00098887   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula     POL-0098470
                          Vennells re: Latest on SS
231.   POL00027852   Email chain from Martin Edwards to POL-0024493
                          Alice Perkins, Paula Vennells,
                          cc'ing Susan Crichton, Alwen
                          Lyons, and others re: JA
                          Meeting Brief - Second Sight
                          Interim Report
232.   POL00144918   Email chain from Ron Warmington POL-BSFF-
                          (2nd Sight) to Simon Baker     0004045
                          (POL); CC Lesley J Sewell
                          (POL) Alwen Lyons & others
                          Re: Bug disclosures
233.   POL00167937   Email chain from Lesley J Sewell POL-0163234
                          (POL) to Paula Vennells
                          (POL); CC Susan Crichton
                          (POL), Alwen Lyons& Others
                          Re: Draft Report




                              Page 795 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




234.   POL00099096   Email from Rodric Williams to Paula POL-0098679
                          Vennells, Mark Davies and
                          others re: Draft statement -
                          Strictly Private & Confidential -
                          Subject to Legal Privilege
235.   POL00115924   Briefing for meeting with James      POL-0116926
                           Arbuthnot, 3 July 2013
236.   POL00098916   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice   POL-0098499
                          Perkins and Alwen Lyons; re:
                          JA meeting brief
237.   POL00029649   Letter from Paula Vennells to James POL-0026131
                          Arbuthnot, MP re key points
                          discussed in the meeting on 3
                          July 2013 with Paula Vennells,
                          James Arbuthnot and Alice.
238.   POL00107985   Email from Angela Van-Den-Bogerd     POL-0110884
                          to    Theresa    lies.   Re:
                          Conference Call this morning
                          with Paula
239.   POL00098912   Email from Rodric Williams to Paula POL-0098495
                          Vennells re: JA meeting brief
                          and concerns with Horizon
                          document
240.   POL00098915   Email from Martin Edwards to Paula   POL-0098498
                          Vennells, Alwen Lyons and
                          others re: JA meeting brief
241.   POL00098973   Email from Paula Vennells to Lesley POL-0098556
                          J Sewell Re: Hi.
242.   POL00098986   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula POL-0098569
                          Vennells, cc'd Alwen Lyons
                          and Martin Edwards re: SS:
                          The Future after Monday
243.   POL00098911   Email from Mark Davies to Alwen      POL-0098494
                          Lyons, Paula Vennells and
                          Martin Edwards re: JA meeting
                          brief
244.   POL00098921   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula POL-0098504
                          Vennells RE. Briefing for
                          meeting with James Arbuthnot.
                          Email chain includes detailed
                          speaking notes.



                              Page 796 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




245.   POL00098940   Email from Martin Edwards to Lesley POL-0098523
                          J Swell and Paula Vennells, re
                          Paula briefing - Duncan Tait
                          04-07-2013.doc
246.   POL00099021   Email from Martin Edwards to Paula   POL-0098604
                          Vennells, Susan Crichton,
                          Mark Davies and others, re
                          Second Sight update 4/7/13
247.   POL00099003   Email from Martin Edwards to Paula   POL-0098586
                          Vennells re Board email.
248.   POL00098928   Speaking note for call with Jo POL-0098511
                         Swinson on SS investigation, 3
                         July
249.   POL00098923   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin POL-0098506
                          Edwards RE: Briefing for
                          meeting with James Arbuthnot
250.   POL00115961   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice   POL-0116963
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland and
                          others RE: SS 5 July update
251.   POL00099063   Signed Interim Report into alleged   POL-0098646
                          problems with the Horizon
                          system
252.   POL00098991   Email from Alwen Lyons to Mark POL-0098574
                          Davies, Lesley Sewell, Susan
                          Crichton and others, re Press
                          for Monday.
253.   POL00098990   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula POL-0098573
                          Vennells, re SS: The Future
                          after Monday.
254.   POL00099012   Email from Mark Davies to Paula      POL-0098595
                          Vennells, re Monday Meeting.
255.   POL00099011   Email chain from Paula Vennells to POL-0098594
                          Martin Edwards re: Monday
                          Meeting.
256.   POL00099005   Email from Mark Davies to Paula POL-0098588
                          Vennells, Alwen Lyons, Susan
                          Crichton   and   others,   re
                          Statement. Email has text of
                          statement embedded within it.
257.   POL00099016   Email chain from Paula Vennells to POL-0098599
                          Alice Perkins re Second Sight
                          update 4/7/13.

                              Page 797 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




258.   POL00099026   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan     POL-0098609
                          Barton,   Nicholas    Kennett,
                          Martin Moran and others, re
                          SS 5 July update.
259.   POL00099027   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice     POL-0098610
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                          Virginia Holmes and others, re
                          SS 5 July update.
260.   POL00099029   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin POL-0098612
                          Edwards, Mark Davies, Lesley
                          Sewell    and   others,     re
                          Proposed way forward.
261.   POL00099043   Email from Mark R Davies to Paula      POL-0098626
                          Vennells, re: Proposed way
                          forward
262.   POL00099050   Email from Martin Edwards to Mark POL-0098633
                          Davies, Alwen Lyons and
                          others re: Proposed way
                          forward
263.   POL00099051   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin POL-0098634
                          Edwards, Mark Davies, Alwen
                          Lyons re: Proposed way
                          forward
264.   POL00099053   Email chain from Martin Edwards to     POL-0098636
                          Paula Vennells re: Proposed
                          way forward
265.   POL00099055   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0098638
                          Davies and Martin Edwards re:
                          Proposed way forward
266.   POL00099054   Email chain between Mark Davies,       POL-0098637
                          Paula    Vennells,     Martin
                          Edwards and      others   re:
                          Proposed way forward
267.   POL00099056   Email from Lesley Sewell to Paula POL-0098639
                          Vennells, Mark Davies and
                          others; re: Proposed way
                          forward
268.   POL00099062   Email from Simon Baker to Paula        POL-0098645
                          Vennells, Mark Davies and
                          others re: Second Sight Interim
                          Report
269.   POL00099102   Email from Mark Davies to Paula        POL-0098685
                          Vennells RE: Draft statement
                               Page 798 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




270.   POL00099103   Email from Lesley Sewell to Paula POL-0098686
                          Vennells, Martin Edwards and
                          others re: Draft statement.
                          Includes email from Alan Bates
                          to Paula Vennells.
271.   POL00099104   Email from Susan Crichton to Paula   POL-0098687
                          Vennells, Martin Edwards and
                          others re: Draft statement
272.   POL00099126   Email from Sarah Paddison to Paula   POL-0098709
                          Vennells, Alice Perkins, Neil
                          Mccausland and others re
                          Update on SS review - 7 July
273.   POL00099121   Email from Sarah Paddison to Paula   POL-0098704
                          Vennells, Alice Perkins, Neil
                          Mccausland and others re
                          Update on SS review - 7 July
274.   POL00099215   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice      POL-0098798
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                          Virginia Holmes and others re
                          Board papers
275.   POL00099129   Email       from     Post     Office POL-0098712
                          Communications Team to Post
                          Office Communications Team
                          re In the Loop - Horizon Report
                          statement - 8 July 2013
276.   POL00116114   Email chain from Alice Perkins to    POL-0117114
                          Martin Edwards, Alwen Lyons
                          and Alasdair Marnoch re:
                          Board note on Horizon
277.   POL00099153   Email from Lesley Sewell to Paula    POL-0098736
                          Vennells, Martin Edwards,
                          Hugh Flemington and others re
                          Actions
278.   POL00006546   POL Board Paper: Update following    POL-0017641
                         the publication of the interim
                         report on Horizon
279.   POL00045457   Memo from Andy Winn regarding POL-0041936
                        clarification of the Settle
                        Centrally process
280.   POL00039089   Operating Level Agreement on POL-0035571
                         Product and Branch Network
                         Accounting,    Network and
                         Service Delivery v1 .0

                              Page 799 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




281.   POL00105529    Legally privileged initial complaint POL-0105096
                           and mediation scheme review
                           by Chris Aujard
282.   POL00021516    Meeting Minutes: minutes of Board POL0000049
                           meeting held on 16th July 2013
283.   POL00099210    Post    Office Ltd Board Meeting       POL-0098793
                             Minutes of 16/07/2013
284.   POL00027315    POL     Draft Agenda for Board         POL-0023956
                             Meeting on 25 March 2015 - v9
285.   UKGI00002414   Post Office Board Forward Agenda       UKGI013228-001
286.   POL00040001    Email from Susan Crichton to           POL-0036483
                           Andrew Parsons, FW: Horizon
                           Issues- draft Board Update
287.   POL00040002    Update to Post Office Limited Board- POL-0036484
                          RE; Horizon Legal Issues.
                          Relates      to     review    of
                          prosecutions.
288.   POL00099349    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula POL-0098932
                           Vennells, Alwen Lyons, and
                           Jorja Preston. Re: Update after
                           Tuesday's Board Meeting
289.   POL00099331    Email from Alasdair Marnoch to POL-0098914
                           Paula Vennells Re: "Insurance
                           reply".
290.   POL00108049    Email from Chris M Day to Paula POL-0110923
                           Vennells, Theresa lies and cc
                           Lesley J Sewell re Simon
                           Blagden - Chairman Fujitsu UK
291.   POL00039994    Letter from Sally Berlin to Paula      POL-0036476
                           Venn ells,   RE:      Horizon
                           Computer System
292.   POL00039995    Draft Paragraphs for Insertion into    POL-0036477
                           Reply to CCRC
293.   POL00099346    Draft Letter from Paula Vennells to    POL-0098929
                           Sally Berlin. Re: "Horizon
                           Computer System".
294.   POL00116111    Email from Amanda Brown to Sally POL-0117111
                           Berlin re: Horizon Computer
                           System.




                                 Page 800 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




295.   POL00116112   Letter from Susan Crichton (Post POL-0117112
                          Office) to Mrs S Berlin (CCRC)
                          re Horizon Computer System
296.   POL00006590   Update on the work programme          POL-0017671
                         arising from the Horizon report
297.   POL00039997   Email from Amanda Brown to Susan      POL-0036479
                          Crichton, RE: CCRC Letter
298.   POL00040012   Letter from Susan Crichton to Mrs S POL-0036494
                           Berlin, Re: Horizon Computer
                          System
299.   POL00006799   Advice on Disclosure and the Duty POL-0017591
                          to Record and Retain Material
300.   POL00006583   Interim Review of CK Processes by POL-0017668
                           Brian Altman QC
301.   POL00027667   Email from Susan Crichton to Paula    POL-0024308
                          Vennells cc: Angela Van-Den-
                          Bogerd, Andy Holt and Alwen
                          Lyons re: Update
302.   POL00027907   Post Office Board Meeting Agenda      POL-0024548
                          of 25/09/2013 - Costs Report,
                          Performance     Management,
                          Horizon System
303.   POL00040029   Email from Susan Crichton to          POL-0036511
                          Andrew Parsons, RE: Fwd
                          ToR
304.   POL00040032   Post     Office- Lessons Learned POL-0036514
                            Review of handling of alleged
                            issues/concerns         about
                            Horizon: Terms of Reference
305.   POL00116123   Email chain from Paula Vennells to    POL-0117122
                          Alice Perkins re Briefing
                          Alasdair.
306.   POL00099133   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen    POL-0098716
                          Lyons, Mark R Davies, Martin
                          Edwards and others re Thank
                          you - SS/JFSA/JA coverage
307.   POL00108019   Email from Susan Crichton to Paula    POL-0110901
                          Vennells re call.
308.   POL00108064   Email from Paula Vennells to POL-0110928
                          Theresa lies re: Fwd: IN
                          CONFIDENCE: FOLLOW UP
                          TO OUR MEETING

                               Page 801 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




309.   POL00027792   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice      POL-0024433
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                          Virginia Holmes and others
                          RE: Board note from Paula as
                          promised
310.   POL00108113   Email from Paula     Vennells to     POL-0110938
                          Theresa lies    re Lessons
                          learned ToR
311.   POL00021518   Meeting minutes: minutes for board   POL0000051
                          meeting    held   on     25th
                          September 2013
312.   POL00027472   POL Board Status Report organised POL-0024113
                         by reference No, 'action' and
                         'whom' re: including but not
                         limited to Crown branches by
                         Alwen Lyons
313.   POL00021521   Meeting Minutes: minutes of Board POL0000054
                          meeting held on 21 st January
                          2014
314.   POL00006564   Board Minutes of POL: 24 March       POL-0017658
                          2014
315.   POL00100592   Post Office Limited Board - Lessons POL-0100175
                          Learned Report by Belinda
                          Crowe
316.   POL00021426   Audit Risk and Compliance Sub- POL-0018056
                          Committee   Minutes    of
                          15/05/2014
317.   POL00099510   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula    POL-0099093
                          Vennells Re: SS and costs.
318.   POL00116131   Email from Martin Edwards to Paula   POL-0117130
                          Vennells, cc Susan Crichton,
                          Alwen Lyons and others re
                          Hooper brief for meeting
319.   POL00116132   Brief for Paula Vennell's meeting    POL-0117131
                          with Sir Anthony Hooper, 24
                          September to discuss the
                          launch of the mediation
                          scheme
320.   POL00116136   Note of meeting with Sir Anthony     POL-0117135
                          Hooper on 24 September and
                         next steps



                              Page 802 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




321.   POL00098592   Email chain from Alwen Lyons to       POL-0098175
                          Sarah Paddison re: Update
                          from James Arbuthnot MP
322.   POL00099013   Emails from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0098596
                          Davies and Martin Edwards, re
                          Monday Meeting.
323.   POL00115958   Email from Paula Vennells to Alwen POL-0116960
                          Lyons, Paula Vennells, Susan
                          Crichton and others re Notes of
                          the meeting with JA 5th July
324.   POL00090219   Post Office statement on findings of POL-0087188
                          interim report into Horizon
                          computer system
325.   POL00099146   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan    POL-0098729
                          Crichton, Mark R Davies,
                          Alwen Lyons and others re
                          Thoughts
326.   POL00116076   Email chain from Nina Arnott to Mark POL-0117076
                          R Davies and Alana Renner re:
                          Horizon
327.   POL00117036   Email from Simon Baker to Paula POL-0117870
                          Vennells, Martin Edwards,
                          Mark R Davies and others re
                          Horizon Investigation / JA
                          meeting - notes from today's
                          4.30 meeting, includes actions
                          and items to discuss with JA.
                          Case review process diagram
                          attached.
328.   POL00099341   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan POL-0098924
                          Crichton and Chris Day cc
                          Alwen Lyons and others. Re:
                          "SS costs".
329.   POL00099342   Email    chain  involving   Susan     POL-0098925
                          Crichton,   Paula    Vennells,
                          Chris Day and others. Re: "SS
                          costs".
330.   POL00108037   Email from Paula Vennells to Susan    POL-0110917
                          Crichton, Simon Baker, Alwen
                          Lyons and others re JFSA,
                          Second Sight.




                              Page 803 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




331.   POL00099354   Email from Alwen Lyons to Ron         POL-0098937
                          Warmington, Ian Henderson,
                          Susan Crichton and others,
                          Re: Notes of the meeting on
                          the 22nd July
332.   POL00118496   Email from Paula Vennells to POL-0119613
                          Theresa lies CC Alice Perkins
                          Re: File Note - SC
333.   POL00116113   Email from Susan Crichton to Paula POL-0117113
                          Vennells re: Workshop -
                          Update
334.   POL00099504   Email from Mike Granville to          POL-0099087
                          Whitehead Mike, Peter Batten
                          and   others Re:     Horizon
                          Information.
335.   POL00095442   Email from Janet Walker to Susan      POL-0095025
                          Crichton and Alwen Lyons re:
                          Follow-up to today's meeting
336.   POL00116218   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin   POL-0117212
                          Edwards re: Draft note for the
                          Board.
337.   POL00026641   Initial      Complaint Review and POL-0023282
                               Mediation Scheme - Working
                               Group - Minutes - 30 January
                               2014
338.   POL00099513   Email from Alice Perkins to Chris M POL-0099096
                          Day, Paula Vennells and
                          Susan Crichton Re: SS and
                          Costs.
339.   POL00108087   Email from Susan Crichton to Paula POL-0110934
                          Vennells, cc Theresa lies and
                          Martin Edwards re Update for
                          Paula       on     Complaint
                          Review/Mediation scheme
340.   POL00066817   Seema Misra Case Study. Email POL-0063296
                         chain from Martin Smith to
                         Susan Crichton RE: Note of
                         meeting with Sir Anthony
                         Hooper.
341.   POL00116166   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin POL-0117165
                          Edwards      Re:     Example
                          Applications


                                  Page 804 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




342.   POL00099695   Email from Mark Davies to Paula POL-0099278
                          Vennells, Martin Edwards and
                          Belinda Crowe re: Example
                          Applications P&C
343.   POL00099702   Email from Theresa lies to Alwen POL-0099285
                          Lyons, Chris M Day, Fay
                          Healey and others RE: FW:
                          Example Applications
344.   POL00099711   Email from Paula Vennells to Alice POL-0099294
                          Perkins      Re.    Example
                          Applications
345.   POL00116181   Email from Martin Edwards to Paula    POL-0117180
                          Vennells. RE: HPBB Legal
                          options
346.   POL00116133   Email from Mark Davies to Paula       POL-0117132
                          Vennells, Susan Crichton,
                          Angela Van-Den-Bogerd and
                          others re: Martin Griffiths.
347.   POL00027757   Email from Kevin Gilliland to Paula   POL-0024398
                          Vennells, Mark R Davies,
                          Alwen Lyons and others RE:
                          Mr Griffiths
348.   POL00108132   Email chain from Paula Vennells to    POL-0110948
                          Theresa lies re: Fwd: Martin
                          Griffiths/Sparrow
349.   POL00116188   Email to Paula Vennells, Kevin POL-0114590
                          Gilliland, Alwen Lyons and
                          others from Rodric Williams
                          Re:      Strictly Private &
                          Confidential - Overview of
                          Coroner Inquests.
350.   POL00006581   Review of PO prosecutions by Brian    POL-0017666
                          Altman QC
351.   POL00027150   PO Executive Committee Agenda         POL-0023791
352.   POL00027134   Post Office Ltd Board, update on POL-0023775
                          Project Sparrow and progress
                          on list of actions
353.   POL00027136   POL    Board   - Chief Executive's POL-0023777
                           Report
354.   POL00021519   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000052
                          meeting held on 31 st October
                          2013

                               Page 805 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




355.   POL00114194   Email chain from Andy Holt to Paula    POL-0113119
                          Vennells Re Weekly Update
356.   POL00027138   Post Office Limited Audit, Risk and POL-0023779
                          Compliance      Board     Sub-
                          Committee Briefing Book.
357.   POL00006801   Brian Altman QC's interim review       POL-0017618

358.   POL00006803   Brian Altman QC's general review of POL-0017620
                          prosecutions
359.   POL00108161   Email from Sarah Paddison to POL-0110956
                          Theresa lies re Sparrow -
                          briefing for Paula for Board
360.   POL00066789   Email from Rodric Williams to Martin   POL-0063268
                          Smith, Simon Clarke, Hugh
                          Flemington and others. Re:
                          The report of Helen Rose
361.   POL00006776   Email re Full Review R v Prince        POL-0017609
362.   POL00040061   Post office- initial complaint review POL-0036543
                          and      mediation      scheme-
                          criminal risk management
363.   POL00116189   Email from Andy Holt to Susan          POL-0117187
                          Crichton, Angela Van Den
                          Bogerd, Alwen Lyons and
                          others re Sparrow Steering
                          Meeting.
364.   POL00116190   Weekly      Steering         Group POL-0117188
                         Presentation slides
365.   POL00027677   Email from Andy Holt to Paula          POL-0024318
                          Vennells, Angela Van-Den-
                          Bogerd, Alwen Lyons and
                          others RE: Weekly Update
366.   POL00038678   Minutes of the ARC Sub-Committee POL-0027989
                          on 19 Nov 13
367.   POL00021520   Meeting Minutes: Board meeting         POL0000053
                          minutes for meeting held on
                          27th November 2013
368.   POL00026626   Post Office Ltd Board - Agenda for POL-0023267
                          27 November 2013 and
                          corresponding     papers   &
                          Various Meeting Minutes from
                          2013


                               Page 806 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




369.   POL00099976   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice POL-0099559
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                          Virginia Holmes re: Follow - up
                          after the Board meeting
370.   POL00099977   Minutes for meeting      on  27 POL-0099560
                          November re: Costs, Second
                          Sight
371.   POL00100193   Post    Office Audit - Risk and       POL-0099776
                            Compliance    Committee
                            Prosecutions Policy
372.   POL00030900   Meeting Agenda for the Audit, Risk POL-0027382
                          and     Compliance       Sub-
                          committee, including paper on
                          the Post Office's Prosecuting
                          Policy
373.   POL00027692   Email chain from Alwen Lyons to       POL-0024333
                          Paula Vennells and Chris
                          Aujard        re:     ARC
                          Teleconference
374.   POL00100223   Email from Theresa lies (on behalf POL-0099806
                          of Paula Vennells) to Alasdair
                          Marnoc,       RE:        ARC
                          Prosecutions Paper
375.   POL00021424   Post Office Limited Audit, Risk and   POL-0018054
                          Compliance Sub Committee
                          Minutes of 11/02/2014
376.   POL00116285   Email from Chris Aujard to Paula      POL-0117278
                          Vennells, Chris M Day, Martin
                          Edwards and others re Board
                          papers - Questions
377.   POL00099991   Strictly Confidential, POST OFFICE POL-0099574
                            LIMITED     BOARD,    Status
                            Report at 4 December 2013,
                           Alwen Lyons
378.   POL00040194   Observations and analysis of the      POL-0036676
                         Cartwright King Prosecution
                         Review Process
379.   POL00100032   Initial Complaints Review & Case      POL-0099615
                            Mediation scheme Steering
                            Group




                               Page 807 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




380.   POL00116241   Briefing Note from Belinda Crowe to POL-0117235
                           Paula Vennells cc Chris
                           Aujard, Hugh Flemington 'and
                           others' re: Briefing for your 1-2-
                           1 with Alice
381.   POL00100084   Post Office Limited Board Meeting POL-0099667
                          held at 10am on 21 st January
                          2014
382.   POL00093696   Briefing Email from Belinda Crowe POL-0093818
                           to    Chairman    and   Chief
                           Executive of Post Office re :
                           Briefing for meeting with RT
                           Hon James Arbuthnot MP
383.   POL00100124   Letter from Belinda Crowe to POL-0099707
                          Chairman and Chief Executive,
                           Post Office Limited cc: Chris
                          Aujard RE: Briefing for Meeting
                          with RT Hon James Arbuthnot
                           MP
384.   POL00090358   Complaint Review and Mediation POL-0087327
                        Scheme       (Chronology     and
                        Supporting Documents) File 2
                         of 5 from April 2013 to October
                        2015
385.   POL00027760   Email from Chris M Day to Alwen POL-0024401
                          Lyons, Chris Aujard, Fay
                          Healey    and     others re
                          Prosecution Policy Paper
386.   POL00100192   Email from Alwen Lyons to Chris POL-0099775
                          Aujard, Chris M Day, Fay
                          Healey, RE: FW: Prosecution
                          Policy Paper
387.   POL00027688   Email from Paula Vennells to Chris   POL-0024329
                          Aujard RE: 11/02/14 ARC
                          telephone conference and
                          discussion     of      future
                          prosecutions.
388.   POL00027687   Email from Susannah Hooper to POL-0024328
                          Alice Perkins, cc'ing Larissa
                          Wilson, Tim Franklin, Alasdair
                          Marnoch and others, re: ARC
                          Teleconference



                              Page 808 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




389.   POL00116262   Email from Mark R Davies to Paula     POL-0117255
                          Vennells, cc Chris Aujard,
                          Belinda Crowe and others re
                          comms on the prosecutions
                          policy
390.   POL00027478   Post    Office Limited: Executive POL-0024119
                            Committee     Agenda   for
                            meeting to be held on 13
                            February 2014
391.   POL00116281   Email from Paula Venn ells to Angela POL-011727 4
                          Van-Den-Bogerd,         Belinda
                          Crowe, Chris Aujard and
                          others Re: Board Papers -
                          questions
392.   POL00021522   Meeting Minutes: meeting minutes POL0000055
                          for Board meeting on 26th
                          February 2014
393.   POL00116209   Email from Paula Vennells to Martin   POL-0117203
                          Edwards re Fwd: Follow on
                          from 1 :1
394.   POL00298004   Update on the work programme POL-BSFF-
                         arising from the Horizon     0136054
                         Report
395.   POL00099806   POL Board Meeting and reports         POL-0099389
396.   POL00026629   Post Office Ltd Board Meeting on POL-0023270
                          26/02/2014 - Chris Aujard,
                          Angela Van Den Bogerd,
                          Belinda Crowe and Others
                          present.
397.   POL00105068   Advice Report on Papers for Post POL-0080700
                          Office Ltd Board

398.   POL00040271   Board pack of the Post Office Board   POL-0036753
                          Meeting of 25/09/2014
399.   POL00027210   Post Office Board Decision Paper by POL-0023851
                          Jane Macleod RE: publishing
                          new prosecutions policy
400.   POL00099929   Email from Paula Vennells to Chris    POL-0099512
                          Aujard RE. Brief for Alice
401.   POL00027506   Post    Office Agenda: Executive      POL-0024147
                            Committee meeting held on
                            19th November 2013 and
                            associated documents
                                Page 809 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




402.   POL00116284   Email from Belinda Crowe to Paula      POL-0117277
                          Vennells, Chris Aujard, Chris
                          M Day and others RE: Board
                          papers- questions
403.   POL00100321   Email chain from Blinda Crowe to POL-0099904
                          Paula Vennells; David Oliver;
                          Chris Aujard; Martin Edwards,
                          re: Papers for tomorrow - our
                          pre- meeting, and meeting with
                          Second Sight and Tony
                          Hooper.
404.   POL00100322   Memorandum from Belinda Crowe POL-0099905
                        to Paula Vennells, and others,
                        re: Briefing for the meetings
                        with Second Sight and Sir
                        Anthony Hooper on Monday 24
                        February.
405.   POL00100323   Annotated Agenda, Meeting with POL-0099906
                         Second Sight on 24 February
                         2014.
406.   POL00116305   Email from Paula Vennells to POL-0117298
                          Belinda Crowe, David Oliver,
                          Chris Aujard and others re.
                          Papers for tomorrow - our pre-
                          meeting, and meetings with
                          Second Sight and Tony
                          Hooper.
407.   POL00100337   File Notes for a meeting with Second   POL-0099920
                           Sight    on    Monday     24th
                           February at 1:00pm.
408.   POL00116312   Email chain from Paula Vennells to     POL-0117305
                          Belinda Crowe re: Speaking
                          note for the Board
409.   POL00116313   Board meeting 26 February          - POL-0117306
                          Speaking note for Paula.
410.   POL00027337   POL Board Meeting Minutes of 26 POL-0023978
                         February 2014
411.   POL00100121   Email from Amarnoch to Alwen POL-0099704
                          Lyons cc: Alasdair Marnoch,
                          Alice Perkins, Alwen Lyons,
                          Amanda A Brown, Belinda
                          Crowe re: Re: Follow - Up after
                          Board Meeting of 21.01.2014


                               Page 810 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




412.   POL00100338   File Note for a meeting with Tony POL-0099921
                          Hooper,      Monday     24th
                          February ta 2:30pm.
413.   POL00116321   Email chain from Paula Vennells to    POL-0117314
                          Chris Aujard re PRINTED
                          Sparrow.
414.   POL00027696   Email from David Oliver to Paula POL-0024337
                          Vennells RE:    Scope for
                          Linklaters work
415.   POL00092172   Post Office Executive Committee - POL-0091750
                          Meeting of 13 March 2014 -
                          Agenda & Update Papers
416.   POL00116348   Email from Neil Hayward to Belinda POL-0117341
                          Crowe, cc Paula Vennells,
                          Chris Aujard and others re
                          Post Office Ltd Board -
                          Mediation Scheme Update
                          March 2014 v3 following
                          advice from Linklaters
417.   POL00022012   Email from Chris Aujard to Jonathan   POL-0018491
                          Swil re: Draft Report
418.   POL00021523   Meeting Minutes: minutes for Board    POL0000056
                          meeting held on 26th March
                          2014
419.   POL00022093   Outline of points produced by POL-0018572
                           Linklaters to explain Horizon
                           and form a basis for a report to
                           respond to public criticism and
                           individual complaints by SPMs.
420.   POL00027800   Email from Chris Aujard to Paula      POL-0024441
                          Vennells with others CC'd RE:
                          Sparrow Update
421.   POL00108396   Email from Belinda Crowe to Chris POL-0106501
                          Aujard, cc'd Belinda Crowe re:
                          Fwd:     Strictly  Private   &
                          Confidential - Subject to Legal
                          Privilege
422.   POL00108399   Email chain from Belinda Crowe to POL-0106504
                          Gareth James and Rodric
                          Williams Re: Strictly Private &
                          Confidential- Subject to Legal
                          Privilege


                              Page 811 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




423.   POL00108404   Email from Belinda Crowe to Gareth POL-0106509
                          James Re: Strictly Private &
                          Confidential - Subject to Legal
                          Privilege
424.   POL00108405   Email chain from Gareth James to POL-0106510
                          Belinda Crowe Re: Strictly
                          Private & Confidential - Subject
                          to Legal Privilege
425.   POL00108408   Letter from Deloitte LLP to Chris POL-0106513
                          Aujard re: Draft Letter of
                           Engagement
426.   POL00108412   Draft Letter (v6) from Deloitte LLP to POL-0106515
                           Post Office Ltd re Terms of
                           Business and Arrangements
                           for Assisting Post Office in
                           Responding to Allegations
                           regarding Horizon
427.   POL00117611   Letter from Deloitte to Mr Chris POL-0115228
                          A~a~ RE: Summa~ cl
                          assurance work undertaken on
                           Horizon HNG-X system to
                          assist POL - signed
428.   POL00006565   Project Sparrow    Sub-Committee POL-0017844
                          Minutes
429.   POL00116439   Post Office Project Sparrow Sub      POL-0117423
                          Committee Meeting ToR and
                          Initial Complaint Review and
                          Mediation Scheme document
430.   POL00006566   Project Sparrow Sub-committee POL-0017845
                          Minutes 30 April 2014
431.   POL00100513   Email chain from Julie George to POL-0100096
                          Gina Gould re. FW: Gareth
                          James / Gareth Jenkins / Julie
                          George I Mark Westbrook -
                          Meeting.
432.   POL00108440   Email from Chris Aujard to Sarah POL-0110987
                          Paddison, Amanda Brown and
                          Theresa lies re: Sparrow
                          Subcommittee meeting
433.   POL00021524   Meeting Minutes: minutes for Board   POL0000057
                          meeting held on 30th April
                          2014


                              Page 812 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




434.   POL00105635    Project Zebra - Phase 1 Report - POL-0104595
                           HNG-X: Review of Assurance
                           Sources
435.   POL00022123    Post     Office Ltd     Board Sub POL-0018602
                             Committee- Initial complaints
                             review and mediation scheme
                             dissemination of Linklaters
                             advice and Deloitte assurance
                             report
436.   POL00031388    ROW Proposed Draft re : Deloitte POL-0028290
                         instructions as at 9.5.2014 - to
                         support Post Office's legal
                         position.
437.   POL00117612    Letter from Mr Gareth James to Mr POL-0115229
                           Chris Aujard re: Change Order
                           to the Contract between
                            Deloitte LLP and Post Office
                            Ltd
438.   POL00027 400   POL Board Minutes on 21/05/2014 - POL-0024041
                          Alice      Perkins,      Neil
                          Mccausland, Tim Franklin and
                          Others present.
439.   POL00028062    Report: Horizon Desktop Review of POL-0023065
                          Assurance Sources and Key
                          Control Features - draft for
                          discussion, Deloitte
440.   POL00006556    Email    from  Rodric      Williams POL-0017650
                           attaching  Deloitte's   (draft)
                           Board Update and a Factfile
441.   POL00031400    Email from Chris Aujard to Paula       POL-0028302
                           Vennells, Martin Edwards,
                           Alwen Lyons and others re
                           FW: Project Zebra
442.   POL00116581    Email from Chris Aujard to Paula       POL-0117506
                           Vennells cc Martin Edwards,
                           Belinda Crowe and others re
                           meeting with Mark Russell
443.   POL00030159    Draft Deloitte Board Briefing Report   POL-0026641




                                Page 813 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




444.   POL00029733    Email from Alwen Lyons to Rodric POL-0026215
                           Williams Re: FWD -Deloitte
                           Briefing - Message from Chris
                           Aujard and Lesley Sewell -
                           Strictly Private & Confidential -
                           Subject to Legal Privilege
445.   POL00027797    Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula POL-0024438
                           Vennells, Chris Aujard, CCing
                           Lesley J Sewell and others RE:
                           Deloitte Briefing- Message
                           from Chris Aujard and Lesley J
                           Sewell
446.   POL00027153    Post Office Ltd Board - Initial POL-0023794
                          Complaints    Review     and
                          Mediation   Scheme:      Sub
                          Committee Recommendation,
                          prepared by Chris Aujard and
                          Mark Davies
447.   UKGI00002392   Post Office Ltd Board - Initial UKGI013206-001
                          Complaints   Review   and
                          Mediation Scheme: Update
                          Paper
448.   POL00006571    Project Sparrow Sub-Committee POL-0017847
                           Minutes 6 June 2014
449.   POL00027054    Zebra Action Summary for Post POL-0023695
                           Office (Internal) v3
450.   POL00031410    Report: Horizon review by Deloitte   POL-0028312

451.   POL00109004    Post Office Ltd Risk and Compliance POL-0111015
                           Committee Meeting Agenda
452.   UKGI00002213   Email chain from Richard Callard to UKGI013027-001
                           Peter Batten re:      Project
                           Sparrow: Linklaters scoping
                           paper for Board comment
453.   POL00107317    Legally privileged report prepared by POL-0105625
                           Linklaters on behalf of Post
                           Office into initial complaint
                           review and mediation scheme
                           legal issues




                                Page 814 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




454.   POL00117519    Email from Rodric Williams to           POL-0115136
                           Gareth James, Copying in
                           Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard
                           and others. Re: Strictly Private
                           & Confidential - Subject to
                           Legal Privilege
455.   POL00028069    Deloitte   Draft    Board  Briefing POL-0023072
                           document further to report on
                           Horizon desktop review of
                           assurance sources and key
                           control features
456.   POL00105552    Email from Alice Perkins to Paula       POL-0105119
                           Vennells, Re: Sparrow
457.   POL00027369    Post        Office Ltd      Board Sub POL-0024010
                                Committee - Initial Complaints
                                Review     and       Mediation
                                Scheme: The way forward
458.   UKGI00002358   Email chain from Richard Callard to UKGI013172-001
                           Mark     Davies   re:   Board
                           Sparrow     Sub    Committee
                           Papers
459.   UKGI00002359   Email from Mark R Davies to UKGI013173-001
                           Richard Callard re. Board
                           Sparrow  Sub    Committee
                           Papers.
460.   POL00116416    Email from David Oliver to Paula        POL-0117400
                           Vennells, Martin Edwards,
                           Belinda Crowe and others RE:
                           Partial draft thematic report
461.   POL00116417    DRAFT - Thematic Issues Report          POL-0117401

462.   POL00004439    Initial      Complaint Review and VIS00005507
                                Mediation Scheme - Briefing
                                Report - Part One - Prepared
                                by Second Sight
463.   POL00002415    Post Office, Initial Complaint Review VIS00003429
                           and Mediation Scheme, PO
                           Reply to Second Sight's
                           Briefing Report -Part Two
464.   POL00117035    Mediation Proposal                      POL-0117869




                                    Page 815 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




465.   POL00026638   "Working Group for the Initial POL-0023279
                         Complaint Review and Case
                          Mediation Scheme" Amended
                          Minutes of 03/01/2014
466.   POL00026640   Meeting Minutes for Working Group POL-0023281
                          for the Initial Complaint Review
                          and Case Mediation Scheme
467.   POL00100132   Email    chain    between     Ian POL-0099715
                          Henderson, Janet Walker and
                          Ron Warmington re: Thanks
                          and One Request
468.   POL00026636   "Working Group for the Initial POL-0023277
                         Complaint Review and Case
                          Mediation Scheme Standing
                         Agenda" for 20/02/2014
469.   POL00116320   Email to Belinda Crowe from Paula POL-0117313
                          Vennells Re: Working Group
                          Meeting Tomorrow
470.   POL00026656   Face to face meeting of the working POL-0023297
                          group - Initial complaint review
                          and mediation scheme- 7
                          March 2014
471.   POL00100387   Email from Belinda Crowe to Peter POL-0099970
                          Batten, RE: Second sight
                          report
472.   POL00026642   Working Group for the Initial POL-0023283
                         Complaint Review and Case
                          Mediation Scheme Standing
                         Agenda
473.   POL00026644   Working Group for the Initial POL-0023285
                         Complaint Review and Case
                          Mediation Scheme - Minutes
                         for 27/03/2014.
474.   POL00108346   Letter from David Oliver to Paula     POL-0110973
                          Vennells RE Note for call with
                          James Arbuthnot - 18 March
475.   POL00105634   'Meeting with MPs - Mediation         POL-0104622
                          Scheme       and      Branch
                          Improvement       Programme'
                          Minutes, undated.




                              Page 816 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




476.   POL00116388   Email from Mark R Davies to Chris POL-0117381
                          Aujard, Paula Vennells, Martin
                          Edwards     and   others    re
                          Confidential MP Meeting -
                          Note and overview of meeting
477.   POL00100474   Letter from James Arbuthnot to        POL-0100057
                           Paula Vennells re: meeting
                          follow up
478.   POL00006552   Email from Andy Parsons re Draft POL-0017646
                          SS Thematic Report
479.   POL00100491   Email Crowe to Sophie Bialaszewski    POL-0100074
                          and other re. Fwd: Update from
                          Post Office meeting, 24 March
                          2014
480.   POL00026633   Initial     Complaint and Mediation POL-0023274
                               Scheme      Working    Group
                               Minutes of 01/04/2014.
481.   POL00100671   Letter from Paula Vennells to RT POL-0100254
                           Hon James Arbuthnot MP,
                           Final report on the Mediation
                          Scheme.
482.   POL00006554   Email from Andrew Parsons re SS       POL-0017648
                          Report
483.   POL00105466   Letter from the Rt. Hon. James POL-0104646
                          Arbuthnot    MP    to   Paula
                          Vennells dated 01/05/2014.
484.   POL00043627   Initial      Complaint Review and     POL-0040130
                               Mediation Scheme Working
                               Group - Minute of meeting
                               dated 6 May 2014.
485.   POL00026659   Minute of Initial Complaint Review POL-0023300
                          and Mediation Scheme -
                          Working Group 20 May 2014
486.   POL00075178   Initial     Complaint Review and      POL-0071741
                               Mediation Scheme Briefing
                               Report Part One
487.   POL00026665   Working Group for the Initial POL-0023306
                         Complaint Review and Case
                          Mediation Scheme - Minute of
                         Working Group Call 26 June
                         2014



                                   Page 817 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




488.   POL00026672    Minute - Working Group for the Initial POL-0023313
                           Complaint Review and Case
                           Mediation Scheme - 10th July
                           2014
489.   POL00022149    Email from Belinda Crowe to POL-0018628
                           Andrew Parsons, Angela Van
                           Dan    Bogerd and    others
                           regarding Second sight part
                           two report
490.   POL00021814    Email from Andrew Parsons to         POL-0018293
                           Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard
                           and Angela Van-Den-Bogerd
                           CC Matthew Fielden, Re
                           Project Sparrow
491.   POL00305575    Email from Belinda Crowe toChris M POL-BSFF-
                           Day, Martin Edwards CC ing        0143625
                           Belinda Crowe
492.   POL00101176    Email chain from Gavin Lambert to    POL-0100759
                           Paula Vennells re: revised
                           Board update with more on
                           Sparrow.
493.   UKGI00002436   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice UKGI013250-001
                           Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                           Alasdair Marnoch and others
                           re: A note from Paula - Period
                           4 Financial Results Update
494.   POL00022215    Email from Belinda Crowe to          POL-0018694
                           Jonathan Swil and Rodric
                           Williams regarding Second
                           sight's draft part two report
495.   POL00022212    Email from David Oliver to Jonathan POL-0018691
                           Swil and Belinda Crowe
                           regarding the draft letter to
                           second sight re part 2
                           preliminary          comments
                           12082014
496.   POL00022213    Letter from Chris Aujard to Ron POL-0018692
                           Warrington and Ian Harrington
                           regarding Second sight's part
                           two mediation briefing report




                               Page 818 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




497.   POL00022186   Email from Andrew Parsons to POL-0018665
                          Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard
                          and others regarding Project
                          sparrow        [BO
                          4A.FID20472253]
498.   POL00101174   Email from Paula Vennells to         POL-0100757
                          Belinda Crowe re: Second
                          Sight part 2 report.
499.   POL00021800   Email from Belinda Crowe to David    POL-0018279
                          Oliver, Melanie Garfield and
                          Andrew Parsons RE: Fwd:
                          Second Sight's Draft Part Two
                          Report
500.   POL00040226   Letter from Chris Aujard (POL POL-0036708
                          Counsel) to Sir Anthony
                           Hooper, RE: Initial Complaint
                           Review      and       Mediation
                          Scheme, draft second sight
                          part 2 report (the draft report)
501.   POL00040230   Email from Rodric Williams to Tony POL-0036712
                          Hooper, RE: Part 2 Report
502.   POL00305792   Email from Rodric Williams to POL-BSFF-
                          AnthonyHooper    CC      ing 0143842
                          Belinda Crowe, Chris Aujard.
                          RE: Second Sight "Part Two
                          Report"
503.   POL00022237   Email from Belinda Crowe to Chris POL-0018716
                          Aujard sofy copy of second
                          sight letter regarding quality of
                          work
504.   POL00116697   Email chain from Alwen Lyons to POL-0117570
                          Larissa Wilson. RE: Sparrow
                          update from Chris Aujard
505.   POL00101301   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0100884
                          R Davies, Alasdair Marnoch,
                          Alice Perkins, and others re:
                          Re: Sparrow update
506.   POL00101325   Email from Paula Vennells to Neil    POL-0100908
                          Mccausland, Mark R Davies
                          and Chris Aujard re: Re:
                          Sparrow update
507.   POL00101365   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0100948
                          Davies re: Sparrow update

                              Page 819 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




508.   POL00026680   Minutes - Working Group for the      POL-0023321
                          Initial Complaint Review and
                          Mediation    Scheme       11
                          September 2014
509.   POL00029944   Fujitsu's comments on Second Sight POL-0026426
                           Briefing Report - Part Two
510.   POL00027363   Strictly Confidential Post Office Ltd POL-0024004
                            Board    Initial  Complaints
                            Review      and     Mediation
                           Scheme: Update Paper by
                           Chris Aujard and Belinda
                           Crowe.
511.   POL00101364   Lead Team update for Paula's CEO     POL-0100947
                          Report to the Board

512.   POL00021853   Email from Andrew Pheasent to POL-0018332
                          Dave Hulbert re: Second Sight
                          Part Two
513.   POL00021773   Email chain between Paul lnwood, POL-0018252
                          Belinda Crowe, Dave Hulbert
                          and others re: Second Sight
                          Part Two.
514.   POL00040246   Email from Andrew Pheasant to        POL-0036728
                          Andy Garner, RE: FW: Second
                          Sight Part Two
515.   POL00021883   Email from Belinda Crowe to Dave POL-0018362
                          Hulbert re: Second Sight Part
                          Two
516.   POL00101244   Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula      POL-0100827
                          Vennells re: Brief
517.   POL00006561   Template    Letter:    PO  Initial POL-0017655
                         Complaint       Review   and
                         Mediation Scheme- SS's Part 2
                         Report
518.   POL00101390   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice      POL-0100973
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                          Virgina Holmes and others re:
                          Sparrow - Board Note
519.   POL00021528   Minute meetings: minutes for Board   POL0000061
                          meeting    held    on    25th
                          September 2014



                              Page 820 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




520.   UKGI00002397   Initial     Complaints Review   and UKGI013211-001
                                Mediation   Scheme:   July
                                Update Paper
521.   POL00100335    File Notes for a meeting with Tony    POL-0099918
                           Hooper,      Monday       24th
                           February ta 2:30pm. Paula
                           Vennells and Chris Aujard also
                           in attendance.
522.   POL00021526    Post Office Ltd Board Minutes of POL0000059
                           10/06/2014

523.   POL00099223    Email from Paula Vennells to Alice POL-0098806
                           Perkins re The case for
                           independence in the Post
                           Office appeals system
524.   POL00118494    Email from Alwen Lyons to Paula       POL-0119611
                           Vennells - Re: Susan
525.   POL00108058    Email from Paula Vennells to          POL-0110925
                           Theresa Illes re SS costs and
                           update from Susan
526.   POL00116124    Email chain from Paula Vennells to    POL-0117123
                           Alasdair Marnoch cc Alice
                           Perkins CB re: Follow up
527.   POL00104258    Collection   of   documents    re: POL-0103841
                           Employee
                           departure/termination      of
                           employment      for    Susan
                           Crichton (24 September 2013 -
                           30 November 2013)
528.   LCAS0001071    Letter from Greg Knight MP to Paula VIS00011311
                           Vennells regarding decision by
                            PO not to mediate Lee
                           Castleton's    case    despite
                           Second                   Sight
                           recommendation.
529.   POL00119548    Letter from Greg Knight to Paula POL-0119860
                           Vennells re: Lee Castleton -
                           Appealing Case for Mediation
                           Scheme                 Letter
                           correspondence attached
530.   POL00101581    Email from Gavin Lambert to Paula     POL-0101164
                           Vennells, re: Draft reply to
                           Gavin

                                   Page 821 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




531.   POL00116840    DRAFT RESPONSE FROM PAULA POL-0114613
                         VENNELLS TO SIR GREG
                         KNIGHT     MP     re: Initial
                         Complaint     Review    and
                         Mediation Scheme
532.   POL00109724    Letter from Paula Vennells to The Rt POL-0111080
                            Hon Sir Greg Knight MP
533.   LCAS0000979    Lee Castleton case study: Letter VIS00011219
                          from Angela Van Den Bogerd
                          to The Rt Hon Sir Greg Knight
                          MP re: Mr Lee Castleton in the
                          Initial Complaint Review and
                          Mediation Scheme
534.   POL00077 426   Draft Closure Letter in relation to POL-0073989
                           case M001 - Lee Castleton -
                           Mediation declined
535.   POL00077 425   Email from Patrick Bourke to POL-0073988
                           Andrew Parsons, Angela Van-
                           Den-Bogerd, Rodric Williams
                           and      others:    RE:    For
                           comments/clearance please:
                           Letters to Applicants where we
                           are refusing to mediate,
                           contrary         to        WG
                           recommendation.
536.   POL00101477    Email from Avene O'Farrell to POL-0101060
                           Belinda Crowe, Tom Wechsler,
                           Chris Aujard re: FW: Post
                           Office mediation process
537.   POL00101484    Briefing for Chief Executive (In       POL-0101067
                            confidence); PV Conversation
                            with JA; QA
538.   POL00117030    Note of call between Paula Vennells POL-0117865
                           and James Arbuthnot MP -
                           15:30, 28 October 2014
539.   POL00022610    Instructions to lead counsel to        POL-0019089
                            advise in conference re In the
                            Matter of the Post Office
                            Limited    Complaints     and
                            Mediation Scheme
540.   POL00022611    Post      office   complaints   and    POL-0019090
                             mediation    scheme    dated
                             24/11/14.


                                 Page 822 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




541.   POL00101578   Email from Mark Davies to Paula        POL-0101161
                          Vennells, re: Sparrow sub-ctte
542.   POL00101586   Email from Ron Warmington to           POL-0101169
                          Mediation re: Post Office cases
                          - update
543.   POL00026741   Letter from The Rt. Hon. James POL-0023382
                          Arbuthnot M.P. to Paula
                          Vennells re: Request for
                          answers to questions from
                          letter dated 8/12/2014 about
                          Second Sight
544.   POL00101596   Letter from Paula Vennells to James POL-0101179
                          Arbuthnot MP re Complaint
                          and     Mediation     Scheme.
                           Disagrees with Oliver Letwin's
                          suggestion      re      general
                          presumption that all cases will
                          be mediated.
545.   POL00101738   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0101321
                          R Davies re: RC/JS briefing?
546.   POL00101700   Letter from The Rt Hon James           POL-0101283
                          Arbuthnot to Paula Vennells re:
                          Compliants and Mediation
                          Scheme.
547.   POL00101690   Post Office Press Release from the POL-0101273
                          office of The Rt Hon James
                          Arbuthnot, MP re: MPs lose
                          faith in Post Office mediation
                          scheme
548.   POL00116824   Speaking Note for Paula re Update      POL-0117685
                         for   Board/Alice    following
                         meeting with MPs
549.   POL00021530   Meeting Minutes: minutes of Board      POL0000063
                          meeting    held   on    26th
                          November 2014.
550.   POL00109487   Letter from Paula Vennells to Jo POL-0111055
                          Swinson     MP Re:      Media
                          attention   relating to   the
                           Mediation Scheme.
551.   POL00105464   Letters between James Arbuthnot POL-0104644
                           and Paula Vennels, RE:
                           request to meet MPs to
                           discuss mediation process.

                               Page 823 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




552.   POL00116734   Email from Belinda Crowe to Avene POL-0117604
                          O'Farrell, Tom Wechsler, Chris
                          Aujard and others RE: Post
                          Office mediation process
553.   POL00116815   Email chain from Gavin Lambert to POL-0117676
                          Mark Davies cc Tom Wechsler
                          and Patrick Bourke re: lines on
                          the Sparrow position for Alice
                          1 :1 and Board.
554.   POL00116816   Note from Paula Vennells: Update      POL-0117677
                          for Board/Alice
555.   POL00116823   Email from Gavin Lambert to Mark R POL-0117684
                          Davies, Tom Wechsler and
                          Patrick Bourke re: RE: lines on
                          the Sparrow position for Alice
                          1:1 and Board
556.   POL00158173   November Board -      CEO Report POL-0146492
                         notes
557.   POL00158172   Email from Gavin Lambert to Paula     POL-0146491
                          Vennells re: board note and
                          CFO cribsheet
558.   POL00022609   Email from Mark Underwood to          POL-0019088
                          Patrick    Bourke,      Rodric
                          Williams, Jane Macleod and
                          others, RE Project Sparrow
559.   POL00101587   Email from Melanie Garfield to Gavin POL-0101170
                          Lambert, Patrick Bourke and
                          clhern;   re:   URGENT
                          SPARROW - ADVICE TO
                          CEO
560.   POL00101589   Email from Patrick Bourke to Paula    POL-0101172
                          Vennells, Mark Davies and
                          others re: Sparrow - Revised
                          Letter - Urgent
561.   POL00116833   Email from Patrick Bourke to Paula POL-0117694
                          Vennells,      Gavin   Lambert,
                          Avene O'Farrell and others re
                          Draft letter to James Arbuthnot
562.   POL00109684   Email from Avene O'Farrell to POL-0111071
                          Patrick Bourke, Gavin Lambert
                          and Mark Davies re: CEO -
                          James Arbuthnot MP - 281114


                              Page 824 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




563.   POL00101604   Email from Alice Perkins to Paula      POL-0101187
                          Vennells, Belinda Crowe and
                          others re: JA
564.   POL00101796   Email from Mark R Davies to Paula POL-0101379
                          Vennells and Gavin Lambert
                          Re: Second Sight - Horizon
                          Errors - Media Coverage.
565.   POL00101801   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0101384
                          R Davies and Gavin Lambert;
                          Re: Second Sight - Horizon
                          Errors - Media Coverage.
566.   POL00101852   Email Chain from Gavin Lambert to      POL-0101435
                          Paula Vennells re Second
                          Sight - Horizon Errors - Media
                          Coverage. Chain discusses
                          conversation     with     Tim
                          McCormack about bugs and
                          errors.
567.   POL00022612   Instructions to Leading Counsel to     POL-0019091
                           Advise in Consultation
568.   POL00102064   Email from Patrick Bourke to Paula     POL-0101647
                          Venn ells;    Re:     options.
                          Mediation Scheme and BBC
569.   POL00102065   January Options v.4        Mediation   POL-0101648
                         Scheme and BBC
570.   POL00117054   Email from Mark R Davies to Patrick POL-0117888
                          Bourke    Re:    Options
                          Comments
571.   POL00102069   Meeting with Sir Anthony Hooper re:    POL-0101652
                          complaint      review    and
                          mediation scheme
572.   POL00021531   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000064
                          meeting held on 28th January
                          2015
573.   POL00117072   Email thread from Mark R Davies to     POL-0117906
                          Tom Wechsler re: Board
574.   POL00006575   Sparrow Sub-Committee Minutes 12 POL-0017849
                          Jan 2015
575.   POL00117046   Email chain from Tom Wechsler to POL-0117880
                          Gavin Lambert re: My Sparrow
                          Board brief


                              Page 825 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




576.   POL00101715    Letter from CMS Cameron McKenna POL-0101298
                            LLP to BBC Programme Legal
                           Advice, re: The One Show -
                            Post Office Limited.
577.   POL00040911    Post Office Ltd - Project Sparrow POL-0037393
                           Sub Committee Update and
                           options
578.   POL00102167    Email from Tom Wechsler to POL-0101750
                           Alasdair    Marnoch,     Alice
                           Perkins re 2015 02 18 Sparrow
                           papers
579.   POL00102168    Criminal Cases Review Commission   POL-0101751
                           (CCRC)
580.   POL00102169    Project  Sparrow       Options POL-0101752
                           Assumptions and Constants
                           Report
581.   POL0000657 4   Sparrow Sub-Committee Minutes 18 POL-0017848
                           Feb 2015
582.   POL00102152    Project Sparrow Sub-committee POL-0101735
                           Update and Options report v4
583.   POL00006366    Advice on Theft and       False POL-0017634
                           Accounting by Brian Altman
                           QC
584.   UKGI00003789   Letter from Paula Vennells to Jo UKGI014603-001
                           Swinson MP re Second Sight
                            Mediation Scheme
585.   UKGI00003615   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice UKGI014429-001
                           Perkins,    Neil    Wilkinson,
                           Richard Callard and others re
                           Sparrow email to the Board -
                           Bringing the Working Group to
                           a close
586.   UKGI00003467   Email from Alisdair Cameron to UKGI014281-001
                           Alwen        Lyons,       Neil
                           Mccausland, Virginia Holmes
                           others re: Sparrow Paper for
                           the Board - Action Required.
587.   UKGI00003501   Email chain from Alasdair Marnoch UKGI014315-001
                           to   Richard    Callard, Tim
                           Franklin, Alwen Lyons Re
                           Sparrow paper for the board -
                           Action required


                               Page 826 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




588.   POL00117187   Email from Belinda Crowe to Jane POL-0114632
                          Macleod, Mark R Davies,
                          Belinda Crowe and others re
                          Fwd: JS letter
589.   POL00119795   Letter from Paula Vennells to Jo POL-0119777
                          Swinson MP regarding the
                          Complaint      Review   and
                           Mediation Scheme
590.   POL00000219   Initial Complaint Review & Mediation VIS00001193
                            Scheme: Work Plan
591.   POL00027279   Post Office Limited - Minutes of POL-0023920
                          board      meeting     from
                          25/03/2015
592.   POL00102397   Email from Roger W Gale to Paul POL-0101980
                          Vennells, Mark R Davies, Jane
                          Macleod and others. Re:
                          Sparrow
593.   POL00041076   Initial     Complaint Review and      POL-0037558
                               Mediation Scheme BRIEFING
                               REPORT - PART TWO
594.   POL00040957   Complaint Review and Mediation POL-0037439
                        Scheme Reply of Post Office
                         Limited to Second Sight's
                         Briefing Report - Part Two (
                         Draft)
595.   POL00043630   Meeting Minutes - Working Group POL-0040133
                          for the Initial Complaint Review
                          and Case Mediation Scheme -
                          14 November 2014
596.   POL00040498   Email from Andrew Parsons to POL-0036980
                          Belinda     Crowe,    Mark
                          Underwood, Re: Second Sight
                          Questions for POL
597.   POL00040499   Draft letter from Christ Aujard to POL-0036981
                          Second      Sight   re:  Initial
                          Complaint       Review     and
                          Mediation Scheme,Questions
                          in relation to Second Sight's
                          Briefing Report - Part Two
598.   POL00043633   Meeting Minutes - Working Group POL-0040136
                          for the Initial Complaint Review
                          and Case Mediation Scheme -
                          14 January 2015

                                  Page 827 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




599.   POL00117052   Email chain from Mark R Davies to POL-0117886
                          Tom Wechsler re: Re: My
                          Sparrow Board brief
600.   POL00027313   Post     Office   Group    Executive POL-0023954
                            Agenda for the meeting to be
                            held on 12th February 2015
601.   POL00117283   Speaking Notes for POL Board re POL-0118100
                         new approach to the Complaint
                         Review and Mediation Scheme
                         (aka Project Sparrow)
602.   POL00027308   Post Office Ltd Agenda for Board   POL-0023949
                          Meeting held on 25th March
                          2015      and    associated
                          documents from meeting
603.   POL00117056   Email from Patrick Bourke to Tom POL-0117890
                          Wechsler and Mark R Davies
                          with email from Paula Vennels
                          forwarded.      Relates    to
                          response to Second Sight
                          Report and possibility of
                          closing the scheme.
604.   POL00102401   Email from Alwen Lyons to Alice    POL-0101984
                          Perkins, Neil Mccausland,
                          Virginia Holmes and others.
                          Re: Sparrow
605.   POL00103765   Email from Tom Wechsler to Laura POL-0103348
                          Thompson, Re: Letter from
                          Vince Cable to BIS Select
                          Committee
606.   CWU00000007   Statement: Post Office Statement on VIS00007681
                          Post Office Complaint Review
                          and Mediation Scheme from
                          19.04/15
607.   POL00091399   Email    chain    between Mark POL-0090421
                          Underwood, Patrick Bourke,
                          Angela Van-Den-Bogerd and
                          others RE: Statement
608.   POL00027751   Email from Mark R Davies to Kevin POL-0024392
                          Gilliland, Paula Vennells, Jane
                          Macleod and others RE: FWD:
                          Note to network




                                Page 828 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




609.   POL00027309   Memorandum for the Board of Post POL-0023950
                        Office Limited from Alisdair
                        Cameron - Fujitsu Extension
                        Option by Al Cameron
610.   POL00027310   Post Office Ltd. Minutes of an          POL-0023951
                         Extraordinary Board Meeting
                         held on 2/7/2015
611.   POL00021532   Meeting minutes: minutes for Board POL0000065
                          meeting held on 21 st May
                          2015
612.   POL00102438   Email from Paula Vennells to Jane       POL-0102021
                          Macleod, Mark R Davies and
                          Alisdair Cameron re: Sparrow
613.   POL00021683   Letter from Jane Macleod (General POL-0018162
                          Counsel, POL) to Second
                          Sight regarding breach of
                          confidence
614.   POL00113697   Letter from Miss Jane Macleod to POL-0112805
                          Second      Sight     Support
                          Services Ltd re: Complaint
                           Review and Mediation Scheme
                          and access to personal data.
615.   POL00102433   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0102016
                          R Davies, Alisdair Cameron
                          and Jane Macleod re: Re:
                          Sparrow
616.   POL00065478   Email chain from Mark Underwood         POL-0061957
                          to Jane Macleod, Rodric
                          Williams Re Sparrow
617.   POL00119489   PO Q&A Report Re: What have POL-0119408
                        Second Sight said to the
                        minister re 'their views have
                        been misrepresented'
618.   FUJ00083379   Fujitsu presentation on     Branch      POINQ0089550F
                           Outreach     Issue     (Initial
                           Findings)
619.   POL00029971   Email from Paula Vennells to            POL-0026453
                          Alisdair Cameron and Rob
                          Houghton         re:       The
                          Dalmellington Error in Horizon
620.   POL00026913   Email from Rob Houghton to Angela       POL-0023554
                          Van Den Bogerd, RE: The
                          Dalmellington Error in Horizon
                              Page 829 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




621.   POL00029980   Email from Sharon Gilkes to Rob       POL-0026462
                          Houghton and Katie Mulligan
                          re the Dalmellington Error in
                          Horizon /problemswithpol
622.   POL00030012   Email from Rodric Williams to Rob POL-0026494
                          Houghton and others RE: The
                          Dalmellington Error in Horizon
                          / problemswithpol
623.   POL00119584   Email from Avene Regan to Rodric      POL-0119896
                          Williams    and     ECT,   RE:
                          Criminal Investigation Opened.
624.   POL00029976   Email from Jane Macleod to Alisdair POL-0026458
                          Cameron, Rob Houghton and
                          Paula    Vennells    re:   The
                          Dalmellington Error in Horizon
                          / problemswithpol
625.   POL00117722   Letter from Tim Parker to Baroness POL-0118354
                           Neville-Rolfe DBE CMG re:
                          proposal to instruct QC to
                          advise as to the appropriate
                          scope of investigation in regard
                          to Post Office's handling of
                          complaints regarding Horizon
626.   POL00024913   Letter sent from Tim Parker to POL-0021392
                           Baroness Neville - Rolfe re
                           :Post Office Handling of
                          complaints made by Sub -
                           Postmasters review
627.   POL00027126   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0023767
                          Vennells RE FW Project
                          sparrow
628.   POL00103110   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula      POL-0102693
                          Vennells, Mark Underwood,
                          Rodric Williams and others re:
                          FW: Chairman's review - with
                          attachment
629.   POL00103111   Annex A: POLs proposals for POL-0102694
                         addressing    the    Report's
                         recommendations, as agreed
                         with Jonathan Swift QC
630.   POL00027128   Email from Tom Wechsler to Paula      POL-0023769
                          Vennells cc Avene Regan RE:
                          121 with Jane


                              Page 830 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




631.   POL00006355    Review on behalf of the Chairman of POL-0017623
                           Post Office Ltd concerning the
                           steps taken in response to
                           various complaints made by
                           sub-postmasters
632.   UKGI00005297   Post    Office Meeting Notes of UKGI016111-001
                             04/08/2015 - Issues with
                             Horizon IT System - Second
                             Sight Mediation Scheme
633.   UKGI00000035   Baroness Neville Rolfe meeting with VIS00000996
                           Post Office: Thursday 6 August
                          Agenda
634.   POL00065471    Email chain from Jane Macleod to POL-0061950
                           Avene O'Farrell, Mark R
                           Davies, Alisdair Cameron Re
                           Sparrow
635.   UKGI00005323   Email from Richard Callard to Alwen   UKGI016137-001
                           Lyons and Laura Thompson
                           re: Panorama.
636.   POL00102551    Letter from Baroness Neville-Rolfe POL-0102134
                           to    Mr   Tim   Parker    re:
                            Unresolved Issues relating to
                            Post Office Horizon System
                           and Further Actions to be
                           Taken
637.   UKGI00000058   Briefing from Laura Thompson ShEx VIS00001019
                            to    Baroness   Neville-Rolfe
                            ahead of meeting with James
                            Arbuthnot
638.   POL0017 4396   Email from Alwen Lyons to Tim         POL-0168393
                           Parker CC'd Jane Macleod,
                           Mark R Davies, Paula Vennells
                           RE; Panorama programme
                           17th of August 2015
639.   POL00319092    Project Sparrow - Note for Tim        POL-BSFF-
                           Parker with Track changes            0157142
                           Date taken from Metadata
640.   POL00168301    Email from Mark R Davies (POL); to POL-0163598
                           Paula Vennells (POL); Alwen
                           Lyons   (POL)    and   Jane
                           Macleod (POL) Re: Note for
                           Tim Parker on BBC Panorama
                           Documentary


                                Page 831 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




641.   POL00021538    Meeting Minutes: minutes of Board      POL0000071
                           meeting    held   on    22nd
                           September 2015
642.   POL00102619    Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102202
                           Parker re: Post Office -
                           meeting with Jonathan Swift
                           QC. Includes summary of
                           meeting in text of email chain.
643.   UKGI00006142   Email from Baroness Neville Rolfe to   UKGI016956-001
                           Laura Thompson, cc Richard
                           Callard RE: Submission to
                           Baroness Neville-Rolfe on
                           Post Office Horizon
644.   POL00117511    Email from Tom Wechsler to Paula       POL-0118287
                           Vennells re telephone call with
                           BNR.
645.   POL00117506    Email from Mark R Davies to Paula POL-0118282
                           Vennells, Tom Wechsler, Jane
                           Macleod and others re: Re:
                           Speaking notes for BNR re
                           Lyca & text of email to
                           Chairman
646.   POL00027115    Briefing for 121 with Tim Parker       POL-0023756
647.   UKGI00000044   Briefing/Update      for   Baroness VIS00001005
                            Neville-Rolfe ahead of meeting
                            with Second Sight
648.   POL00027129    Project Sparrow - Chairman's review POL-0023770
649.   POL00110344    Email from Paula Vennells to Tom       POL-0111280
                           Wechsler cc Avene Regan re
                           Sparrow - latest stats
650.   POL00027124    Briefing for 1-2-1 with Tim Parker     POL-0023765

651.   POL00103200    Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0102783
                           Vennells, RE: Sparrow Board
                           paper- Request for advice
                           subject to legal professional
                           privilege
652.   POL00027116    Email from Tom Wechsler to Paula POL-0023757
                           Vennells re TP/BNR - Phone
                           call with BIS which included
                           discussion about Sparrow



                                Page 832 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




653.   POL00103171   Email from Tom Wechsler to Paula        POL-0102754
                          Vennells. Re: Feedback from
                          Tim/ BNR meeting
654.   POL00110440   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula        POL-0111334
                          Vennells re: 1:1 on Monday
655.   POL00110406   Email chain from Tom Wechsler to        POL-0111316
                          Paula Vennells Re: Corporate
                          services budget savings
656.   POL00029710   Email from Andrew Winn to Alan          POL-0026192
                          Lusher re: Rivenhall
657.   POL00030001   Email from Andrew to Alan Lusher,       POL-0026483
                          Re: Rivenhall
658.   POL00088956   Email    thread   between    John POL-0080917
                          Breeden, Angela Van-Den-
                          Bogerd and others, re: Follow
                          up to BIS meeting on JFSA
659.   POL00002151   Gareth Jenkins Witness Statement        VIS00003165


660.   POL00097215   Email from Jenkins Gareth GI to POL-0096798
                          Rachael Panter, Jarnail A
                          Singh, Andy Cash and others.
                          RE: Fujitsu expert report -
                          URGENT
661.   POL00120561   Email from Mike Granville to Paula POL-0126174
                          Vennells, Mike Moores, Mike
                          Young and others re: Update
                          on JFSA and Horizon issues
                          and urgent respinse needed
                          for BIS and Report on JFSA
                          response to issues for BIS
662.   POL00098377   Note of Phone Call between Paula POL-0097960
                          Vennells and James Arbuthnot
                          dated May 2013
663.   POL00029590   Email from Martin Edwards to Alwen      POL-0026072
                          Lyons, re: Paula 1 :1 with Alice
                          - update on 2nd sight.
664.   POL00099088   Email from Lesley Sewell to Susan       POL-0098671
                          Crichton, Paula Vennells and
                          others re: Draft statement
665.   POL00029812   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0026294
                          R Davies, Lesley J Sewell re:
                          Accessing Horizon
                               Page 833 of 861
                                                                               WITN01020100




666.   POL00025511    Letter from Freeths to Rodric POL-0021990
                           Williams (POL Solicitor) re:
                            Bates & Others v Post Office
                            Limited Group Action Letter
                           pursuant to the practice
                           direction on pre-action conduct
667.   POL00025510    Bates & Others v POL Claim Form,        POL-0021989
                           Claim no HQ16X01238
668.   UKGI00006646   Email from Mark Underwood to            UKGI017460-001
                           Laura Thompson, cc'ing Tom
                           Wechsler re: Letter from
                           Freeths - Proceedings Issued
                           forGLO
669.   POL00103162    Email from Jane Macleod to Patrick POL-0102745
                           Bourke, Rodric Williams and
                           Mark Underwood re: Post
                           Office - Chairman's enquiry
                           and related matters
670.   POL00103165    Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102748
                           Parker, re Post Office -
                           Meeting with Baroness Neville-
                           Rolfe Wednesday 27 April
                           2016, 3:30pm
671.   POL00117704    PO Group Executive - Postmaster POL-0118337
                          Litigation - Executive Summary
                          (Jane Macleod / Rodric
                          Williams).
672.   POL00006805    PO   Board: Postmaster     litigation   POL-0018041
                           executive summary
673.   POL00103199    Email from Jane Macleod to Mark R POL-0102782
                           Davies, RE: Sparrow- Advice
                           subject to Legal Professional
                           Privilege
674.   POL00021542    Meeting Minutes: minutes for POL0000075
                           meeting held on 24th May
                           2016
675.   POL00027219    Post Office Limited minutes of a POL-0023860
                           board meeting held
676.   POL00025507    Email from Rodric Williams to POL POL-0021986
                           employees    re    Postmaster
                           Litigation  Steering   Group
                           Meeting on 7 June 2016


                               Page 834 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




677.   POL00025508    Agenda for Postmaster Litigation POL-0021987
                          Steering Group Meeting on 7
                          June 2016
678.   POL00110433    Email from Amanda Brown to POL-0111332
                           Thomas      Moran,    Rodric
                           Williams, Mark Davies and
                           others re: FW: Postmaster
                           Litigation Steering Group -
                           SUBJECT        TO    LEGAL
                           PROFESSIONAL PRIVILAGE
                           - DO NOT FORWARD.
679.   POL00025509    Draft Postmaster Litigation Steering POL-0021988
                            Group Meeting Terms of
                            Reference and Membership
680.   POL00024292    Email chain from Jane Macleod to POL-0020771
                           Andrew Parsons and Rodric
                           Williams,   Re:  Postmaster
                           Litigation.
681.   POL00024308    Email    chain   between    Jane POL-0020787
                           Macleod, Thomas P Moran,
                           Andrew Parsons and others,
                           Re: PLSG - Decision Paper.
682.   POL00024199    Email chain between Thomas P POL-0020678
                           Moran, Jane Macleod, Mark
                           Underwood and others Re:
                           Postmaster Litigation SteerCo
                           Call: Security for Costs.
683.   POL00024 700   Email from Jane Macleod to Mark POL-0021179
                           Ellis, Mark Davies and others
                           re: URGENT - Po~ma~er
                           litigation -strategic options for
                           CMG
684.   POL00110441    Email from Tom Weschler to Paula   POL-0111335
                           Vennells re: 1:1 with Jane

685.   UKGI00006685   Email from Richard Callard to UKGI UKGI017499-001
                           POL Team and Claire French
                           (Communications) re Sparrow
                           update/media coverage




                               Page 835 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




686.   POL00103194    Email from Jane Macleod to Rodric POL-0102777
                           Williams, Patrick Bourke and
                           Mark Underwood, RE: FW:
                           Post     Office-    Chairman's
                           Review       Confidential and
                           legally privileged
687.   POL00103259    Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102842
                           Parker, Carla Stent, Richard
                           Callard and others, RE: PO
                           Ltd- Supply Chain Litigation-
                           Confidential and subject to
                           legal privilege- do not forward
688.   POL00104103    GLO Updates to POL Board (April       POL-0103686
                          2016 - March 2016)
689.   UKGI00008549   Email from Ken McCall to Paula        UKGI019357-001
                           Vennells, Carla Stent and
                           others, CC Tim Parker re
                           Postmaster Litigation
690.   POL00006440    Decision Paper - Communication        POL-0017745
                           Strategy


691.   UKGI00006959   Email from Richard Callard and UKGI017773-001
                           Laura Thompson CC Claire
                           French        re     Postmaster
                           Litigation - Update to Board
692.   POL00024967    Email from Andrew Parsons to          POL-0021446
                           Thomas P Morgan and Jane
                           Macleod,     CCing    Melanie
                           Garfield,  Rodric    Williams,
                           Patrick Bourke and others RE:
                           Postmaster Litigation Briefing
                           Plan
693.   POL00110697    Email from Alwen Lyons to Tim POL-0111373
                           Parker, Ken Mccall, Tim
                           Franklin and Others Re Note
                           for the Board Possible FT
                           Article
694.   POL00110699    Email chain from Mark R Davis to POL-0111374
                           Jane Macleod Re JFSA
                           Release
695.   POL00111196    Note re: GLO communications - POL-0111466
                          proposed approach


                               Page 836 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




696.   POL00111699   Email from Paula Vennells to Mark POL-0109272
                          R Davies re. Board GLO Sub
                          Committee.
697.   POL00117702   Email chain from Jane Macleod to POL-0118335
                          Paula Vennells,   Mark R
                          Davies, tom Wechsler and
                          others re: Sparrow Board
                          paper
698.   POL00021700   Email from Rodric Williams to         POL-0018179
                          Thomas P Moran and others,
                          RE     Postmaster Litigation
                          Steering Group
699.   POL00103201   Email from Paula Vennells to Avene POL-0102784
                          Regan, RE: Fwd: Sparrow
                          Boa~ Pape~ Reque~ for
                          advice    subject     to legal
                          professional privilege
700.   POL00103161   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102744
                          Parker re: Post Office -
                          Chairman's      enquiry and
                          related matters
701.   POL00041246   Email from Jane Macleod to Rodric     POL-0037728
                          Williams re. Con with TRQC I
                          JSQC Recommendations
702.   POL00027221   Group   Executive     Agenda     at POL-0023862
                         Finsbury Dials
703.   POL00027218   Post Office Board Agenda              POL-0023859

704.   POL00110442   Email from Diane Blanchard to Jane POL-0111336
                          Macleod re: Chair's review
                          (LP)
705.   POL00006601   Letter to PO from Bond Dickinson re   POL-0017859
                          group litigation
706.   POL00022764   Email    chain    between     Jane POL-0019243
                          Macleod. Patrick Bourke,
                          Mark Underwood and others
                          RE: FW: Letter to Minister
                          regarding the Litigation
707.   POL00103207   Email from Patrick Bourke to Jane POL-0102790
                          Macleod, RE: FW: Post Office
                          Ltd- Update and Request for
                          Further Advice


                              Page 837 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




708.   POL00103220   Email from Tom Wechsler to Paula      POL-0102803
                          Vennells, RE: Confidential and
                          Subject to Privilege
709.   POL00041258   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0037740
                          Venn ells    re.    Postmaster
                          Litigation - Confidential and
                          Subject to Legal Privilege
710.   POL00030007   Email from Jane Macleod to Alisdair POL-0026489
                          Cameron and Rob Houghton
                          re Sparrow Update
711.   POL00022663   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0019142
                          Vennells, Alisdair Cameron,
                          cc'ing Avene Regan and others
                          re:    Postmaster   Litigation-
                          CONFIDENTIAL              AND
                          SUBJECT TO LITIGATION
                          PRIVILEGE
712.   POL00022666   Extracts from Bond Dickinson to       POL-0019145
                          Freeths re: Defects in Horizon
713.   POL00103232   Email from Alwen Lyons to Tim POL-0102815
                          Parker, Ken Mccall, Carla etc,
                          RE: Postmaster Litigation-
                          Update to Board
714.   POL00006599   Post Office Group Action- Bond        POL-0017857
                          Dickinson Workplan
715.   POL00022641   Postmaster Litigation - Bates & 90 POL-0019120
                         Others v. Post Office Limited -
                         Agenda for Steering Group
                         meeting
716.   POL00022638   Email chain between Andrew POL-0019117
                          Parsons,    Rodric Williams,
                          Thomas P Moran and others
                          re:    Postmaster  Litigation
                          Steering Group
717.   POL00030006   Email from Rob Houghton to Jane POL-0026488
                          Macleod, Andrew Parsons,
                          Rodric      Williams,       Patrick
                          Bourke, Thomas P Moran,
                          Tom Wechsler, Mark R Davies,
                          Melanie Garfield, Angela Van-
                          Den-Bogerd         RE:      Strictly
                          private and confidential -
                          subject to litigation privilege


                              Page 838 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




718.   POL00021543   Meeting Minutes: minutes of a Board POL0000076
                          meeting held on 25th July 2016
719.   POL00021544   Meeting minutes: minutes for Board    POL0000077
                          meeting    held    on    29th
                          September 2016
720.   POL00021545   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000078
                          meeting held on 25th October
                          2016
721.   POL00027185   Minutes of POL Board Meeting held     POL-0023826
                          on 24 November 2016
722.   POL00103892   Post      Office    Board    Agenda   POL-0103475
                            (24/11/2016)
723.   POL00110564   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0108284
                          Vennells; Alisdair Cameron;
                          others CC'd. RE: Postmaster
                          Litigation - Remote Access
                          (Extract from draft letter to
                          Freeths).
724.   POL00110565   Remote access to Horizon data         POL-0108285
                         (from Bond Dickinson LLP)
725.   POL00091418   Email from Jane Macleod to Alisdair POL-0090440
                          Cameron, RE: Postmaster
                          Litigation- Remote Access-
                          extract from draft letter to
                          Freeths
726.   POL00091419   Email from Thomas Moran to Paula POL-0090441
                          Vennells, Rodric Williams,
                          Jane Macleod and others, RE:
                          Postmaster Litigation - Remote
                          Access: extract from draft letter
                          to Freeths
727.   POL00041377   Email from Andrew Parsons to POL-0037859
                          Rodric Williams re. Postmaster
                          Litigation - Remote Access:
                          extract from draft Letter to
                          Freeths - Legally Privileged -
                          Do Not Forward
728.   POL00091420   Email from Mark R Davies to Paula POL-0090442
                          Vennells    RE:    Postmaster
                          Litigation- Subject to legal
                          privilege



                                Page 839 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




729.   POL00030211   Response by Bond Dickinson on POL-0026693
                         behalf of Post Office to Letter
                         of Claim dated 28 April 2016
730.   POL00041392   Letter from Freeths LLP to Bond POL-0037874
                           Dickinson LLP re. Letter further
                          to Letter of Claim dated 28
                          April 2016
731.   POL00024984   Postmaster Litigation - Agenda for POL-0021463
                         Steering Group meeting on 01
                         November 2016.
732.   POL00023426   Email chain between Andrew POL-0019905
                          Parsons, Jane Macleod, Mark
                          Underwood and others re:
                          Remote Access Wording
733.   POL00029103   Email from Mark Underwood (Post POL-0025585
                          Office) to Andrew Parsons
                          (WBD) re: Deloitte Report -
                          Subject to Litigation Privilege.
734.   POL00023431   Bond     Dickinson Remote Access        POL-0019910
                            Rider - Access to Horizon Data
735.   POL00023435   Email chain between Andrew POL-0019914
                          Parsons, Mark Underwood,
                          Jane Macleod and Rodric
                          Williams re: Remote Access
                          Wording
736.   POL00041324   Email from Mark Underwood to            POL-0037806
                          Andrew Parsons; re: Remote
                          Access Wording
737.   POL00023433   Email from Jane Macleod to Andrew POL-0019912
                          Parsons    and   others   re:
                          Remote Access wording
738.   POL00041373   Email from Andrew Parsons to POL-0037855
                          Rodric Williams, re Draft Letter
                          to Freeths
739.   POL00024869   Email trail from Thomas P Moran to POL-0021348
                          Jane Macleod cc: Andrew
                          Parsons re: Letter to Freeths -
                          legally      privilege    [BD-
                          4A.FID26896945]




                                Page 840 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




740.   POL00025050    Email chain between Andrew POL-0021529
                           Parsons,     Rodric Williams,
                           Mark Underwood and others,
                           re: Letter to Freeths - legally
                           privilege                 [BD-
                           4A.FID26896945].
741.   POL0002487 4   Email from Andrew Parsons to Jane POL-0021353
                           Macleod cc: Rodric Williams,
                           Mark      Underwood,        Rob
                           Houghton and others re: Letter
                           to Freeths - legally privileged
                           [BD-4A. FI D26896945]
742.   POL00024806    Remote access to Horizon data      POL-0021285
743.   POL00024991    Remote access to Horizon Data      POL-0021470

744.   POL00024875    Remote access to Horizon data      POL-0021354
                          (from Bond Dickinson LLP
745.   POL00110586    Letter chain from Bond Dickinson to POL-0108302
                           James Hartley Freeths LLP Re
                            Bates & Others v Post Office
                            Limited
746.   POL00041383    Email from Rodric Williams to      POL-0037865
                           Andrew     Parsons re. FJ
                           approval of letter

747.   UKGI00007544   Post Office Ltd Audit, Risk and UKGI018358-001
                          Compliance          Committee
                           Minutes of 30/01/2017
748.   POL00006404    Steering Group Decision Paper - POL-0017709
                           GLO Advertisement
749.   POL00025060    Draft Communications: Application POL-0021539
                           for Group Litigation Order
                           - January 26
750.   POL00025021    Email trail from Melanie Garfield to POL-0021500
                           Andrew Parsons, cc: Rodric
                           Williams      re:    Sparrow
                           communications for GLO [BD-
                           4A.FID26896945]            with
                           attachment




                               Page 841 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




751.   POL00103302   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim           POL-0102885
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                          Stent et, RE: Subject to
                          privilege- Postmaster litigation:
                          GLO Application
752.   POL00021546   Meeting minutes: meeting minutes POL0000079
                          for meeting held on 31 st
                          January 2017
753.   POL00027200   CEO's Report for Post Office Board       POL-0023841
                         meeting on 31 January 2017

754.   POL00025375   Email from Tom Wechsler to Mark POL-0021854
                          Underwood, Jane Macleod,
                          Angela Van-Der-Bogerd and
                          others cc: Mark R Davies,
                          Thomas P Moran, and Mark
                          Ellis re: RE: PLSG meeting on
                          Tuesday       @10:30am      in
                          Islington (0.04 ).
755.   POL00025376   Bond Dickinson PO Group Litigation       POL-0021855
                         Steering Group Meeting RE:
                         DECISION: Does Post Office
                         agree with the recommended
                         strategy set out in this paper?
756.   POL00021547   Meeting Minutes: Minutes of Board        POL0000080
                          meeting held on 28th March
                          2017
757.   POL00021438   Post Office Limited Audit, Risk and POL-0018068
                          Compliance          Committee
                          Minutes of 18/05/2017
758.   POL00027188   Post Office Minutes: Meeting of the      POL-0023829
                          Board held at 12:30pm on
                          28/3/2017
759.   POL00103307   Email from Alwen Lyons to Carla POL-0102890
                          Stent;      Kenmccall1;   Tim
                          Franklin; Richard Callard, re:
                          ARC Action - Postmaster
                          Litigation funding.
760.   POL00021548   Meeting minutes: meeting minutes         POL0000081
                          for Board meeting held on 25th
                          May 2017.




                               Page 842 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




761.   POL00027182   Meeting Minutes: Post Office Ltd - POL-0023823
                          Group Executive Meeting 13th
                          July 2017
762.   POL00110666   Q&A for GE Meeting on 13 July POL-0108371
                        2017 - Bond Dickinson
763.   POL00003340   Letter from Andrew Parsons to VIS00004354
                          James Hartley, re: Bates &
                          Others -v- Post Office Limited -
                          Generic      Defence        and
                          Counterclaim
764.   POL00249979   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula      POL-BSFF-
                          Vennells RE: Postmasters             0088042
                          litigation
765.   POL00028055   Email: Email from Andrew Parsons      POL-0023058
                          (WBD) to Jane Macleod (PO)
                          re-Group Litigation and points
                          to be raised with Paula
                          Vennells by Counsel
766.   POL00024459   Email from Amy Prime to Jane POL-0020938
                          Macleod and others, re: Tony
                          tomorrow
767.   POL00024489   Email from Thomas P Moran to          POL-0020968
                          Andrew Parsons, Amy Prime
                          and Rodric Williams re PLSG
                          meeting on Wednesday 24
                          May 2017 @12 in Tonbridge
                          (1.11)
768.   POL00006360   Bond Dickinson's recommendations POL-0017628
                         on issues in the Postmaster
                         Group Action (undated)
769.   POL00021549   Meeting minutes: meeting minutes      POL0000082
                          of Board meeting held on 25th
                          July 2017
770.   POL00041238   Email from Mark Underwood to POL-0037720
                          Patrick Bourke re. Deloitte
                          (attachment in email subject to
                          legal privilege)
771.   POL00006380   Post      Office   Group     Litigation, POL-0017685
                            Steering Group Meeting -
                            strategy to disclosure for POL
772.   POL00006503   Litigation Strategy Options           POL-0017808



                                Page 843 of 861
                                                                              WITN01020100




773.   POL00041485   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0037967
                          Vennells and       others re.
                          Postmaster Litigation - Update
                          tomorrow                morning
                          CONFIDENTIAL               AND
                          SUBJECT         TO       LEGAL
                          PRIVILEGE         DO       NOT
                          FORWARD. Attached paper
                          explains       priority      for
                          construction of SPM contract.
774.   POL00041486   Post Office Board - Postmaster POL-0037968
                         Litigation: Confidential and
                         Subject to Legal Professional
                         Privilege
775.   POL00021550   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board          POL0000083
                          meeting    held   on    26th
                          September 2017.
776.   POL00006384   Email from Andrew Parsons (Bond            POL-0017689
                          Dickson) to Tony (OEC Law) re
                          talking points for Paula
777.   POL00006499   Email from Andrew Parsons:                 POL-0017804
                          Subject 'Tony tomorrow'
778.   POL00107163   Post      Office    Group     Litigation   POL-0105471
                            Litigation Strategy Options with
                            handwritten notes
779.   POL00024660   Email from Thomas P Moran to               POL-0021139
                          Andrew Parsons, re: Litigation
                          Options Paper attaching Board
                          briefing on Horizon v0.3
780.   POL00024690   Email chain discussing responses to POL-0021169
                          common issues trial and
                         judgment, including burden of
                          proof.    Email   from    Jane
                          Macleod to Thomas P Moran,
                          Andrew Parsons and Rodric
                          Williams re: Board briefing re
                          Postmaster Litigation CMG
                          Options
781.   POL00028063   Email from Andrew Parsons (WBD) POL-0023066
                          to Tony Robinson (OECLaw)
                          forwarding Paula Venn ell's
                          questions on litigation
782.   POL00028070   Deloitte's 'Bramble' Draft Report          POL-0023073


                                 Page 844 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




783.   POL00021551   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POL0000084
                          meeting held on 31 st October
                          2017.
784.   POL00103898   Post Office Board Agenda                POL-0103481
785.   POL00024317   Email from Mark Underwood to Jane POL-0020796
                          Macleod, Angela Van-Den-
                          Bogerd, Mark R Davies and
                          others Re: PLSG meeting on
                          Friday.
786.   POL00024318   Agenda for Steering Group meeting       POL-0020797
                         on 3/11/2017.
787.   POL00024323   Post Office Group Litigation Steering   POL-0020802
                          Group Meeting - Noting Paper:
                          Deloitte Reports
788.   POL00024322   Noting paper: Update on CMG and         POL-0020801
                          Future Work Streams
789.   POL00004167   Alan    Bates etc v Post      Office, VIS00005181
                            Approved Judgment
790.   POL00006435   Steering Group Meeting: Availability    POL-0017740
                          of Counsel
791.   POL00024311   Email chain from Thomas Moran to POL-0020790
                          Jane      Macleod,     Mark
                          Underwood, Rodric Williams
                          and others Re: PLSG meeting.
792.   POL00024346   Email from Andrew Parsons to POL-0020825
                          Rodric   Williams,     Jane
                          Macleod,       and     Mark
                          Underwood, re: Counsel
793.   POL00024268   Womble Bond Dickinson: Briefing on      POL-0020747
                        selecting Counsel for trial in
                        November 2018.
794.   POL00024267   Email from Andrew P Parsons to POL-0020746
                          Jane      Macleod,    Mark
                          Underwood, Rodric Williams
                          and others Re: Counsel
                          briefing.
795.   POL00024340   Email from Jane Macleod to POL-0020819
                          Andrew       Parsons,   Rodric
                          Williams and others re: Group
                          Litigation - Update on Counsel
                          - Subject to Legal Privilege -
                          Do Not Forward

                               Page 845 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




796.   POL00021552   Meeting Minutes: minutes of Board   POL0000085
                          meeting    held   on    23rd
                          November 2017
797.   POL00024423   Letter from Andrew Parsons to POL-0020902
                          James Hartley re: The Post
                          Office Group Litigation
                           Disclosure and future case
                          management
798.   POL00041527   Email from Rodric Williams to Jane POL-0038009
                          Macleod and others re. Bates
                          trial date Nov 17
799.   POL00024446   Postmaster Litigation - Bates & 509 POL-0020925
                         Others v. Post Office Limited -
                         Agenda for Steering Group
                         meeting on 20 November 2017
800.   POL00090630   Steering Group Meeting Re: Noting POL-0090151
                          paper: Update on strategy for
                          the    Court   hearing    on
                          02/02/2018.
801.   POL00041650   Email chain from Jane Macleod to    POL-0038132
                          Thomas P Moran and others
                          re. Disclosure CMG Skeleton
                          Arguments - Subject to Legal
                          Privilege
802.   POL00024326   Email from Rodric Williams to POL-0020805
                          Patrick Bourke, Mark R Davies
                          and others re: OLSG Call on
                          Wednesday       6    December
                          @14:00 (0.15 Walton Street is
                          booked if people are in FD and
                          wish to attend in person)
803.   POL00022880   Womble Bond Dickinson Post Office POL-0019359
                        Group     Litigation, Steering
                        Group     Meeting,    Decision:
                        Should Post Office put forward
                        the settlement proposals set
                        out below?
804.   POL00024182   Email    chain     between      Jane POL-0020661
                          Macleod, Alisdair Cameron,
                          Paula Vennells and others Re:
                          Postmaster Litigation - Briefing
                          notes for the Board.



                              Page 846 of 861
                                                                            WITN01020100




805.   POL00103314    Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0102897
                           Vennells, Alisdair Cameron;
                           Tim Parker, and others, re:
                           Postmaster Litigation - Update
                           from CMG.
806.   POL00006520    Email   from    Jane      Macleod:      POL-0017825
                           Postmaster Group Litigation
807.   POL00103333    Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102916
                           Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                           Stent    and     others,     re:
                           Postmaster Group Litigation -
                           Subject to legal privilege - do
                           not forward.
808.   POL00021440    Post Office Limited Audit, Risk and     POL-0018070
                           Compliance          Committee
                           Minutes of 29.01.2018
809.   POL00027267    Group Executive Agenda January POL-0023908
                          2018
810.   POL00104316    Post Office Ltd ARC Report on           POL-0103899
                          Annual Legal Risk Review:
                          2017
811.   POL00021553    Meeting minutes: minutes of board POL0000086
                           meeting held on 29th January
                           2018
812.   POL00117892    Postmaster  Litigation Advisory POL-0115392
                          Board Subcommittee
813.   POL00117894    Womble Bond Dickinson Briefing          POL-0115394
                         Note RE PO Group Litigation
814.   POL00117899    Minutes of a meeting of the POL-0115399
                           Postmaster         Litigation
                           subcommittee of Post Office
                           Limited on Monday 26 March
                           2018 at 20 Finsbury Street
                           EC2Y 9AQ
815.   UKGI00018134   Minutes of a Meeting of the Board of UKGI028141-001
                           Directors of Post Office Limited
816.   POL00006765    Agenda and Papers for the 26 POL-0018023
                          March      2018   Postmaster
                          Litigation      Subcommittee
                          Meeting
817.   POL00006524    Horizon litigation: facts of the case   POL-0017829
                           for BEIS Permanent Secretary

                                Page 847 of 861
                                                                       WITN01020100




818.   POl00021445   Audit,    Risk   and  Compliance POl-0018075
                           Committee meeting Minutes of
                           27/03/2018
819.   POl00027257   Post      Office    Board    Agenda POl-0023898
                            27/3/2018 and associated
                            documents - Tim Parker,
                            Richard Callard, Tom Cooper
                            and Others in Attendance
820.   POl00025892   Alan Bates & Others and Post Office POl-0022371
                          Limited   Opinion   on     the
                          common issues
821.   POl00110906   Email     chain  between    Diane POl-0111449
                          Blanchard and Tim Parker, RE:
                          attendance of Board Group
                          Litigation    Order       Sub
                          Committee meeting 15th May
822.   POl00041771   Email from Rodric Williams to Mark POl-0038253
                          Underwood re SPM Litigation
                          Committee Minutes
823.   POl00023972   Womble Bond Dickinson Summary POl-0020451
                        of Counsel's Opinion on the
                        Common Issues.
824.   POl00024257   Email from Andrew Parsons to POl-0020736
                          Rodric    Williams,     Mark
                          Underwood       and     Jane
                          Macleod    Re:      Counsel's
                          Opinion.
825.   POl00024196   Email from Mark Underwood to Jane POl-0020675
                          Macleod, Angela Van-Den-
                          Bogerd, Mark R Davies and
                          others      Re:     Postmaster
                          Litigation Steering Group Call.
826.   POl00041773   Email from Mark Underwood to        POl-0038255
                          Veronica Branton re SPM
                          Litigation Committee Minutes
827.   POl00110935   Email from Diane Blanchard to Tim POl-0111461
                          Parker, Thomas Cooper, Paula
                          Vennells and others RE:Board
                          GlO subcommittee 15 May
                          2018 - agenda and draft
                          minutes




                                Page 848 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




828.   POL00006382   Speaking Note for Post Office POL-0017687
                         Litigation    Sub-Committee
                         Meeting on 15 May 2018
829.   POL00006754   Meeting Minutes of the Postmaster POL-0018012
                          Litigation Subcommittee of
                          POL
830.   POL00006763   Meeting Minutes of the Postmaster POL-0018021
                          Litigation Subcommittee of
                          POL
831.   POL00021555   Meeting   Minutes:  minutes of POL0000088
                          meeting held on 24th May
                          2018
832.   POL00103335   Post Office Board Agenda.             POL-0102918

833.   BEIS0000079   Protocol between POL, BSEI and        BEIS0000059
                          UKGI for the POL Litigation

834.   POL00021446   Post Office Limited Audit, Risk and POL-0018076
                          Compliance          Committee
                          Minutes of 28/06/2018
835.   POL00103336   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102919
                          Parker; Ken McCall; Carla
                          Stent;   Tim   Franklin,  re:
                          Postmaster     Litigation
                          Confidential and subject to
                          Legal Privilege - Do not
                          Forward.
836.   POL00024156   Email    chain   between      Rodric POL-0020635
                          Williams, Jane Macleod, Mark
                          Underwood and others re:
                          Postmaster      Litigation
                          Disclosure in the 2017-18
                          ARA.
837.   POL00024230   Email chain between Mark R POL-0020709
                          Davies, Jane Macleod, Mark
                          Underwood and others Re:
                          Postmaster Litigation.
838.   POL00041840   Email from Jane Macleod to POL-0038322
                          Andrew Parsons and others re
                          PO Group Litigation Draft
                          wording
839.   POL00041841   Draft Wording for Annual Report and   POL-0038323
                           Accounts for 2021

                              Page 849 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




840.   POL00041836    Email chain from Tom Cooper to Tim     POL-0038318
                           Franklin    and     others   re
                           Contingent Liability wording in
                           PO Group Litigation
841.   POL00041849    Email from Patrick Bourke to Mark POL-0038331
                           Davies and others re Draft
                           wording for the ARA
842.   POL00041865    Email from Mark Underwood to Jane POL-0038347
                           Macleod and others re PO
                           Group Litigation
843.   UKGI00008203   Email from Elizabeth O'Neill to Tom UKGI019015-001
                           Cooper, Helen Lambert and
                           others; Re: PO - Draft wording
                           for the contingent liability
                           disclosure
844.   POL00041871    Email from Rodric Williams to Gavin POL-0038353
                           Matthews re        PO Group
                           Litigation
845.   POL00041884    Email    chain      between   Jane POL-0038366
                           Macleod, Alisdair Cameron,
                           Michael Passmore and others
                           RE: POL Contingent Liability
                           Issue and Outstanding Items -
                           Confidential and subject to
                           legal privilege
846.   POL00041885    POL    Annual Report Contingent POL-0038367
                            Liabilities Disclosure Part 11
847.   POL00111017    Email chain from Dianne Blanchard POL-0111465
                           to C Johnson cc Peter Mciver,
                           Sana M Gangat and others re:
                           POL Contingent Liability Issue
                           and Outstanding Items -
                           meeting with Womble Bond
                           Dickinson.
848.   POL00041896    Email from Mark Davies to Jane POL-0038378
                           Macleod and others re PO
                           Group Litigation
849.   EY00000001     EY Audit Results Update Report to VIS00009749
                          the    Audit,    Risk    and
                          Compliance Committee for the
                          52 week period ended 25
                          March 2018.



                                Page 850 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




850.   POl00090608   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim         POl-0090129
                          Parker, Ken McCall and Tom
                          Cooper and others Re Board
                          Litigation Subcommittee
851.   POl00024176   Email chain between Angela Van- POl-0020655
                          Den-Bogerd, Andrew Parsons,
                          Jane Macleod and others Re:
                          Speaking Note for Board
                          Subcommittee.
852.   POl00024177   Speaking Note for Board Sub- POl-0020656
                         committee on 10 July 2018.
853.   POl00024166   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim         POl-0020645
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Tom
                          Cooper and others Re: Board
                          Litigation Subcommittee.
854.   POl00024167   Draft Contingency Planning: Risk POl-0020646
                          Assessment Table.
855.   POl00041866   Email from Victoria Brooks to Angela   POl-0038348
                          Van Den Bogerd and others re
                          Witness Statements in PO
                          Group Litigation - re witness
                          availability
856.   POl00121166   POST OFFICE GROUP ACTION POl-0126830
                        FOR     DISCUSSION
                        PROPOSED     LIST    OF
                        GENERIC          ISSUES
                        WITNESSES CAN COMMENT
                        ON
857.   POl00021556   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board POl0000089
                          meeting held on 31 st Ju ;y 2018

858.   POl00111281   Email from Angela Van-Den-Bogerd POl-0111472
                          to Paula Vennells, Alisdair
                          Cameron, Mark R Davies and
                          others     re:      Private   &
                          Confidential         subject to
                          litigation     privlegdge
                          tomorrows GlO update and
                          planning call is cancelled
859.   POl00154359   Email from Rodric Williams to          POl-BSFF-
                          Andrew Parsons and Jonathan           0013458
                          Gribben, RE: Fujitsu Witness
                          Evidence - issue resolved


                               Page 851 of 861
                                                                                 WITN01020100




860.   UKGI00008345   PO   Group Litigation: Litigation UKGI019157-001
                           Update for UKGI following POL
                           Board Meeting on 31 July 2018
861.   POL00003348    Letter from James Hartley to Andrew VIS00004362
                            Parsons re: Post Office Group
                            Litigation - General Comments
                           on Post Office Disclosure
862.   POL00041859    Letter from Womble Bond Dickinson POL-0038341
                            LLP to Freeths LLP re PO
                           Group Litigation Disclosure.
                            Extensive   comments     on
                           various    categories      of
                           documents, as well as three
                           page schedule on different
                           documents with additional
                           comments.
863.   POL00090612    Postmaster Litigation Update report POL-0090133
                          (Executive Summary)
864.   UKGI00008372   Email chain from Paula Vennells to        UKGI019184-001
                           Tom Aldred cc Jane Macleod,
                           Tom Cooper 'and others' RE:
                           Rescheduled litigation briefing
                           with Perm Sec and minister.
865.   POL00111095    Briefing for Paula Vennells meeting       POL-0108701
                            with Post Affairs Minister, Kelly
                            Tolurst MP
866.   POL00024179    Email chain between Andrew POL-0020658
                           Parsons,    Jane    Macleod,
                           Patrick Bourke and others Re:
                           Litigation.
867.   UKGI00008369   Email from Stephen Clarke to MPST UKGI019181-001
                           Tolhurst, UKGI POL Team,
                           Sam White and others re
                           Briefing:  Paula     Vennells
                           meeting on Monday
868.   UKGI00008370   Meeting with Paula Vennells - 03          UKGI019182-001
                           September; BEIS
869.   POL00103345    Post Office Ltd Board Agenda of POL-0102928
                           25/09/18




                                 Page 852 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




870.   POL00105467    Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0104647
                           Vennells and Alisdair Cameron
                           re: Postmater Litigation -
                           Meeting with Perm Sec &
                           Minister on 17 October
871.   UKGI00008494   Email from Jane Macleod to UKGI019305-001
                           Richard Watson, Joshua Fox
                           and others RE: Postmaster
                           Litigation: BEIS and UKGI
                           Briefing 17th October 2018
872.   POL00111218    Post    Office Briefing Paper for POL-0108821
                             meeting with Kelly Tolhurst MP
                             and Alex Chisolm Permanent
                             Secretary,   BEIS,     on    17
                             October 2018
873.   POL00042063    Email from Rodric Williams to Jane POL-0038545
                           Macleod and others; re Strike
                           out application
874.   UKGI00008519   BEIS Agenda: 'Post Office: Horizon    UKGI019330-001
                          Trial Contingency Planning'
875.   UKGI00008554   Draft read out note of POL meeting    UKGI019362-001
                            in HoC on 17th October 4-
                            4 :45pm
876.   UKGI00008606   Email from Tom Aldred (UKGI) to       UKGI019414-001
                           Tom Cooper (UKGI) and
                           Richard Watson (UKGI) CCing
                           Stephen Clarke and others re:
                           Post Office Litigation Meeting
                           readout (17 October)
877.   POL00006757    Meeting Minutes of the Postmaster POL-0018015
                           Litigation Subcommittee of
                           POL
878.   POL00021557    Meeting minutes: minutes for Board    POL0000090
                           meeting    held    on    25th
                           September 2018
879.   POL00024170    Email    chain  between     Rodric POL-0020649
                           Williams,  Jane    Macleod,
                           Andrew Parsons and others
                           Re: Contingency Planning.




                                 Page 853 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




880.   POL00042037   Email chain setting out briefing on POL-0038519
                          GLO CMG on 19 Sep 2018,
                          focussing on security for costs
                          and trial timetable. Email from
                          Jane Macleod to Rodric
                          Williams and others re PO
                          Group Litigation
881.   POL00022943   Draft Womble Bond Dickinson: Post POL-0019422
                           Office     Group   Litigation:
                           Mitigations Report
882.   POL00024157   Email from Angela Van-Den-Bogerd POL-0020636
                          to Paula Vennells, Jane
                          Macleod, Alisdair Cameron
                          and others Re: GLO Call 0815
                          28 Sept, Postmaster Group
                          Litigation.      Contingency
                          Planning
883.   POL00111165   Post Office Group Litigation, draft POL-0108771
                          update   for  Board      Sub-
                          Committee
884.   POL00117991   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0114700
                          Parker, Ken McCall and others
                          RE: Postmaster Litigation-
                          timetable - CONFIDENTIAL
                          AND SUBJECT TO LEGAL
                          PRIVILIGE      DO        NOT
                          FORWARD
885.   POL00022669   Post     Office   Group    Litigation POL-0019148
                            between Alan Bates & Others -
                            and- Post Office Limited -
                            Update to the opinion on the
                            common issues
886.   POL00024158   Contingency    Planning   Internal POL-0020637
                          Governance    meetings    27
                          Sept-30 Nov.
887.   POL00111214   Post     Office Briefing Paper for POL-0108817
                            Meeting on 17 October 2018
                            with Kelly Tolhurst MP and
                            Alex Chisolm on" Common
                            Issues" trial in Group Litigation.
888.   POL00111257   Postmaster Group Litigation - POL-0108858
                         Briefing Note ahead of Board
                         Meeting on Tuesday 30th
                         October 2018

                                Page 854 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




889.   POL00103360   Email from Veronica Branton to Tim    POL-0102943
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Thomas
                          Cooper    and    others    re:
                          Board/ARC briefing
890.   POL00042106   Email chain from Rodric WIiiiams to POL-0038588
                          Patrick     Bourke,      Mark
                          Underwood       and   Andrew
                          Parsons, re FW: Post Office
                          Group Litigation
891.   POL00042122   Email from Rodric Williams to POL-0038604
                          Andrew Parsons, seeking AP's
                          comments on text summary of
                          opening submissions prepared
                          for Paula Vennells.
892.   POL00006388   Steering Group Meeting Paper:         POL-0017693
                          Should POL accept implied
                          terms?
893.   POL00023117   Judgement (no.2) of the High Court POL-0019596
                         of Justice in Alan Bates and
                         Others v Post Office limited
                         [2018] 2698(QB).
894.   POL00103355   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim        POL-0102938
                          Parker, Paula Vennells and
                          Mark R Davies re: RE:
                          Postmaster Litigation
895.   POL00103356   Email from Jane Macleod to Ken        POL-0102939
                          McCall, Carla Stent, Tim
                          Franklin  and      others re:
                          Postmaster Litigation
896.   POL00103349   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102932
                          Parker, Diane Blanchard and
                          Paula Vennells re: Postmaster
                          Litigation
897.   POL00103351   Email from Tim Parker to Jane         POL-0102934
                          Macleod, Diane Blanchard
                          and Paula Vennells re: Re:
                          Postmaster Litigation
898.   POL00103357   Email from Paula Vennells to Ken      POL-0102940
                          McCall, Carla Stent, Tim
                          Franklin and others re: Re:
                          Postmaster Litigation




                              Page 855 of 861
                                                                         WITN01020100




899.   POL00103358   Email from Ken McCall to Paula        POL-0102941
                          Vennells, Carla Stent, Tim
                          Franklin and others re: Re:
                          Postmaster Litigation
900.   POL00026936   Post Office Board Agenda              POL-0023577


901.   POL00021558   Post Office Ltd Board Minutes dated   POL0000091
                          30/10/2018
902.   POL00111283   Email from Dianne Blanchard to POL-0111474
                          Avene Regan, Angela Van-
                          Den-Bogerd, Paula Vennells
                          and others re: Tomorrow's
                          GLO update and planning call
                          is cancelled
903.   FUJ00160138   Letter from Freeths to Andrew POINQ0166316F
                           Parsons - Re: Alan Bates &
                          Others v Post Office Limited -
                           Horizon Issues Trial - sending
                          Claimant's Expert Report
904.   POL00111231   Email from Jonathan Gribben to POL-0108832
                          Catherine   Hamilton,    Rob
                          Houghton, Rodric Williams and
                          others re: Jason Coyne's
                          report              [WBDUK-
                          AC.FID27032497]
905.   POL00117998   Email from Rodric Williams to Paul POL-0114706
                          Vennells, Jane Macleod, Mark
                          Davies and others. RE: PO
                          Group litigation - update
906.   POL00118001   Email from Mark Underwood to POL-0114709
                          Paula Vennells Re Post Office
                          Group Litigation Update -
                          Subject to legal professional
                          privilege - Draft Email for the
                          Board.
907.   POL00026954   Group  Executive Agenda for POL-0023595
                         Meeting on 12th November
                         2018




                              Page 856 of 861
                                                                        WITN01020100




908.   POL00111405   Email from Rodric Williams to Paula POL-0108994
                          Vennellls, Jane Macleod,
                          Mark R Davies and others re
                          Post Office Group Litigation
                          Update - SUBJECT TO LEGAL
                          PRIVILEGE          DO     NOT
                          FORWARD
909.   POL00042151   Email providing update on latest day POL-0038633
                          in court in group litigation trial.
                          Email from Rodric Williams to
                          Andrew Parsons re: FW: Post
                          Office Group Litigation Update
                              SUBJECT TO LEGAL
                          PRIVILEGE             DO     NOT
                          FORWARD
910.   POL00111475   Email from Rodric Williams to Paula POL-0109061
                          Vennells, Jane Macleod, Mark
                          R Davies and others re Post
                          Office Group Litigation Update
                               Post    Office     closing
                          submissions
911.   POL00107162   Email     chain    between  Paula POL-0105470
                          Vennells, Rodric Williams,
                          Jane Macleod and Mark
                          Davies (fwd to Avene Regan)
                          Re:      Post   Office Group
                          Litigation Update
912.   POL00111208   Post Office briefing paper with POL-0108811
                         annotations for meeting with
                         Kelly Tollhurst MP and Alex
                         Chisolm
913.   POL00118002   Email from Rodric Williams to Paula POL-0114710
                          Vennells, Jane Macleod, Mark
                          R Davies and others RE: Post
                          Office Group Litigation Update
                          - summary of evidence from
                          Pamela       Stubbs        and
                          Mohammad Sabir.
914.   POL00021559   Meeting minutes: minutes of Board   POL0000092
                          meeting    held   on    27th
                          November 2018
915.   POL00006471   Steering Group Noting Paper - POL-0017776
                          Expert Report of Dr Robert
                          Worden

                              Page 857 of 861
                                                                          WITN01020100




916.   POL00006756   Meeting Minutes of the Postmaster POL-0018014
                          Litigation Subcommittee of
                          POL
917.   POL00006753   Meeting Minutes of the Group POL-0018011
                          Litigation Subcommittee of
                          POL
918.   POL00107155   Email from Rob Houghton to Rodric POL-0105463
                          Williams and Angela Van-Den-
                          Bogerd re: If you get the
                          chance ... , attaching marked up
                          supplemental expert report of
                          Jason Coyne 01 February
                          2019 and scanned comments
                          of Rodric Williams
919.   POL00103372   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim         POL-0102955
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                          Stent and others, Re: Board
                          Report - Final.
920.   POL00103373   Report for Post Office Limited Board POL-0102956
                         as at 13 December 2018
                         concerning the Post Office
                         Group Litigation (Common
                         Issues Trial).
921.   POL00042244   Email chain from Rodric Williams to POL-0038726
                          Andrew Parsons re: FW:
                          Postmaster     Litigation
                          proposed agenda for the
                          Committee meeting on 28
                          January.    CONFIDENMTIAL
                          AND SUBJECT TO LEGAL
                          PRIVILEGE          DO     NOT
                          FORWARD
922.   POL00021560   Meeting Minutes: minutes of Board      POL0000093
                          meeting on 23rd January 2019
923.   POL00118020   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim         POL-0118400
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                          Stent and others re Post Office
                          Postmaster      Litigation
                          Judgment timeframes
924.   POL00042253   Email chain from Rodric Williams to POL-0038735
                          Andrew Parsons CCing Amy
                          Prime re: Post Office Group
                          Litigation      Update      on
                          Mediation/ Potential Mediators

                               Page 858 of 861
                                                                           WITN01020100




925.   POL00118022   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0118401
                          Vennells, Alisdair Cameron,
                          Rob Houghton and Others RE:
                          Postmaster            Litigation-
                          Confidential and subject to
                          legal privilege- do not forward
926.   POL00118023   Email thread from Rodric Williams to    POL-0118402
                          Jane Macleod, Paula Vennells
                          and Alasdair Cameron RE:
                          Postmaster litigation.
927.   POL00111672   Email from Jane Macleod to Paula POL-0109249
                          Vennells and Rob Houghton
                          re, Postmaster Litigation -
                          Confidential and Subject to
                          Legal Privilege - Do Not
                          Forward.
928.   POL00028045   Email from Jane McLeod (PO) to POL-0023048
                          other PO and UKGI employees
                          on risks of the Horizon Issues
                          Trial
929.   POL00028071   Note: Horizon Issues Trial Draft Risk   POL-0023074
                          Assessment Table prepared
                          for POL by WBD
930.   POL00026934   Post Office Limited Board -25.03.19 POL-0023575
                          - Bundle of documents re. the
                          25.03.19 Board Meeting.
931.   POL00103381   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102964
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                          Stent etc, RE: Postmaster
                          Litigation
932.   POL00042147   Email chain from Rodric Williams to POL-0038629
                          Jane Macleod and Mark
                          Underwood re: Litigation
933.   POL00119590   Email chain from Melanie Garfield to POL-0119898
                          Laura Tarling Re: FW: Group
                          Litigation - Experts' Reports on
                          the Horizon Issues
934.   POL00111694   Email from Paula Vennells to Tom        POL-0109267
                          Cooper, Alisdair Cameron, Tim
                          Parker and others re. Board
                          GLO Sub-Committee.
935.   POL00006496   Speaking Note for Board meeting on      POL-0017801
                         21 Feb 2019

                               Page 859 of 861
                                                                      WITN01020100




936.   POL00103409   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102992
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                          Stent    and    Others    re
                          Postmaster     Litigation
                          Confidential and Subject to
                          Legal Privilege - Do Not
                          Forward
937.   POL00103416   Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0102999
                          Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                          Stent and Others re GLO
                          Board Call at 10.30 am
                          Tuesday     12      March
                          CONFIDENTIAL         AND
                          SUBJECT     TO     LEGAL
                          PRIVILEGE.    DO     NOT
                          FORWARD
938.   POL00103411   Email Chain from Tim Parker to Tom POL-0102994
                          Cooper, Jane Macleod, Ken
                          McCall     and   Others     re
                          Postmaster     Litigation
                          Confidential and Subject to
                          Legal Privilege - Do Not
                          Forward
939.   POL00103426   Email Chain from Tim Parker to    POL-0103009
                          Alisdair   Cameron     re:
                          Statement
940.   POL00023817   Email from Jane Macleod to POL-0020296
                          Andrew Parsons and cc Rodric
                          Williams     and       Mark
                          Underwood, RE: Appeal
941.   POL00023878   Note by David Cavender QC re POL-0020357
                         Basis of Appeal in Bates &
                         Others v PO
942.   POL00022685   Email Chain between Andrew POL-0019164
                          Parsons, Mark Underwood,
                          Jane     Macleod,        Rodric
                          Williams, Mark R Davies,
                          Melanie Garfield, Julie Thomas
                          and Zoe Brauer re: Common
                          Issues Judgment, Instructions
                          Table+ Subsequent Actions
943.   POL00006398   Advice by Lord Neuberger on the   POL-0017703
                          recusal application



                              Page 860 of 861
                                                                             WITN01020100




944.   POL00006700    POL Group Litigation:        Executive POL-0017958
                         Summary
945.   POL00103484    Email from Jane Macleod to Tim POL-0103067
                           Parker, Ken McCall, Carla
                           Stent and others re. Post
                           Office Group Litigation
                           Update on Recusal Application
946.   POL00104219    Post    Office Board Agenda        of POL-0103802
                             Tuesday 30th April 2019
947.   FUJ00168538    Email chain from Duncan Tait to        POINQ0174719F
                           Stephen Long cc'ing Paul
                           Patterson, Gavin Bell and
                           another Re: Brief - Post Office
948.   FUJ00174556    Email chain from Helen Lamb and POINQ0180737F
                           James Davidson re: Post
                           Office - No Issues on service to
                           raise, peak service running
                           well and no significant outages
                           of late.
949.   FUJ00174662    Briefing Notes - Duncan Tait, Paula    POINQ0180843F
                            Vennels Meeting
950.   FUJ00168649    Email from Haydn Jones to Paul POINQ0174830F
                           Patterson, Helen Lamb, Mark
                           Phillips  and   others  RE:
                           Readout from OT/ PV meeting
951.   FUJ00174708    Email from Amit Apte to Mark POINQ0180889F
                           Phillips cc Gavin Bell, James
                           Davidson, Manu Sharma RE:
                           Paula Vennells meeting with
                           OT this morning
952.   PVEN00000418   Text    messages between Paula         PVEN00117157
                             Vennells and Simon Blagden
                             CBE.
953.   FUJ00083833    Email chain between Matthew POINQ0090004F
                           Lenton and Chris Jay - RE:
                           Witness Statements to PR
                           manager
954.   POL00006740    Email from Ben Foat re Disclosure POL-0017998
                           Incident
955.   PVEN00000386   Text    messages between Paula         PVEN00113340
                             Vennells and Duncan Tait.



                                 Page 861 of 861
