WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

Witness Name: Gerald Barnes
Statement No.: WITN09870200

Dated: 19 December 2023

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF GERALD BARNES

|, MR GERALD BARNES, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION

1. As noted in my first witness statement dated 30 August 2023, | am currently
employed by Fujitsu Services Limited (“Fujitsu”) as a Software Developer, a

position | have held since 1998.

2. This second witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT
Inquiry (the “Inquiry”) with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Requests provided
to Fujitsu on 16 June 2023 and 31 July 2023 (together, the “Requests”, to the
extent | have or had direct knowledge of such matters. As with my first witness
statement, this witness statement relates to my work in Fujitsu's audit team and
the processes relating to audit queries (also known as Audit Retrieval Queries

or “ARQs’).

3. The nature and potential significance of the matters set out in this statement
came to light on 6 December 2023, and there is an ongoing operational

investigation with which | am assisting. In order to bring this matter to the

Page 1 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

attention of the Inquiry as soon as possible, this statement was drafted with
assistance from Morrison Foerster, the recognised legal representatives for
Fujitsu in the Inquiry, in a limited timeframe. It may be necessary to further
supplement the information provided in this statement, as my knowledge and

understanding of the issues develop.

4. Where | have referred to documents to assist my preparation of responses to

the Requests, the URNs of the relevant documents are set out in this statement.

BACKGROUND

5. In the Requests, the Inquiry asked me to confirm whether | was aware of any
incidents where an audit log (whether an ARQ log, a log produced by RQuery
or XQuilla, detail from the ARQ interface or equivalent) had been provided to
Post Office Limited (“POL”) or Royal Mail for court or disciplinary proceedings
or in an investigation relating to a postmaster, manager or assistant that was,
or may have been, unreliable. As noted in paragraph 26 of my first witness
statement, | understand ‘ARQ log’ to refer to the data provided by Fujitsu to
POL in response to ARQ requests that sought data from the audit servers,
which would be presented on a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (“ARQ

Spreadsheet’).

6. As | explained in paragraph 27 of my first witness statement, during my time at
Fujitsu, | was not personally involved in responding to ARQs submitted by POL
Fujitsu in relation to investigations, court proceedings, or disciplinary
proceedings against postmasters, managers or assistants. To assist the

Inquiry, at paragraphs 27 to 38 of my first witness statement, | set out details of

Page 2 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

any incidents or issues relating to the accuracy of ARQ data that | was aware

of at that time.

7. Since providing my first witness statement, | have become aware of an incident
where Fujitsu provided POL an ARQ Spreadsheet in relation to an ongoing
appeal by the postmaster of the Apex Corner branch (with Financial Accounting
Division or “FAD” code 097005) (“Apex Corner’), and this ARQ Spreadsheet

was unreliable (“Apex Corner Incident’).

8. Due to my background, knowledge, and experience working in the audit team
at Fujitsu, | have been involved in investigating the Apex Corner Incident. | have
helped to identify the cause of the Apex Corner Incident, which | will refer to as
the “ARQ Extraction Issue” in this statement. | am currently working with other
technical and operational staff within Fujitsu’s Post Office Account team
(‘POA’) to (i) understand the extent and impact of the ARQ Extraction Issue

(as far as possible), and (ii) developing a solution to rectify it.

THE APEX CORNER INCIDENT

9. On 14 November 2023, | was informed by members of Fujitsu's legal team and
Morrison Foerster that a series of ARQ Spreadsheets were provided by Fujitsu
to POL in response to an ARQ request from POL dated 11 August 2023 relating

to Apex Corner (“Apex Corner Request’). It was explained to me that:

a. the Apex Corner Request related to an ongoing appeal by the former

postmaster of Apex Corner, which was before the Court of Appeal;

Page 3 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

in the Apex Corner Request, POL had requested transaction data relating
to Apex Corner for a number of months, which included the months of

March and April 2008 (FUJ00234826);

Fujitsu had provided POL a number of ARQ Spreadsheets in response to
the Apex Corner Request, with separate ARQ Spreadsheets for each
month of transaction data requested by POL, including an ARQ
Spreadsheet for transactions in March 2008 (“March 2008 ARQ

Spreadsheet”) and April 2008 (“April 2008 ARQ Spreadsheet”);

as part of the appeal proceedings, the former postmaster had provided a
girocheque report dated 10 April 2008 (FUJ00234827), which listed 13
transactions that did not appear in any of the ARQ Spreadsheets Fujitsu
provided POL in response to the Apex Corner Request (“13 Missing

Transactions’);

it had been identified from relevant Peaks, a Known Error Log (KEL) and

Operational Correction Requests (OCRs) that:

i. the 13 Missing Transactions, which had taken place in March 2008,
had been “marooned” on the counter at Apex Corner together with a

large number of other transactions in 2008;

ii. consequently, in April 2008, the Software Support Centre (“SSC”) had
manually reinserted these “marooned” transactions into the
correspondence servers relating to the earlier version of the Horizon

system (known as “Legacy Horizon”); and

Page 4 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

iii. these “marooned” transactions were reinserted into the
correspondence using a virtual counter ID (i.e., a counter that did not
exist at the branch, which was used to identify that they had been

reinserted by the SSC).

INVESTIGATION INTO THE APEX CORNER INCIDENT

10. | was asked to investigate the Apex Corner Incident as part of a team of

technical and other operational staff in POA to understand:

a. why the 13 Missing Transactions did not appear in the March 2008 ARQ

Spreadsheet or April 2008 ARQ Spreadsheet; and

b. the extent and impact of the ARQ Extraction Issue, including whether it
impacted (i) ARQ data extractions that had been undertaken in relation to
other branches, (ii) Legacy Horizon, Horizon Online (including “HNGx”),

or both,

(the “Investigation”)

11. The investigation team includes John Simpkins (Team Leader, SSC), Farzin
Denbali (Security Operations Manager, POA) and Steve Browell (Service

Operations and Strategy Manager, POA).

AUDIT AND ARQ PROCESSES RELATING TO THE APEX CORNER INCIDENT

12. To assist the Inquiry to understand why the Apex Corner Incident occurred, |
set out below my understanding of (i) how transactions in Legacy Horizon were
transmitted from the branch counter to the audit archive (“Legacy Audit
Process’), and (ii) the ARQ process that was applied in relation to the Apex

Corner Request, which has been in place since around 2009 (“Horizon Online

Page 5 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

ARQ Process’). In setting out my understanding of these processes, | have

highlighted what happened in relation to the Apex Corner Incident.

13. My explanation below is based on my knowledge and experience working in
the audit team as well as my involvement in the Investigation. As | explained in
paragraph 7, 14 and 18 of my first witness statement, | have limited experience
and knowledge regarding the systems and processes relating to audit and
ARQs in relation to Legacy Horizon, however, | have learned more about these

systems and processes as a result of my involvement in the Investigation.

The Legacy Audit Process
14. | understand that the process in which transactions made at the counter in
Legacy Horizon were transmitted and stored in the audit archive was designed

to operate as follows:

a. Riposte messages, including transaction messages, would first be written
to the Riposte message store on the local counter at the Post Office
branch and attributed a Riposte message date (among other things). For
example, the Riposte message date for a transaction message was the
date that the transaction took place at the counter (“Transaction Date”).
To create a back-up, these messages were replicated locally to (i) other
counters in the branch (if the branch had multiple counters), or (ii) a “mirror
disk” physically contained in the counter (if the branch only had a single

counter).

b. Periodically, Riposte messages would then be sent from the counter to
the correspondence servers in the data centres. This was done

periodically because Legacy Horizon was primarily an offline system.

page of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

Branches were assigned to one of four “clusters”, which refers to a group
of FAD codes, and messages from branches would feed into one of these
clusters at the correspondence server level. Once at the correspondence
server level, an audit harvester would write the messages from these
clusters into Transaction Management Service files (“TMS Files”) (i.e.,
only messages within the same cluster at the correspondence server level
would be written in the same TMS File). The TMS Files would also be

labelled with a cluster identifier and date/time.

c. The TMS Files would then be gathered and copied to the audit server. A
cyclic gatherer program would take the TMS Files from the
correspondence server and copy them to the audit server, keeping the

same cluster identifier and date/time.

d. The gathered TMS Files would then be sealed by the application of an
“MD5 checksum” and put onto a storage device (for example, Centera).
The TMS File was considered stored on the audit archive on the date it
was sealed (“Seal Date”). The Seal Date and name of the file (which
included the name of the cluster) (“Audit Filename”) were recorded on a

“Sealer Database’.

What | have described above is the process, as | understand it, that should
have taken place to store counter data onto the audit archive. | understand that

due to an issue with the counter at Apex Corner:

a. the 13 Missing Transactions, which had Transaction Dates in March 2008,
were not sealed in TMS Files in the audit archive until April 2008 because

the transactions were reinserted by the SSC in April 2008; and
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

b. asa result of this delay, the 13 Missing Transactions had Transaction
Dates in March 2008, however, the transactions were contained in TMS

Files with a Seal Date in April 2008.

The Horizon Online ARQ Process

16.

Fujitsu uses a software application called “AEClient” to retrieve data from the
audit archive. AEClient is run on physical terminals known as Audit
Workstations (AUW), which members of Fujitsu’s audit and security teams use

to perform the retrieval. The Horizon Online ARQ process operates as follows:

a. A cluster look-up database is used to identify the details of the cluster
where messages from the relevant branch FAD code and ARQ request

date range are stored.

b. | The Sealer Database is then used to identify and retrieve the sealed TMS
Files from the audit archive relating to the ARQ request by searching for
(i) the cluster relating to the relevant branch FAD code across the Audit
Filenames, and (ii) date range (known as the “Retrieval Range”)
according to the Seal Date, which is typically a calendar month. As |
explained in my first witness statement at paragraph 25(d), when the audit
team performs audit retrievals, it allows extra days in the Retrieval Range
to allow for TMS Files that were gathered late. For example, when
responding to an ARQ request for the month of March, a Retrieval Range
of 1 March to 2 April (inclusive) will be used to allow for TMS Files
containing transactions that took place on 31 March, which were not

gathered until 1 April.

Page 8 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

The Query Manager service, which is a separate application controlled by
the AEClient, then queries each of the sealed TMS Files that have been
retrieved from the audit archive and filters the messages contained within
them according to (i) the relevant branch FAD code, and (ii) Riposte
message date (e.g., the Transaction Date), which is typically entered as a
date range (“Filter Range”) of a calendar month. The Query Manager
service also undertakes automatic checks to identify any gaps and
duplicates in the Riposte messages within the Filter Range. Each
message has a unique and ascending identifier known as the “Num”
attribute, which the Query Manager service uses to undertake these

checks.

The Query Manager service then generates a single XML file, which
contains data relating to all of the messages (e.g., transactions and events
messages) that meet the filtering criteria applied (i.e., branch FAD code

and Riposte message date).

The XML file is then queried using a query language known as “FLWOR”
(pronounced “flower”) for specific information and data. Where the ARQ
request is for details of transactions, the FLWOR query is used to identify
and extract Riposte transaction messages by returning all messages that
have any value for two Riposte message attributes:
“EPOSSTransaction/ProductNo” and “TxnData/Start/Date”. The identified
transaction messages are then put into a new XML file (“Output XML

File”). The Output XML File will only contain the Riposte message

Page 9 of 14
17.

18.

WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

attributes that are specified in the FLWOR query, which include,

Transaction Date, Mode, Session ID and Transaction ID.

f. The AEClient then uses the Output XML File to produce the ARQ

Spreadsheet.

My understanding is that the security team would identify gaps and duplicates
in messages through automatic checks, and occasionally identify that whole
days of messages were missing at the end of an ARQ Spreadsheet following a
manual review of the spreadsheet. This would sometimes be drawn to my
attention by the security team, who would ask me to investigate the gaps and
find the missing messages by extending the Retrieval Range of the ARQ while

keeping the Filter Range the same.

My understanding is that the process | have described at paragraph 16 in this
statement was followed for the Apex Corner Request. As part of my work on
the Investigation, | helped to determine that the 13 Missing Transactions were
not presented on the ARQ Spreadsheets provided in response to the Apex
Corner Request because of how the Horizon Online ARQ Process operates in
certain circumstances, which | set out below at paragraph 21. In summary, the

Apex Corner Incident occurred because:

a. when the Horizon Online ARQ Process was applied to the Apex Corner
Request, the Sealer Database was used to identify and retrieve sealed

TMS Files for March 2008 and April 2008 (among other months);

Page 10 of 14
19.

20.

WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

b. as noted above at paragraph 15, the 13 Missing Transactions, which had
Transaction Dates in March 2008, were contained in sealed TMS Files

with a Seal Date in April 2008;

c. when processing the ARQ request, the Query Manager service was used

to filter:

i. the sealed TMS Files for March 2008 for transactions with a

Transaction Date in March 2008; and

ii. the sealed TMS Files for April 2008 for transactions with a Transaction

Date in April 2008;

d. consequently, the 13 Missing Transactions were not captured by the
Query Manager service during the filtering process noted at paragraph

16(c).

In order for the 13 Missing Transactions to be retrieved and presented on an
ARQ Spreadsheet, | identified that the Query Manager service needed to query
the TMS Files that were sealed in April 2008 and filter these files for

transactions with a Transaction Date in March 2008.

Once this revised query was applied, the 13 Missing Transactions were
retrieved and presented on an ARQ Spreadsheet and the automatic checks
noted at 16(c) identified gaps in the messages that had been reinserted by the
SSC on the virtual counter. At this stage, | am not sure why there were gaps in

relation to these messages and the Investigation is ongoing in this regard.

Page 11 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

EXTENT AND IMPACT OF THE ARQ EXTRACTION ISSUE
21. Based on the Investigation so far, in general terms, my understanding is that

the ARQ Extraction Issue can occur in the following circumstances:

a. _ there is a delay between (i) the date that a transaction was carried out at
a branch, and (ii) the date the TMS File containing the transaction was

sealed in the audit archive;

b. _ the delay is caused by error or fault (e.g., counter hardware failures, a fault
with the sealer, network connectivity problems), which leads to transaction
messages that took place in month “A” being stored in the audit archive in
TMS Files that are sealed in month “B” (e.g., in the Apex Corner Incident,
the SSC reinserted the 13 Missing Transactions (and others) using a

virtual counter ID);

c. an ARQ request is received requesting data for the branch including in

relation to month “A”;

d. the current Horizon Online ARQ Process is followed to respond to the
ARQ request, and the sealed TMS Files relating to the branch for month

“B” are not searched for transactions that took place in month “A”; and

e. the automatic checks, noted at paragraph 16(c) above, fail to identify any
gaps in the transaction messages that would indicate the transaction is

missing.

22. The Apex Corner Incident has shown that the current Horizon Online ARQ
Process has a flaw because transactions in Legacy Horizon for one month can

be stored in the audit archive in the following month, such that the additional

Page 12 of 14
WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

days allowed in the Retrieval Range are not enough to capture all relevant TMS
Files that were sealed late. As a result, Fujitsu is modifying the process to allow
three months in the Retrieval Range (i.e., the date range applied to retrieve
TMS Files). Hence it will retrieve up to 2 months of lately sealed or inserted

messages.

23. Astexplain above at paragraphs 8, 10 and 11, | am currently working with other
technical and operational staff in POA to understand the extent and impact of
the ARQ Extraction Issue, including in relation to Legacy Horizon and Horizon
Online. | will endeavour to provide further information to the Inquiry as | learn

more about the issue.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed: |
=

Dated: _19 December 2023

Page 13 of 14
INDEX TO THE SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF GERALD BARNES

WITNO09870200
WITNO09870200

Exhibit

No Description Control Number URN
Girocheque report dated 10

1. April 2008 POINQ0240969F | FUJ00234827
ARQ Spreadsheet relating

2. to Apex Corner provided to POINQ0240968F | FUJ00234826

POL on 4 September 2023

Page 14 of 14
