                                                                                                WITNO5380100
                                                                                               WITNO5380100



                                                                                   WITN 0538/01


                                                                Witness Name: Chris Gilding.
                                                               :Statement No.: WITNO538.010O
                                                                Exhibits:
                                                               Dated      7%L
                                        POST OFF ICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY


                    FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF CHRIS GILDING


General
A brief professional background.

1.   .Joined Post Office in August 1977 as a Crown Office Counter Clerk, promoted

     to Assistant Branch Manager.;

2.   Reserve Regional Trainer delivering 6-week classroom induction courses from

     late 1980's to 1992
3.   1992 - 2009, 27 years Crown Branch Manager at various branches. across

     Hampshire
4. 2009 joined.                            Support as a Field Team Leader (FTL) managing team of
                     Network




                     trainers and auditors                     .. .. __
     multiskilled




5.   Approx. 2013 - 2015 2„years secondment to Horizon Mediation Investigation
     Team,

6.       Returned to FTL role after secondment, took voluntary redundancy
                                                                                      in




     September 2016.




Using the Horizon IT                         in the course of my work.
                               System




7.    1 was working as..a Crown Branch Manager when Horizon was first introduced,

     to the POL Network.

                                                   ..   ....
8.   As FTL I used Horizon (a)                                                                                                      events (b) during branch audits at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      all
                                                                                             during




                                                                                                              training
     types of offices across the network, and (c) in office visits assisting Postmasters

     to investigate Horizon data for balance enquiry purposes

                    My roles in relation to the Horizon IT System.

9,   Branch Manager, Training and Audit Manager,.Horizon Mediation Team Leader

Your role(s) in relation to training



10. My first                            as Trainer was in the mids1080s, when I                                                                                                               for the role of
                          role




                                          a'




                                                                                                                                                                       applied
     Reserve Training Instructor. This was pre-iT so all accounting was in the form

     of manual paper based records. I delivered classroom induction courses for

     new entrants, both Crown Office clerks and neWly appointed Subpostmasters.

     There were a few Subpostmasters' assistants ,on these courses but the

                                               was                                                                                        to                      their own staff and the                                   of
     contractual




                                 onus




                                                                      for




                                                                            Subpostmasters




                                                                                                                                               train




                                                                                                                                                                                                               cost
     staff attending a 6 week classroom course was a barrier to
                                                                                                                                                                                      most




     Subpostmasters.

11. I re-joined the training team                                                                           2009 as                        of the rollout of the WH Smith
                                                                                                                         part
                                                                                                      in




     (WHS) programme,                                                                                      WHS were taking over the.. running of
                                                 whereby




     approximately 70 crown branches nationwide. Initially I oversaw the on
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -site




      training for the first 2 weeks of go-live at                                                                                                                                           the south.
                                                                                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                                                several




                                                                                                                                                       branches




12. Following the. WHS initial rollout I applied and was, appointed to the FTL role.

13. The structure of the national training team had changed and was now,under the
                   umbrella of Network.
                                                           Support.




14. One aspect of this role was to oversee all training including Horizon, delivered

           by my team.
                                                                                                             W ITNO5380100
                                                                                                            WITNO5380100



                                                                                           WITN 0538/01

•   15. When I became trainer as a minimum job requirement the applicant had to




                                        a
•        have an in-depth knowledge of Post:Uffice products and branch procedures,

         including branch accounting.

    :16. Minimum requirements for new trainers                         an active knowledge of all Post




                                                                were
         Office transactions, as an ex-Crown Manager I also had knowledge of all office

         procedures including the use of Horizon for internal stock unit transfers, office

         remittances and accounting procedures for losses and gains within the branch,



    17: Prior to training others to use the Horizon system, I had approximately 10

         years' experience as a Crown Branch Manager

    18. When Horizon was introduced to the Crown network, all staff attended a one-

         day face to face training event, which had a -very hands-on syllabus. All staff

         were trained on how to access the Horizon system, how to enter transactions

         via the customer facing screens and how to balance an.individual stock Unit
         (SU) at the                    of the balance period (BP). This included "rolling" the S_U into
                        end




         'the next BP.

    19. All Branch and Assistant Branch Managers also attended for a second half -day

         to learn the                       procedures and processes on Horizon, ie Maintaining
                              office'




                                                                                                   Users,




         allocating Stock-Units, transfers between stock units, remittances to and fr©m

         the branch. Accounting processes shown included, end of week balancing

         procedures, how to complete weekly balances for the full branch and how to

         "rollover" the office accounts to the following balance period (BP) also how:to.

         rolloverthe'accounts at the end of each month accounting period, known as a

         Cash Accounting Period ,(CAP).




                                                         Page 3 of19
                                                                                                           WITN05380100
                                                                                                          WITNO5380100



                                                                                           WI ; N 0538:0 i

20. As a Crown manager i was using Horizon every day and acted as a 1st line

     supervisory checker for staff who were..unable to balande.at the end of each

     BP. I would also oversee or complete the office rolls er`procedures every

     Week.



21. I cannot recah receiving a 3 v additional training before I trained others to use

     !horizon as my n,evious experience of (a) classroom training                          (b)




                                                                                                 Branch
                                                                                     and
     Manager role fulfilled           the requirements of the role.
                                all




22. I carried out training as-a FTL from 2009 - 2013, 'I managed a team of trainers

     and would occasionally cover classroom or on-site training due to a staffing

     shortage, ie staff sickness.

23. _ I am unableto recall-an exact number of                            that I delivered as I only
                                                         -courses




     covered odd days as required
24. Any refresher training I received was conducted remotely.
25. 1 was never made aware of any bugs or defects with Horizon and my view was

     'that it         a robust system as all the accounting :errors I came across as a
     Crown manager were due to ;inputting errors:by staff .members:
26. My view of the robustness of the system didn't change over time as the'losses
     ,attributed to Horizon only appeared to occur in Sub Post Offices, 1 am not
     aware of any major losses in Crown offices, the Horizon equipment:installed in

     .all,            types across the network was identical.
             branch




27. As FTL it was my role to update the team on any new products, processes or

      procedures. These were primarily undertaken                        Team Meetings which were
                                                                    at




     scheduled.approx. every 6 weeks. `


                                                     4 of 19
                                              Page
                                                                                                                                                                                                               WITNO5380100
                                                                                                                                                                                                              WITNO5380100



                                                                                                                                                                                               WITN 0538101

28. During these events we would discuss any Horizon technical questions raised

     by team,members, there was. no evidence                                                                                   suggest a fault in Horizon as the




                                                                                                                 to
     areas raised                                                  caused by users                            following correct procedures when


                                              were




                                                                                                 not
     inputting data.

29   There were also National Training Events held for product launches...



30. I cannot remember any specific feedback from delegates other than general

      comments. The Horizon                                                                                           was                                                                   be user friendly
                                                                        customer




                                                                                     interface




                                                                                                                                     designed




                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                  once the initial introductory training session had been delivered, the
     and




     majority of trainees across all parts of the network became proficient in its use

     within a short amount of time.

31. There                          feedback from Subpostmasters that additional training on how
                    was




                                                                                                                                                                                                         to
       investigate discrepancies would have                                                                                                     in the                                             Trainers
                                                                                                       been




                                                                                                                      useful




                                                                                                                                                         classroom.




     would explain that Subpostmaster would have                                                                                                on-site trainer for the n weeks
                                                                                                                                an




     of go-live and balancing discrepancies and the use of "Horizon logs would be

     covered                       a "live"
                          in




                                                     :situation.




32. It                not possible to amend the classroom training course                                                                                                                    demonstrate
            was




                                                                                                                                                                                       to




           procedures for "rolling" over the accounts as the training                                                                                                                              was setup
                                                                                                                                                                      equipment




     to ensure "live transactions" did not transmit to the Horizon servers, hence the

       training equipment was not able to progress to the next:accounting period.

33.. This was                                                       feature to ensure events carried out in a training classroom
                               a




                                   security




                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
                                                                                       W I TNO5380100
                                                                                   WITNO5380100



                                                                       WITN 0538101

     to run a Post Office". This training could be extended by the Field Team Leader

     if the trainer felt the Subpostrnaster was struggling after the 2 weeks. This was

     often due to the Suboostmaster being unable to give their full attention as they

     also had a new retail business to operate.

35. The allocation of trainers to classroom and on-site train;ne events was

     completed by the Network Scheduling Team based in Salford, then Bolton.

     Using one schedule nationally ensured the most efficient use of training staff

     resource.



36. All feedback was collated nationally and passed to the National and Area

     Training Managers for inclusion in training reviews.

37   Numerous changes were made over the years, including`refreshing the

     timetable to ensure a clearer focus on office procedures alongside product

     knowledge based training.

_38. 1 supervised and trained trainers:as.their line:manager during 2.004-2Q13~: and
     2015-2016

39. The various teams I managed were dispersed as follows: 2009-2011—

     supervised 12-15 trainers in South West Region, area covered from

     Portsmouth, up to Reading, across the M4 corridor to South Wales and down to

     .Cornwall and all areas :j between.

40, 2011 2016 -, area reduced to ,Hampshire & Berkshire due to Network;Support




                                      Page 6of19
                                                                                                  W ITN05380100
                                                                                                 WITNO5380100



                                                                                  .WITN 0538/01



41. Asa Line manager for the Field Team I was responsible for the wellbeing.of.my

     team. alongside the, ability to delver high quality training to our customers, this.
     included setting team and personal goals.

X42. 1 monitored and. measured individuai..:performance to understand and deliver

        refresher training for,individuals as required to ensure the team delivered .the

        highest quality of training available to them. Monitoring took the format of

     shadowing trainers when they were .delivering classroom training. and on sate.

     training at Sub Post Offices.

43. Informal and formal feedback was given at each event to the trainer. I cannot

             recall any trainer failing in the delivery of the training, they were a dedicated,

             hard working group of people who regularly went over and above their remit in

                   of additional hours on-site and being available to take phone calls
     terms




                                                                                          from
        Subpostmasters, sometimes for months after the`training had concluded.

         Several of the team forged strong working commitments with Subpostmasters,

             leading to friendships outside of the work environment.
                                                             ... ... ....



44_ Feedback from the training was collated after every training event, both

             classroom and on-site. There Were general comments regarding the length of

     .the course in the .classroom :and the training environment.

45. .Feedback from the on-site training was collated nationally, however I am

             unable to recall any specific examples at this stage.
46. All feedback was shared with National, and Area Training Mangers to

             incorporate in training programme updates.;.




                                                Page 7 of 19
                                                                                                                         WITN05380100
                                                                                                                    WITNO5380100



                                                                                                        WlTN 0538/01


4.    r-::   :.-s r.rt:   reaue         add   e:`snze   on
                                                        -sit      e    t
                                                                       -nn       :.   TrIr



     were. struaaiina
                  'UM eA at the    star'
                            Li iz• _e
                                           of the
                                         a vi t. Emir   ._••;eS-°: ro i'v~f. i      3:
                                                                                 L!!e~'      flowing
                                                                                                 .     additional
                                                                                                             onal
                                                                                                                  on -
                                                                                                                     _




     site trainer support for an additional week

      !  -
     Numerous changes to~i~.7i~tU`i:it asa result                     of :~~~.~--~o.K received, but no

     extension to the amount of time dedicated to on -site                                traininn was ever


     n-ro 'aced           except on   an ad_ho nas;5 if requested by, tie                        —S      d


=0. As stated above, the majority of Subpostmasters found the 2 weeks training to

     be sufficient, however outside influences caused some to be distracted from

     their training and I recall on several occasions agreeing to a one week

     extension for the training.




       The training programme(s)



       General Overview of the training Programme

:54_; When I joined the training team in 2009 this was completed byThe-Network

     Support National Training Manager and their Area. Training Managers..

51. Following a reorganisation of the National Support Team, 1 am unsure of the

     :date, ;a National Security and Compliance :Manager was appointed to oversee

     all aspects of the training events offered by Network Support..




                                                   Page8of'19
                                                                                           WITNO5380100
                                                                                       WITNO53801 00



                                                                          WITN 0538/01

54. The training was offered to all new,Crown Office staff, all newly appointed

      Subpostmasters.

55, Subpostmasters were contracted to train theirown staff




56. Classroom training would be undertaken at the start of their employment and

      would be their introduction to working in a. Post Office


57.   How the training was delivered:
       Classroom —

       Pre technology was a 6 week course with 3 weeks in the classroom, weeks 4
       & 5 in a "live"branch with support from local staff and back to the classroom

       for week 6.

58. Following the introduction of Horizon and the reduction on emphasis of

      numeracy skills required to balance the branch, the training was reduced to 4

      weeks.

59. This was reduced further to 2            as the product range changed drastically
                                     weeks




      with the loss of many Government transactions,_ie Pensions & benefits paid

      into banks, TV Licences and Vehicle licensing moving to _online..

60. The reduction in course attendance reflected the changing environment that the

      business operated in, it did not lessen the quality of training .provided as the..

      focus shifted towards additional support within the live•wo.rking .environment..

      The majority of Subpostmasters were supportive of the reduced time required
                                                                                                                                                                             WI TN05380100
                                                                                                                                                                            WITNO5380100
.....      .........                                                                                   .........._.


                                                                                                                                                         WITH 0538/01

        62. The vast majority of                                          were full, however courses could be run with                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                just
                                                    courses
                 attendees if required, I recall at least one occasion                                                                   there was only 1




                                                                                                                                 where
                 attendee.




        63. The course content focusing on Horizon was as follows:

        64. There was <a session entitled An Introduction to Horizon, this was delivered




                                                                                                                                                                       in
                  the first 2 days and any subsequent transactional training would                                                                            be




                                                                                                                                                always
                ;Completed using the Horizon accounting

                                                                                              system
        65. The course was very much                                                      knowledge-based course, with accounting
                                                                      a




                                                                           product




                  activities attached to each product session.

        fib. Horizon equipment identical to workstations in "live" branches was used to

                  process the financial part of the training transactions, exactly as it would be In

                  branch.

        67. In branch accounting was completed every Weds, in order to replicate this

                  stock balancing was .a 2-hour session held in the classroom on Weds.

        U. in.the classroom the trainees were shown the basics of.running,a transactional

                  log for identifying discrepancies, but this was very                                                                   Crown staff were.
                                                                                                                        basic.




                   informed that Branch Managers would continue this training on-site,

                   Subpostmasters would receive .additional.support from on-site •trainers in the

                  first 2 weeks of
                                     appointment.




        69.. Following the 2 week                                  -site training, a follow-up balance support was offered
                                                              on




                  to Subpostmasters with the trainer available                                                        be contacted by phone to
                                                                                                               to




                   discuss any balancing or operational issue. This was formally scheduled for the




                                                                                     Page 10 of19
                                                                                                WITN05380100
                                                                                              WITNO5380100



•                                                                             WITN 0538/01

•       first week after the.on-site training, however I have recollections of some
         Subpostmasters using this facility for several. months.



    70. The Network Business Support. Centre (NBSC) was the first port of               for




                                                                                 call
         Subpostmasters.. This was a telephone-based support function.

    71. Additionally, they could contact their Contracts Advisor and request additional

         on        support l
           -site




                               training,




    72: Trainees had access to the full transactional logs created on Horizon,
    73. The Horizon system is in my view, a digital double entry accounting system. For

         every item sold, ie a 1st class :stamp, the stock is reduced and the cash

         method of payment (MOP) increased, hence the system figures are always `in_a

         state sof balance.

    74. In a transaction log, Subpostmasters could identify every transaction entered

         via. Horizon and this would include which MOP was used. The transaction log

         would showthe User, Stock Unit, and time of the event.
    75. Subpostmasters .also had access to Event logs. These identified procedural
         events rather than transactional,        times each user,logged in or out of Horizon,
                                             ie




         which stock unit they were attached to, which transactional mode was being

         used, ie. customer service,,balancing, reversals,



    76. For Subpostmasters, the opportunity to discuss Horizon accounting :procedures

         would take place during the 2 weeks on-site support from a trainer




                                           Page 11of 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W ITNO5380100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WITNO5380100



                                                                                                                                                                         WITN 0538/01

77, Changes toth,e, initial.                  a,
                      iti classroom could be made .accorn modate the mix of




                                                                                                                                               to




                                                                                                                                                                                                  __.
    attendees, le if .no Crown staff present additional focus would be spent on




                                                                                                                                                                                                        "how
     to run .a.Post.Office", however I would say this was rare.


78. There was no formal testing of delegates understanding of Horizon, this was

    -undertaken.on an observation basis by the on-site trainer who raised any

     concerns with the                                                                                          Advisor'for that branch.
                                                                                         Contracts




19, 1 believe the training programme was adequate, the vast majority'of trainees
     were competent in the use of Horizon, able to complete all tasks required for

                                             respective role within the branch.
     their




80. Investigating the Horizon system for discrepancies was sufficient for the
             majority of Postmasters, however additional support could be sought be those
      struggling to identify specific discrepancies. Following the 2 week on-site
      training, a                                                                                     balance                   offered                   Subpostmasters with the
                                                                                                                support




                                                                                                                          was
                                                                        follow-up




                                                                                                                                                    to.




         trainer available                                                                           be contacted by phone to discuss                              balancing
                                                                                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                           any




         operational issue. This was formally scheduled for the first week after the on-
             site
                                  training




81. Fallowing this the Network Business Support Centre (NBSC) was the first
                                                                                                                                                                                                               port




                                                                                                            This.was telephone-based :support function..
                  .call




                                              for
             of




                                                      Subpostmasters.




                                                                                                                          :a




82.. Additionally, they could contact their Contracts                                                                                                            and request
                                                                                                                                                                               -additional
                                                                                                                                     Advisor




             on                                     support 1 training.
                          -site
                                                                                                                                                  WITNO5380100
                                                                                                                                          WITNO5380100



                                                                                                                    WITN 0538/01

83. Subpostmasters could request additional training via the Contracts Advisor

     (CA) if they felt they had specific additional training needs,                                            transactional




                                                                                                          ie
     knowledge or accounting support. These were actioned at the CA discretion

     following discussions between the CA and the Subpostmaster...

84. Additional training was also offered if the on-site trainer felt it was..necessary.

     Crown Office staff received additional training from Branch Managers.



                  and
       Advice




                         assistance




85. As FTL, one of                                 responsibilities was to conduct follow up meetings with new
                                      my




     Subpostmasters at the one month and three-month stages. These reviews

     included a -one-to-one discussion with the Subpostmaster regarding the

     standard of training received and if they felt it had equipped them fully to run




                                                                                                                                              a
     =Post Office. There would also be a cash check undertaken at these visits.

86. In addition I would visit Subpostmasters by appointment as scheduled by the

     Contracts Advisor to discuss discrepancies. This meeting                                                       include
                                                                                                  would




     additional trainingand                                        Horizon Transactional, and Event logs and
                                                      producing




     how to interpret the data.

87. The, initial :contact :by the Sub postmaster would have been a phonecall to the

      NBSC who would ;escalate to the Contracts ,Manager.

88. _ _.An example of a .visit: A Sub postmas                                .k.io Was considered very good in his

      role' by the Contracts Advisor, was struggling, to reconcile the cash                                                             for
                                                                                                                               figure




      his stock          for the Automated Teller machine (ATM). Upon request I agreed a
                  unit




     date:and time to visit so we could spend quality time looking                                                  Horizon
                                                                                                               at




     transaction and                                  logs. I confirmed his                               of the
                                                                                                                     Horizon
                                           event




                                                                                  understanding




                                                                  Page 13 of 19
                                                                                                                       WITNO5380100
                                                                                                                  WITNO5380100



                                                                                        WITN 0538/01

     system by asking him to, produce the logs1. demonstrating he knew his way

     around the. reports.
89;. We investigated the data together and identified an operational procedure that

     he-was not following -correctly, which. was causing.,him to compare                                      levels




                                                                                         cash,
    in the ATM on different.days/times, hence•they did not.match. There were no

     losses recorded against the branch for this issue, however he was reassured
     that Horizon was working correctly once he understood the disparity in figures

     he was incorrectly using., The on-site visit               completed in approximately 4



                                                          was
     hours.
90.. All_issues raised were reported back to The Contracts Advisor

91. The -only difficulties I encountered with Horizon, were primarily due to user

     errors, ie incorrect accounting processes followed and, quite often, a reluctance

     from Subpostmasters                seek assistance. Unfortunately there



                                                                                                 too




                                                                                                       many
                                   to




                                                                                 were
     occasions whereby the Subpostmaster tried to "fix" discrepancies but actually,

     by incorrect accounting, made the situation worse. However I am unable to

     offer any specific examples at this time.




92. My personal view of the support offered to Subpostmasters was that having just

     a telephone support in NBSC was not sufficient, there should have been a.

     dedicated team.of "Problem Busters" available                   support at short native. This
                                                                to




     would have been a team of dedicated trainers available at short notice to make

     on-site visits to branches were accounting issues' were ;occurring. This would

     have been quick response system which would have ensured any errors
                            a




     made would not escalate out of hand, ensuring repeated incorrect procedures

     did not                    the outcome further,..
               complicate




                                               Page, 34 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                        WITNO5380100
                                                                                                                                                                      WITNO53801 00



                                                                                                                                       WITN 0538/01

93. This was suggested on.numerous occasions, although I cannot recall specific

     dates, but did not fit in with the structure designed for Network Support by
     senior managers as it was considered too_resource heavy and an inefficient

     use of staffing resources.



      2011 Training review



94. Feedback was collated                   all trainers and                                     by FTL's at the




                                                                                                                                                training
                              from




                                                                        shared
     review meeting. Primary drive for the review was                                                                    in emphasis




                                                                                    a




                                                                                        change




                                                                                                                                                             within
     POL for a more sales-driven culture within branches                                                               the need to improve



                                                                                                 and
     'product sales to create additional income                                  Subpostmasters.
                                                                  for




95   There         a suggestion              my                 to amend the timing of the Cash
             was




                                     from




                                                        team




     Management session, as they felt it could be covered much better                                                                                      site as

                                                                                                                                           on




     the classroom only had a minimal amount of "dummy"                                                                  in each stock and
                                                                                                                cash




     did not prepare some Subpostmast&s for the vast amounts of cash they would

     be dealing with. This suggestion                          not adopted by                                                        ... . .........
                                                  was




                                                                                                       senior




                                                                                                                         Managers:




,96:. The course was very much focused on product transactional knowledge with

     little focus on "how to run a Post Office branch."

97. an.my view Vie one size fits all policy ensured a consistent level of training

     delivered to all .newcomers within the business, irrespective of the type of

     branch they were ,due to work in.




                                              ;,Page 15 of 19
                                                                                                                      WITNO5380100
                                                                                                                     WITNO5380100



                                                                                                     WITN 0538/01

98. Personally, I don't feel this had any detrimental effect on Sub.postmasters ability
     to run a branch as this aspect of their role was covered..by the on-site training

     which occurred straight.after the classroom attendance.



99. Stock balancing in the classroom consisted of just 2 powerpoint slides as this

     was a practical session requiring the trainees to balance the small tills within

     the classroom. I fed into the training review that the delegates were not given

     enough information                   understand                 the acronyms and terminologies used
                                to




                                                               all




     within POL. Asa result, 2 new powerpoint                                             added to explain

                                                                          slides




                                                                                   were
      balancing terminology and also how to account for discrepancies (Gains &

     Losses). These improvements along with the provision of handouts for the

     delegates, was sufficient to overcome the Initial training shortfall.




1100. Further in-depth training for office accounting, ie transactions corrections and

      Rems, was delivered in the 2 week,on-site training

1.01. In later times, around 2012, if memory serves me correctly, as the business

              forward with its Network Reinvention Programme, the transactional
      moved




     :base for Post Offices had changed greatly: Unlike' previous years whereby
                                                                                                                 a




      $ubpostmaster was guaranteed a constant customer footfall due to the nature

      of the business, this had been eroded and the tide swung whereby they would

       need a strong                      offer to                    the costs of running a branch. The
                       retail




                                     to




                                                     support




      course.contented was changed to give a greater emphasis,to                                     new sales
                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                WITNO5380100
                                                                                                          WITNO5380100



                                                                                            WITH 0538/01.

IO2   Perso   Lily,   I felt.the emphasis
                                       axis of th e COurse, Ai.itl..ti1e business        .a.S 1..WI viv-I ad.


      become too sales orentated           and not enough          focus     was   on cash discrepancies

                                               .t ~9I                                                       o f
           .. L
        t Eli`    anc:`~   . M",, view     -
                                         {~_   "What      .r  `he.. n: _nt
                                                      _ t ~_- _     --        generating small levels

      income f,,.,.:      n
             from ~ e .:c~~,g a      av i insurance product, if :o 3es' were occurring
                                                                losses
       `           y,
      elsewhere in branch due to a lack offocus;on procedural areas                       such   as   stock


      and cash control measures". l st ress this my view and not that o f the senior

      management team who were striving to keep branches afloat by generating_

      new income streams.

103. Further feedback from my team was that Day 1 of the classroom training was

      overloaded with content, and I agreed that there was not enough time in day 1

      to welcome the delegates, make them feel comfortable and engaged before

      heading into the training content. Some transactional sessions could have been

      moved to a different day, however the training timetable was very tight for the

      full 2 weeks.




       Review of -training in December 2013



.104. There was a 1-day course that had been put together for introducing non-

      frontline POL mangers to working on the counter:as cover for emergency

      situations and was intended as.,an,operationalcontingency only, le industrial

      action. The one-day -course was not devised for Subpostmasters or their staff.




                                                 Page 17 of 19
                                                                                                  WITNO5380100
                                                                                                WITNO5380100



                                                                                  WITN 0538/01

Changes to training in 2015

:105. As more offices and new entrants began using IT at home,a review was

               undertaken to produce an online training facility for new entrants which would

               greatly reduce or even remove the necessity to attend a formal .classroom

                     The online.              was designed to be used by Subpostmasters before
     'event.




                                   training




               attending a shortened course, with the added benefit they could delegate to.

               any staff they wanted to train, something that was not available before..



                Bugs, errors and defects

106:: 1 always operated on the statement received.from. Fujitsu that Horizon was"the

               2nd most secure system in Europe". I personally was never aware of any issue

               or problems with Horizon.

107. All of my dealings with Subpostmasters and staff were.:based on Horizon being

               a robust accounting system.

108. In, response to a direct question regarding :a problem raised in PinlCL,-I have no

               recollection :of this specific event, however I -vaguely. remember the Horizon

               system would not "rollover" from one. BP.or T•P to the next one if there were

               outstanding transfers between Stock Units (SU.). The reason being if a transfer

               had not been accepted, the incoming SU.would be showing a false cash on.
                                                                                                                                W I TN05380100
                                                                                                                         WITNO5380100



                                                                                                       ` TN 0538/01

Resolution of dEsputes


111.                     with   ..tea; -~         % .
                                            disputes       r               W;;;, a
                                                                    Post i Office    and
                                                                                             C~ ~hrpn
                                                                                           • .^W  Va>s
                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                       tmaste
                                                                                                        .: :.,.; s..
                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                       w.v i ;s




       regarding any alleged shortfalis, this was undertaken by the Contracts Advisor




STATEMENT OF TRUTH

I believe the content of this statement to be true

Signed. ... l
                  GRO
Dated
                            . . .... . . . .. .. .. . ..




                                                    Page 19.of-19
