                                                                                         WITNO4190100
                                                                                    WITNO4190100




                                                   Witness Name: Terence Paul A
                                                        Statement No: WITN0419 01
                                                           Exhibits: WITN0419 0111-
                                                                     WITNO419_01/7
                                                           Dated: 13 September 2022




                        POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY




            FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF TERENCE PAUL AUSTIN




     THIS STATEMENT IS PROVIDED IN RESPONSE TO THE RULE 9 REQUEST

 NUMBER 1 DATED 7 JUNE 2022 FOR INFORMATION PURSUANT TO PHASE 2

     OF INQUIRY: HORIZON IT SYSTEM: PROCUREMENT, DESIGN, PILOT, ROLL

                             OUT AND MODIFICATIONS.




1, Mr Terence Paul Austin, will say as follows:

INTRODUCTION


I.      I have over 40 years' experience in the Information Technology sector leading

        large complex government and commercial programmes from the business

        requirements definition stage through to system implementation. in addition to

        ICL Pathway, projects included the UK Customer Billing system for Severn

        Trent Water, Branch Network System for Eurodollar/TSB, Corporation Tax and


                                         1 of 20
                                                                                                                                                                                         WITNO4190100
                                                                                                                                                                                 WITNO4190100




     refresh programme for the National Trust.


BACKGROUND


2.   1 joined the Fujitsu ICL bid team as Programme Director in 1995 to help

     formulate the proposal to deliver an automated benefit card system and

     electronic point of sale system for DSS/POCL. Following successful selection,

     I became responsible for delivering the IT Pathway Solution. As the system

     grew in size and complexity, I was appointed Systems Director as part of an

     organisational restructure. I left the programme in October 2000 shortly after

     rollout had commenced, because my experience and knowledge were no

     longer required following formal POCL acceptance of the system. The

     programme moved naturally from what was primarily a development

     organisational structure into a structure focusing on service management and

     operational support which required different managerial and technical

     expertise,

                55                 y J4          .~e~
3.   Y i¢~   G~fi96?.3     e~~     W&~J~Eiw 4w 4~Y~~.:   „✓. r   ~.   k '.r ,».   ~.   a.+   ,..~Y W4   ~,.<   ,w   1d[.•6 ti`   V~V`~ ' .   .n,6   x4~   ,   .<< „✓`+./l   . ..~;.%~.




                                      the paper                                        ethods of paying social se q., ,Lyg benefits

     frn.. " s           ` ~P'14          s"'   o n tic                                7 yrnent card and for y"°r                                         the'w,s   crwr^ n


     a    F P nat        a:ile national r1 :`tiii rk b"r'                              ost offices and introduce, a. ? :.1 , . tf


               e system (EPOSS). For ICL Pathway, the objective was to be ai

             BSS/PO('1... PFI contract and to deliver it successfully. In parallei,                                                                                           tf,

     cx                          c;ld also explore all opportunities to sell the solution to

     offices worldwide.




                                                                                  2 of 20
                                                                                                WITNO4190100
                                                                                           WITNO4190100




PROCUREMENT


4.   My involvement in the procurement process was to evaluate the system

     requirements specified in the Invitation to Tender document (ITT) and

     determine the iiCL resources necessary and third parties needed to deliver the

     solution in the timescales defined.


5.   The delivery schedule for the solution was extremely ambitious and, in




                                                                                     my
     opinion, could only be achieved by implementing what was known in the

     industry         a 'turn-key' or 'off the shelf system. The time available from award
                 as




      of contract in May 1996 to the first implementation was only 18 weeks and

     only 10 months to carry out a fully functional live trial. This was only possible

     by integrating several existing products and interfacing with existing DSS and

     POCL systems. There was limited scope for any bespoke software

     development. With the benefit of hindsight, DSSIPOCL seemed blissfully

     unaware that this was a consequence of the timescales set and gave the

     impression that they expected to specify their detailed requirements during

     the months running up to the live trial in March 1997.


6.   It         essential         ICL Pathway to have a baseline functional specification of
          was




                            for




     their solution which had been demonstrated during the latter stages of the

     procurement activity. This was produced and                clause in the contract stated
                                                            a




     that this document must be signed off by DSS/POCL within 30 days of the

     award of contract. In addition, iCL Pathway assumed that the 289

     `agreements to agree' would be resolved within 3 months as these included

     many essential non-functional requirements such as system security.




                                               3 of20
                                                                                             WITNO4190100
                                                                                        WITNO4190100




     However, neither of these critical milestones were achieved placing the

      project at significant risk of failure.


7.   A comprehensive and detailed history of the procurement process is described

      in the report on 'The Cancellation of the Benefits Payment Card project'

      produced by the National Audit Office published 18 August 2000 RLIT0000001

     [WITN0419_01/11. All the relevant people in ICL Pathway, the DSS and POOL

      contributed to this report which in my opinion was accurate and well researched

     although it didn't address the obvious tensions between the DSS and POCL

      regarding the continuing use of the post office network to pay benefits. The DSS

     were trying to reduce the costs associated with benefit payments whereas

      POCL, an expensive option, needed the benefit business to sustain their

      network. The NAO concluded that there were various complex factors which

      contributed to the card project's failure and that Government should heed the

      lessons to be learnt.


INITIAL GO LIVE (IGL)


8.    It is important to understand that the first two versions of the solution to be made

     available i.e. IGL & IGL2 were predominantly releases for the Benefit Payment

     Card aspects of the system and involved 10 Post Offices in Stroud paying Child

      Benefit only, this was subsequently increased to 205 offices in the north and

     south of the country. I do recall that during this time, very few scft are defects

      were identified, and we were surprised that the project was subsequently

      cancelled. There was very little functionality introduced for POCL consequently

      it has limited relevance to `The Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry'. In fact, when the

      DSS made the decision to cancel the project in May 1999, all the relevant card


                                           4 of 20
                                                                                                      WITNO4190100
                                                                                                 WITNO4190100




         software was removed from the ICL Pathway solution. The POCL Horizon

         project only came into existence in the spring of 1998 and a new agreement

         with Post Office Counters Ltd signed in July 1999. Essentially, the first half of

         the development focused on the DSS requirement and the second half on the

         POCL functionality.


9.       It became clear during the weeks following award of contract that the

         DSS/POCL required significant additional functionality which had not been

         previously specified. This meant that in many instances manual 'workarounds'

         were introduced rather than enhance the software because there was

         insufficient time available. It also became clear that the DSS CAPS interface

         was immature and poorly defined and subject to constant change. A CAPS

         Interface definition document should have made available shortly after award

         of contract, but this did not happen. There was no doubt that the DSS were

         the dominant partner, and the benefit payment functionality took precedence

         over the POCL EPOSS functionality which would be developed in parallel over

         a longer period using an iterative development approach. On the plus side,

         the initial go live system was delivered on time, and it worked well, containing

         very few software defects. In addition, the installation processes and the

         training for post masters was well received albeit it was on a much smaller

         scale than the forthcoming national rollout.


     .    r ~. , lassons learnt from IGL frog,          ) ' L Pathway perspective are described in

               -n- nI . $. $00058278 E     ; 4..,s      9J 01 /2]. Other issues which came to light

                                      single DSS/POOL business requirements authority,

                             nftl process or effective management of system interfaces.



                                                     5 of 20
                                                                                                               WITNO4190100
                                                                                                          WITNO4190100




      " e Programme Delivery : : thority (PDA) set up by DSS/POCL was unwieldy,

              tive                          was haphazard and inconsistent. It was also

                                           -nship and transparency                      tween the parties
                           .          a    r ~     -. . . #   .,, . ItUdewaS r~r'. _. .#`:'~   ~nCretiVe and


                                                                     succes                      much more

      difficult      l   7 .;   . s , _`   __:`.                      ns behind thi behaviour. This
                                   f withdrew from the programme following
      conduct continueµ! a.~.1xl D

      `cancellation'. As        e progresseu in the early days it became apparent that

      neither DSS or POCL were ready managerially or technically and their systems

      were not prepared for the solution they had procured, in particular the OSS

      CAPS system.


SUBSEQUENT RELEASES AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT


11.   Following on from IGL, I believe that two more releases were planned known

      as NR1, NR2 but after the DSS cancellation and the birth of Horizon these were

      renamed CSR and CSR+. There may have been other interim releases, but I

      would need to inspect the high level plans to be certain.


12.   The process for developing the ICL pathway element of the Horizon system

      was described in the Software Engineering Process document supported by

      various stage process documents such as design, development and testing

      which have not been made available to me. However, in my opinion these

      represented the very best in the industry and conformed to international

      standards at the time. It should also be noted that POCL approved all the

      software functional specifications and test plans and in many instances also

      witnessed the actual tests and the results achieved. The POCL personal

                                             Sot 20
                                                                                            WITNO4190100
                                                                                        WITNO4190100




      involved in the approval process would depe                    wledge ane, s! l

      required and the individual nominated would u iisteu i s tape rr ie   lit e~~i -m r

      each document. Once approved a document would be maintained under formal

      change control. Tracking the original customer requirements through the

      design, devei d    , ° -,E testing and acceptance stages, was the most thorough

      and detailed pfi        f 4    - i had ever seen.


13.   A comprehensive and sophisticated process for managing change to the

      solution was agreed by all parties whether the change was to the contract,

      approved documentation, software or baseline delivery plans. This was a

      critically important process because it enabled the programme to quantify the

      impact that change was having on the solution and the delivery schedule. A

      change could be instigated by the DSS, POCL or ICL Pathway (CCN, CR

      and/or CP) and would only be implemented if the implications were fully

      understood, costed and approved by the appropriate Change Control Board.

      ICL Pathway would assess the request in detail and estimate the costs and

      timescales involved. This would then be passed back to DSS/POOL who

      would decide whether to authorise the work. If approved, ICL Pathway would

      amend the various specifications and other supporting documents, amend

      and test the code and make it available in a future release. In some cases,

      the cost in manpower would be considerable. There was a fast-track

      procedure for urgent and critical change but even taking the time to evaluate

      a change could divert valuable resources. Coping with the number of

      essential software changes requested became a major issue for the

      programme in the latter stages but I was not party to how change was

      managed within the POCL domain.

                                        7 of 20
                                                                                                                          WITN04190100
                                                                                                                      WITNO4190100




DELAY


14.   There were many technical challenges en               „'                      the       J       ,w         e




                                                                      .




                                                                          .,




                                                                               ::
                                                                 w,
      the solution, but this was not unexpected with a system of this magnitude.

      These issues would be discussed, and resolutions agreed at the numerous
      architectural, design, performance, scalability and development forums and/or

      meetings created for this purpose. I cannot be specific without reviewing the

      various progress reports and issues log available at the time. What I can be

      certain of is that that the solution grew in size and complexity exponentially from

      that defined in the Invitation to Tender (ITT) and this presented                           a              major

      challenge for ICL Pathway and its ability to maintain the delivery schedule.


15.   System interfaces were well known in the industry for creating difficulties

      especially across ownership boundaries and Horizon was no exception e.g.

      Pathway to DSS systems and Pathway to POCL systems were certainly

      problematic. There is a view that the problems encountered with the ICL

      Pathway to CAPS interface were the main reason why the card project was

      cancelled.


16.   The ICL Pathway Architecture comprised of four layers and the middleware

      which linked the front-end Microsoft based systems with the back-end Oracle
      based systems proved troublesome due to their differing architectural

      principles. This was a bit like trying to interface between Apple's iOS and an

      Android device in today's world.. Additionally, providing acceptable desktop

      response times, managing the huge transaction volumes predicted, delivering

      state of the art'back                , ,`, capabilities, satisfying grcu, ci.,-breaking

            1iy €é u.. rnhnt   end àilld     ,t      n4.9nieroI.,4    h r Iw         ,. ': :fsa   z        #f8       to


                                           8 of 20
                                                                                                        WITN04190100
                                                                                                    WITN04190100




       handle the                   of testing r




                    variety
       which had to be overcome. Gf..

       office staff required to be trained              'e incredibi

       developing the ability to remotely install new software updates on the tills in

       the post offices overnight.. Although the latter is commonplace nowadays, it

       was cutting edge technology at the time.


`17.   Inevitably, slippages and delays did occur, and it was not always evident who

       was responsible. There were lots of interdependencies and opportunities to

       misunderstand a requirement which would require rework or certain software

       functions would be underestimated. The ICL Pathway plan comprised of

       thousands of activities linked via many levels of detail, so slippage on one

       task wouldn't necessarily mean slippage to the overall schedule unless it was

       on the critical path. Whatever the case, actions would be taken to recover the

       situation, or to utilise the contingency built in at various points within the

       plan.


18.    Having said that, I do not believe that ICE Pathway management was made

       aware of the extent of the problems that DSS and POCL were experiencing

       with their obligations and their IT systems throughout the development

       process.


19.    1 cannot remember whether the key milestones (e.g.start of live trial) for CSR

       or CSR+ were delayed, to determine that I would have                       review the progress
                                                                             to




       reports and delivery plan updates. The documents made available to the

       Inquiry are only             snapshot        time and it is necessary to follow an issue
                                               in
                                a




       through to             closure to reach anymeaningful conclusion.
                       its




                                                      9 of 20
                                                                                                 WITNO4190100
                                                                                        WITNO4190100




20.   There was a 'Risk Management Plan' FUJ00077883 [WITN0419_01/31,                   r Vim,


      was reviewed and updated on a regular basis. This was an attempt to ps ~ ait

      what events could happen during the course of development, estimate the cost,

      probability of it occurring and identify the mitigation actions. I do recall one such

      event which was caused by the Intel Corporation updating its chip technology

      (firmware) before all the desktop tills had been manufactured and delivered by

      Fujitsu. If this had not been addressed successfully, it would have resulted in a

      complete retest of the ICL Pathway solution and significant delays would have

      resulted. Fujitsu managed to obtain enough of the original chips worldwide and

      kept their production lines open until the required number of desktops had been

      delivered, a remarkable achievement.


21.   The impact of any delay would depend on the party involved. For DSS it may

      undermine their Business Case as described in 'The Cancellation of the

      Benefits Payment Card project' produced by the National Audit Office, referred

      to earlier in this statement: RLIT0000001 [WITN0419_01/1]. For ICL Pathway

      it would be increased cost in terms of additional resources either manpower or

      hardware equipment resulting in a worsening of their business case. For POCL,

      it would increase the time taken to automate their post office network.


ROLL OUT AND DEFECTS/SYSTEM ROBUSTNESS


22,   /     Systems Director I was aware of all the bugs, errors and defects within the

                     but only to the extent of ensuring that they were identified and

               ented at the earliest opportunity and that the highest priority issues were

      c~alysed and fixed as quickly as possible. Through this process, I did become

          vv, r cf   :w t/ issto€e with the   rly    r i ns of the EPOSS product which


                                          10 of 20
                                                                                               WITN04190100
                                                                                         WITN04190100




      was created using a Rapid Application Development to

      agile methodology was in its early stages of development

      adopted when             z wre was no detailed business requirement specificat

      the application, hn,,ri t be delivered quickly via a series of iterations with the end

      Gw.j-:. r. Due to         imaturity it was rarely used for large systems where the

      requireme                          ecifications had to be signed off before any work

      Cn r        ~_      ~?      fire known as the `waterfall approach'. The supporting

      dry ►.~►   ► pia ► would instead be produced       as the application developed. The
      absence of a detailed business requirement specification for EPOSS meant that

      this was the only way this functionality could be produced. A consequence of

      the RAD approach was that the design specifications had to be `reverse

      engineered' from the code. Not ideal, but if done properly there should be no

      lasting implications.


23.   In July 1997 the ICL Pathway Chief Architect and senior members of Escher,

      one of our partners who were experts in Microsoft messaging technology,

      concluded that the EPOSS application was not sufficiently robust and should

      be re-engineered by Escher to utilise the features offered by the Riposte

      software. Following the return of the product in November 1997, more functional

      changes were implemented, and a large number of fixes applied, but certain

      aspects of the software still appeared to be unstable. Consequently, in the

      autumn 1998 I asked for a Task Force to be created to establish the nature and

      cause of the outstanding defects and to fix them..


24,   The Task Force comprised of seasoned IT professionals in multiple disciplines

      and some members of the team were concerned that the code may have



                                             11of 20
                                                                                                    WITN04190100
                                                                                               WITN04190100




      decayed due to the scale of the changes ti , I ad been applied since thr;

      product had re               Fs h r,           ~s     ~ . : lotbelieve this to be the case.

      The Task F Ir     aid rift   chic      I_   w ".u'     i   ;,¢. ,F r      « ,.r''e er


      near zero for a variety of reasons, but it Cyr"1


      the root causes of the isst

      related.


25.   A correction action plan was then devised which adopted the recommendations

      which emerged from the Task Force report FUJO0080690 [WITNO419- 01/4,.

      introduced more intensive testing at all levels and changes in personnel to

      improve the skill and competence of those involved in the corrective action

      activities


26.   An internal audit report published in September 1999 recommended that we

      consider a re-design and re-write of EPOSS and this was reiterated in a

      Development       Audit      published      in       October       1999   FUJO0079782

      [WITN0419_0115], the reasons given was the level of outstanding issues was

      still too high. This option was debated at length by senior members of the lCL

      Pathway management and technical teams and the outcome was that we

      should embark upon a major exercise to target the specific areas known to be

      source of most (circa 80%) of the issues identified which were error handling

      and printing. If this approach was unsuccessful, then a rewrite would be the

      only option available. However, the product did become stable, and the number

      of outstanding defects did fall within the levels defined in the acceptance

      criteria.




                                          12 of 20
                                                                                                                WITNO4190100
                                                                                                           WITNO4190100




                be o_. . ...i    ,r. .              ,.w. .x . _ vial quality cor..   1. a,r    sw„=, unicated

            CL but they` ',v,iai-e        vv'a.      ci' th    "►umber of Software

      do,,}:ected, fixed and those still outstanding at p                  ,icular point in time. i

          mass orb          r Lance inci f,rn t "              F. .,

                                e 1999.They

        3ed midway f x i _,, -,, . <5             ., ,    ,::rnent and. .:piped to ad ,        ,wrn.


28.   Subsequently, the functional and design specifications, the test plans and

      results of the testing were subsequently signed off by POCL and formal

      acceptance was achieved following successful completion of the operational

      live trial in the spring 2000_


29.   All the errors and defects identified in the ICL Pathway solution, their severity

      and their status were documented at every stage of the testing and release

      processes. It was accepted in the industry that the number of system defects

      would be commensurate with number of lines of code and their complexity. To

      that end, ICL Pathway conducted program specification and code reviews

      followed by rigorous and comprehensive testing. This comprised of unit and

      link testing, system testing, technical and non-functional testiii , integratioii
       nd end to end testing
                                         (E2E), model office testing (MOT' w                    ,earsals an#,
          vm.gt, live tries lam, ... ' these were
                                                  designed to progressi'i l" sift                 er

                                                              on was robust          .; ,.>a

                                                              rn raised within the i '_        ~~ ~. solution

             be ._ nzs „.tcd by the technical teams, d                       ussed at the a oropriate

         nagement levels any - f                          ..1 accordingly.




                                                         13 of 20
                                                                                         WITNO4190100
                                                                                    WITNO4190100




30.   Occasionally, the number/type of outstanding incidents

      cause for concern. One such view is documented Err ~' LsO'2si29

      [W1TN0419_01/6j and is related to the interface with the POCL TIP system, but

      this simply reflects an uneasiness shown by those present that they may not all

      be satisfactorily resolved in the timescales required. If that had been the

      outcome, the system would not have achieved acceptance' and resulted in the

      inevitable delay to the start of rollout.


31.   A decision to `workaround' an issue would be made if a defect could not be

      fixed in time for the next scheduled software release. However, if it was not

      possible or acceptable to develop a manual workaround then the release

      would be delayed until the software could be fixed and the outcome verified.

      All `workarounds' were agreed with POCL and fully documented at each

      release.


32    1 was not aware of the bugs, errors and defects in the POCL systems, or the

      processes adopted to manage them unless it was an interface issue with a

      ICL Pathway module. On the other hand, POCL were made aware of every

      defect in the ICL Pathway solution and its progress through to resolution.


33.   Turning to rollout phase, Mike Coombs was responsible for the (CL/Fujitsu

      elements of the actual rollout, I was responsible for developing the software to

      support the process and I left many months before rollout was completed.

      However, the rollout was technically and logistically extremely challenging, over

      19,000 locations were involved and over 30,000 desktop terminals (Tills) to be

      installed at a rate of approx. 300 post offices per week. It demanded meticulous

      planning and preparation, rapid escalation of incidents and their resolution and


                                          14 of 20
                                                                                                                                           WITNO4190100
                                                                                                                                     WITNO4190100




      purpose-built                         satisfy this requirem et . "' ' ,, ..:t      y   ;   U                               "




                                       to
                            software
      was defined in the contract and as far as I can remember this never oh' ' x r                                                    I

      was not privy to the factors which influenced the speed

      understand from the NAO report RLIT0000001 [WITN!041901/1] that it was

      driven by the DSS Business case for card payments.


34.   The rollout of Horizon commenced once formal acceptance of the ICL Pathway

                       had been achieved. To do this it was necessary to provide evidence
      system




      that every functional requirement had been met, that all the necessary system

      documentation had been produced, that every priority defect                                           had                 been

           resolved or an acceptable `workaround' was available and that all the system

       engineering processes were documented and had achieved ISO 9001

      standards confirmed by independent verification and certification.                                                    POCL's

       success/acceptance criteria was defined in POL00029137 [WITN0419_01/4]

               plus later revisions, and had these not been met at the time, rollout would not

               have commenced.


35.            POCL were certainly aware of all the outstanding issues in the ICL Pathway

           solution, but I cannot confirm that they were aware of all the issues                                                     the
                                                                                                                  within




               Horizon system. Any concerns raise by POCL would have been addressed and

               resolved, had this not been the r , e,              t    o P    .-   gave been delayed until they

               were. A Release Notice and Kr                                   ster (KPR) would have been

               published for the ICL Pathway sup


36.            1 was not aware of any political pt           Ja    £, 1- )   mence roll-out                                it did, this
                                                                                                     when




                 s determined simply by the readiness a d robustness of the software. As

                      I cam, P call that dhr1nn then              ; . ,..t.. r 1 left the programme, it was


                                                             20
                                                                                         WITNO4190100
                                                                                     WITNO4190100




      considered a huge success. That is not to s•

      these were dealt with promptly and effecta° iy ~c na i r iiou.. to oriiir ue at

      the required pace.


37.   This was one of the largest IT systems in the world and ICL Pathway was set

      up by Fujitsu/ICL to specifically manage, develop, integrate and rollout their

      solution. In addition to using their own resources they recruited specialist

      expertise where necessary.


38.   Throughout the programme (CL and Fujitsu senior management were

      appraised of progress, risks and issues on a regular basis. In addition, all the

      partners met monthly at the Suppliers Forum to review progress,

      dependencies and issues, each company represented by their Managing

      Director or Chief Executive. Any areas of concern would be evaluated by the

      various technical teams, discussed at the appropriate management levels and

      addressed by devising a detailed corrective action plan followed by close

      monitoring of the outcome.


39.   In the months prior to rollout, Fujitsu personnel came over from Japan to help

      with testing and defect management and reported daily back to senior Fujitsu

      personnel.


40.   Resourcing for ICL Pathway was a constant issue due to the large staffing

      numbers and skills required but where shortfalls did arise every effort was

      made, including long hours and weekends, to ensure that the critical

      milestones were still achieved. In addition, the manpower was a mixture of

      permanent and contract staff which enabled the team to respond quickly to

      demands. However, there were occasions where specific activities were

                                       16 of 20
                                                                                                       WITN04190100
                                                                                                  WITNO4190100




      adversely impacted by unexpected resignations
      marketplace causing the lower-level tasks to be replanned.


41.   The talent and expertise in most disciplines in the very large ICL Pathway team

      was exceptional and, in some instances, the best available in the IT industry.

      Where specific knowledge and skill was required, lCL Pathway joined forces

      with companies (partners) who were experts in their field. Oracle UK for

      database systems, Microsoft for Windows based expertise, Energis for network

      communications, CISCO, Fujitsu, EMC, Sequent/IBM for Hardware, Tivoli/IBM

      for systems management and Wfpic for post office surveys and preparations.


42.   The company adopted best IT practice, processes, products and tools for

      reporting, planning and progress monitoring, to manage risk, to control change,

      for configuration management, to assist testing and introduced a transparent

      internal audit process to enhance the quality control and assurance procedures.

      I have worked with other major IT integrators such as FIRS, BT, IBM and CSC

      and in my opinion, they were no more equipped to take on a programme of this

      magnitude.


43.   1                     to         whether the oversight from Government or senior POCL
          am




               not




                     able




                                 say




      management was sufficient                    a system of this enormity and significance, but
                                             for




      I can say that the level of POCL intervention                  assurance activities in the ICL
                                                               and




      Pathway processes and deliverables was considerable in the second half of the

      programme as shown in an early version of the Horizon Plan for Acceptance

      P0L00029137 [W1TN0419-01/4j.




                                                   17 of 20
                                                                                                     WITNO4190100
                                                                                                    WITNO4190100




GENERAL


44.   Over 20 years have elapsed since I left the programme, so it'is difficult to recall

      aspects that Fujitsu/ 1CL may                    done differently. In hindsight, taking on a




                                            have
        project without an agreed functional requirement, with such a large number of

        `agreements to agree' and with so many customer contractual obligations to

      fulfil (CARs       Contracting Authorities Responsibilities), was high risk. The level

       of `requirements creep' was substantial, causing ICL Pathway to be reactive,

       constantly recruiting more resources and continually evolving. The final

      solution which achieved customer acceptance bore little resemblance to the

       original requirement defined in the Invitation to Tender (ITT).


45.         I do believe that there was an overriding sense of achievement and pride

      amongst the majority of those who were involved in the ICL Pathway solution.

        It required great deal of technical expertise, commitment, determination and

      sheer hard work to overcome all the obstacles and challenges that were faced

       by the team but at no stage did I feel that we would deliver a poor quality

        product. All the known defects were listed at the start of rollout and these were

      scheduled to be fixed            later releases. The system architecture and complex
                                  in




      functionality was impressive and would bear scrutiny by any external

      organisation at the time. The acceptance process was both
                                                                             comprehensive




                                                                                              and




      demanding and the quantity and quality of the system documentation produced

                exceptional.
      was




                                                   18 of 20
                                                                 WITN04190100
                                                                WITNO4190100




Statement of Truth


ibe.ieve ff   content of this sta.,- m,.. t to   .J
                                                      -. .,:'




Si9ned:          GRO
Dated:               q?             - --




                                            19 of 20
                                                                                                                                    WITNO4190100
                                                                                                                                WITNO4190100




Index to First Witness Statement of Terence Paul Austin


 No.    Exhibit Number                      Document                     Ccntrof Number                      URN
                                          I Description

1       WITNO419. 01/1                        National Audit             RLIT0000001                         RLITO000001
                                              Office Report -
                                              The Cancellation
                                              of the Benefits
                                              Card Project
                                                                                       i
 2      WITNO419 01/2                         Initial Go Live            P iMQOO64449F ` FUJO0058278
                                              Lessons Learnt
                                              report

 3      VV1TN04.i9 01/3                       Risk Register              P01NQ0067471F FU1O.O                                   3
                                              (May 1998 - April
                                              2000)

 4      '.JVIT '0 10 0~/4                 ° r?e ,u                             NC JOC               C .Y     ,      "000'0090


              r           ~,a                 C          p               fl•fl1 ~o-                 -3F                   rr,
 5       . , e . r   , J M . i7     !d    g    "„a 4..       d d ' .a
                                                             r,..s;        . 5 ~ ~ ~,. .. w   ~.~ .f ~.+ a       =13.;O
                                                                                                                    .,      7782

                                                   k'Pment
                                                     4
                                                      per}


                                              Audit 1

 6      WITNO419 01/6                         Memo from                  POL-0024911                         POL00028429
                                              Andrew
                                              Simpkins,
                                              Horizon Release
                                              Management re
                                              Horizon Testing
                                              & Programme
                                              Plan -- Current
                                              Status

 7      WlTN041                   O'i/7       Horizon Plan for           POL-0025619                         POL00029137
                                              Acceptance
                                              During the 1CL
                                              Pathway
                                              Operational Trial
                                              (Version 2)




                                                                20of20
