WITNESS: HUGHIE NOEL THOMAS

STATEMENT NO: WITNO162_02

EXHIBIT: WITNO162_02/2

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

EXHIBIT 2

The following documentation comprises the exhibit referenced as exhibit
WITN0162_02/2 in the witness statement of Mr Hughie Noel Thomas referenced

WITNO162_02.
Former postmistress Jo Hamiton: Committed £36,000 fraud but was saved
from prison thanks to villagers’ support

A postmistress who admitted a £36,000 fraud has walked free from court after
villagers rallied round to save her from

prison.
in an extraordinary show of support, they raised £9,000 to help pay back the
missing cash after Jo Hamilton staged a village meeting to try to explain her

actions.
Hamitton, 51, blamed the fraud on the fact that she “dint have a clue” about
using the post office's computer system.
relatives and friends from the north Hampshire village of South
Warnborough packed into the public gallery at Winchester Crown Court as she
pleaded guilty to 14 counts of false accounting.

. Personal references from nearly everyone who lives in the picturesque village
were handed to Judge Patrick Hooton, and the parish priest, the Rev Jane
Leese spoke in Hamilton's defence.

‘said: "She loves serving the people of our community. in many ways, | feel

village than | am.”

that when Hamilton took over the post office
difficutt to get to grips with the computerised
2005 revealed a shortfall of £36,644.89.

that despite her intial insistence that she had not taken the
had now accepted acting dishonestly.

Customers and friends raised £9,000 to help repay the cash lost from the South

Warnborough post office where Jo Hamilton was postmistress

Anita Saran, defending, said Hamilton “didn't have a clue what she was doing”

with the computerised system.

Despite trying to get help from the Post Office, she let it get on top of her. “My

client was taking money to try to balance the books, but it just wasn't

balancing.”

When Judge Hooton asked where the cash had gone, Miss Saran said the

postmistress could not answer.

She said Hamilton had not spent it on luxuries. She still lived in the house she

always had with her husband and her parents, and continued to work in the

village shop.

Saran said Hamilton explained what had happened to her colleagues,
and customers at a meeting in the village.

added: “None of them could believe what was happening, but they agreed

by her.”

the help of the villagers’ donations, Hamilton has now fully repaid the

f which Miss Saran said had left her in severe financial difficulties.

Hooton ordered her to comply with a community order, with a

v requirement of 12 y

hearing, Hamilton said: “I have been overwhelmed by the support of

in the village.

believe it. | was expecting to go to prison. | had packed a bag and
Royal Mail Group said Hamilton's contract was terminated in

; are in a unique position of trust and it is always
that trust is breached.”
