                                                                                          WI TNO3660200
                                                                                      WI TN03660200




                                                          Witness Name: Alison Clark
                                                      Statement No.: WITN 03660200
                                                                  Dated: 1605/2023


                       THE POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY



Second Witness Statement of Alison Clark in the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry




I, ALISON CLARK, of I Future Walk, Chesterfield S49 1PF, SAY AS FOLLOWS:

1.    My name is Alison Clark. I have been employed by Post Office Limited ("POL")

      since 2000.

2.    I am the same Alison Clark who provided a witness statement to the Inquiry in

      draft on 8 February 2022 and then subsequently in signed final form on 21 July

      2022, in which I provided to the Inquiry the same or similar information that POL

      previously provided to the Inquiry at certain "teach-in" sessions between April

      and June 2021.

3.    Except where I indicate to the contrary, the facts and matters contained in this

      witness statement are within my own knowledge. Where any information is not

      within my personal knowledge, I have identified the source of my information or

      the basis for my belief. The facts in this witness statement are true to the best

      of my knowledge and belief.

4.    In this statement I use the term "Postmaster" broadly to refer to those people

      or entities that are responsible for operating post offices (but excluding those

      individuals employed by POL), rather than with any formal definition in mind. I

      use the terms "Postmaster" and "Subpostmaster" interchangeably given their


11/80453178_1                                                                        1
                                                                                        WI TNO3660200
                                                                                   WI TN03660200




       common usage. Nothing in this statement is intended to detract or differ from

       any definition adopted by POL. I refer in this statement to "Postmasters"

       interactions with the Network Business Support Centre ("NBSC"), although I

       note that it was also common for members of staff within a branch to place a

       call to the NBSC. Calls by staff would be handled in the same way as calls by

       Postmasters and as such I don't make any distinction in this statement between

      Postmasters and branch staff and commonly refer, for simplicity, to these

      interactions being with "Postmasters".

5.    This witness statement has been prepared in response to the request made by

      the Horizon IT Inquiry (the "Inquiry") pursuant to Rule 9 of the Inquiry Rules

      2006, dated 3 January 2023 (the "Rule 9 Request"). In this witness statement,

      I address each of the questions set out in the Rule 9 Request, including my

      career background at POL and my knowledge and involvement in the NBSC.


DEFINED TERMS

6.    In this statement, I have used a number of acronyms and defined terms. I have

      set out a definition of each, as I have introduced them. However, for

      convenience, I also set out an explanation of what I mean by each of these

      acronyms and definitions below:

       Knowledge           A platform on which the call scripts are hosted for
       Base                access by NBSC staff
       Horizon             The Horizon IT System
       Inquiry             The Horizon IT Inquiry
       NBSC                Network Business Support Centre (which later
                           became the Branch Support Centre)
       POL                 Post Office Limited




11/80453178_1                                                                      2
                                                                                         WI TNO3660200
                                                                                     WI TN03660200




       Rule 9 Request      The Inquiry's request pursuant to Rule 9 of the Inquiry
                           Rules 2006, dated 3 January 2022

BACKGROUND

1.     Please set out your professional background, including summaries of any

      roles you had at the Post Office or ICL Pathway/Fujitsu.

7.    I have been asked to set out my professional background. I graduated from

      school in 1996, after which I worked in a contact centre before moving to

      Australia in 1999. In late 1999, 1 came back to the UK, prior to commencing my

      employment at POL in 2000.

8.    In 2000, I joined POL as a Service Support Advisor within the NBSC. My

      responsibilities were handling calls from branches as a Tier 2 advisor. At that

      time, there was a two-tier system within the NBSC. As I recall, Tier I advisors

      were the first port of call for Postmasters who had questions. In relation to

      Horizon, this included questions about how to use Horizon's functionality to

      perform tasks in branch, including how to record transactions and do

      accounting tasks. More technical hardware/software questions were directed to

      the Horizon System Helpdesk (later called the Horizon Service Desk). This was

      independent of POL and was run/managed, I recall, by Fujitsu. I describe the

      different functions of, and the interaction between, the NBSC and the Horizon

      System Helpdesk further below.

9.    The Tier 1 team at the NBSC would listen to the caller's issues, ask questions

      to understand the exact problem, and then try to find answers to assist from a

      series of scripts on the Knowledge Base. Tier 2 advisors handled calls from

      branches that were escalated from Tier 1 advisors where there was no scripted

      response available or the question could not be answered by a scripted



11/80453178_1                                                                        3
                                                                                            WI TN03660200
                                                                                       WI TN03660200




       response (for example, if it was too complex or unusual). My role as a Tier 2

       advisor was to speak to the Postmaster to understand this more complex

       question (including the issue that was really at the nub of the call), record that

       question on the case management system and seek appropriate ways to find

      resolutions, including by speaking with the various relevant Team Manager

      within the NBSC. My responsibilities changed from handling calls to overseeing

      the performance of the Service Support Advisors who handled calls. I recall that

      certain complex calls were escalated to me from time to time. All of these calls

      would have been handled by either a Tier I or a Tier 2 Service Support Advisor

      in the first instance.

10.   As noted in paragraph 8 above, when I first joined POL in 2000, the NBSC had

      a two-tier system. The Tier I operation was run by the Royal Mail Group

      ("RMG") and the Tier 2 operation was run by POL. However, in 2005, the whole

      operation of the NBSC was outsourced to RMG. Therefore, my job title changed

      to Team Manager of Royal Mail Customer Services. Despite this change in job

      title, my role, responsibilities and day-to-day function did not change.

11.   In 2005, shortly after the structure change, I left the NBSC and joined the POL

      customer contact centre as a team leader for advisors. In contrast to the NBSC,

      the customer contact centre was responsible for fielding calls received from

      customers coming into branches (rather than from the Postmasters or branch

      staff). In 2008, I accepted a secondment to a team that was responsible for

      ensuring the readiness of branches for the rollout of Horizon Next Generation

      (also known as "Horizon Online"). This is covered in more detail in paragraph

      22 below. In 2010 I returned to the Team Manager role in the NBSC.




11/80453178_1                                                                          4
                                                                                          WI TNO3660200
                                                                                     WI TN03660200




12.   Following the split out of POL into a separate legal entity from RMG in 2012,

      the operation of the NBSC moved back to POL and I continued as a Team

      Manager of the NBSC with the same responsibilities until 2017.

13.   In 2017, I moved out of the NBSC and started working as a Fraud Analyst

      Manager in the Security Unit. I was responsible for managing a team of analysts

      who looked at transactional data to identify anomalies and underlying root

      causes of such anomalies. Once identified, I would raise the issue and work to

      fix the underlying root cause by contacting branches to rectify these anomalies.

      This would be the case where the anomaly was caused by something that we

      had been able to identify that the branch had done wrong, for example a keying

      error or they had not followed the right process for a particular transaction. In

      this way, we gave the branch the opportunity to correct what they had done

      wrong and hopefully learn how to do it correctly in the future. If this was not

      possible, we would to initiate the decision-making process as to whether to call

      the branch or to send an auditor out to the relevant branch.

14.   Between 2019 and 2021, I held the role of Branch Analysis & Control Manager

      which entailed similar, but broader, responsibilities. I had second line

      responsibilities for the predecessor of the Branch Analysis & Control team and

      I was also responsible for the field-based audit team. My primary role was to

      bring these two teams together.

15.   In 2021, I was promoted to my current role as Head of Network Monitoring &

      Reconciliation. In this role, I also started to manage the Branch Reconciliation

      team. The Branch Reconciliation team was responsible for correcting and

      resolving various aspects of Postmasters' accounts. I also have third line

      management responsibilities for the Network Monitoring & Reconciliation team.



11/80453178_1                                                                        5
                                                                                         WI TNO3660200
                                                                                    WI TN03660200




2.    Please describe any training and/or instruction you received in relation to

      the Horizon IT project and/or working in the NBSC.

16.   When I joined as a Service Support Advisor in 2000, I recall receiving six weeks

      of formal training. During the first four weeks I had counter training, where I

      learned to use Horizon for day-to-day transactions and conduct daily

      accounting and monthly balancing procedures. Then, I had one week of training

      on how to carry out accounting processes on Horizon, and the sorts of issues

      that Postmasters and branch staff may face while using Horizon. The final week

      of training was on customer service issues and logistical matters, such as how

      to record details of calls received from branches on the case management

      system.

17.   After completing the formal training, I sat with more experienced call handlers

      for four weeks to shadow them and receive feedback on how I handled calls.

      This was standard practice at the time for new joiners within the NBSC and was

      referred to as the "nursery". There was a culture of learning from those with

      more experience, asking questions and, if you were the one with more

      experience, helping others with their queries. After four weeks, I started

      handling calls on my own without close supervision on every call. Although it

      was a steep learning curve, I believed at the time that the level of training,

      support as a new joiner, and supervision were all good.

18.   Once I fully started in the role, I attended 30-minutes to one hour training

      sessions on a weekly basis to learn about any changes that the call handlers

      should be aware of to answer questions coming from branches. At the meeting,

      the call handlers also shared common questions and trends of issues being

      raised by branches.



11/80453178_1                                                                       6
                                                                                            WI TNO3660200
                                                                                       WI TN03660200




3.    Please describe your experiences working in the NBSC, including the

      following details:

      a. Your responsibilities and any projects you were involved in;

19.   As set out in paragraph 9 above, my responsibilities as a Tier 2 Service Support

      Advisor involved answering calls from Postmasters and staff in branches that

      were referred to me in circumstances where the Tier 1 advisor was unable to

      help (because the issue was incapable of being resolved through a standard

      process set in a script, usually because it was a little unusual, a new problem

      or a little bit complex). A key part of this role was asking the right questions to

      really get to the nub of the issue that the caller was having.

20.   My role was to try to find solutions to the problems and to record the call on the

      case management system. This was a standalone system and was not

      connected to the PinICL or PEAK systems. As the problem was, by definition,

      something outside of the "usual" and couldn't be answered by reference to the

      script, it would usually require a degree of investigation work, and potentially

      discussing the problem with the relevant internal product team to help

      understand the problem and to come up with a solution. This case management

      system could produce reports which could be helpful to identify any trends in

      the sort of issues being escalated up to Tier 2.

21.   As a Team Manager in the NBSC, my day-to-day responsibilities were largely

      focussed on supervising, managing and coaching the Tier 2 advisors (being the

      job that I had been promoted from). Between 2000 and 2005, there were around

      8-10 Team Managers at the NBSC, each supervising the work of around a

      dozen Tier 2 advisors. There were similar numbers of Tier 1 advisors. To



11/80453178_1                                                                          7
                                                                                            WI TNO3660200
                                                                                       WI TN03660200




      understand how the advisors that I supervised were performing and to help

      identify areas for development and feedback, I would listen to their calls. I

      mainly did this by listening to calls that had been recorded, but I also

      occasionally would sit next to an advisor whilst they were on a call to observe

      the call live. I would then assess the advisor's performance using the marking

      system in the POL quality assurance framework, before providing feedback to,

      and discussing it with, the particular individual on a monthly basis. This

      feedback would cover both the advisor's soft skills in handling the call, but also

      would seek to identify whether there were any gaps in the advisor's knowledge.

22.   In around 2008, I was involved in a project to ensure readiness in branch for

      the rollout of Horizon Next Generation (also known as "Horizon Online"). This

      included liaising with branches to ensure that all the right equipment had arrived

      in branch and they had successfully completed all necessary training modules

      prior to the introduction of Horizon Online. I managed a team of up to 30 people

      who were required to work through a checklist with each branch of the various

      equipment and training points to complete. I understand there was also a group

      of ringfenced people within POL who were specifically dedicated to supporting

      branches with the introduction of Horizon Online. I did not work directly with this

      team and it did not form part of the NBSC.

      b. How the NBSC worked in practice in dealing with subpostmasters

         requests for support in relation to Horizon;

23.   Prior to the introduction of Horizon, advice and assistance was provided to

      Postmasters by regional helplines with dedicated regional telephone numbers.

      Following the rollout of Horizon, support to Postmasters became more

      centralised in the form of the NBSC. This meant that there was then a


11/804531781                                                                           8
                                                                                          WI TNO3660200
                                                                                      WI TN03660200




       centralised number that Postmasters and branch staff could call when they

      were experiencing issues with how to use Horizon's functionality to perform

      tasks in branch.

24.   If the Postmaster had more technical questions in relation to the Horizon

      hardware/software (including, for example, printer questions), these questions

      should be directed to the Horizon System Helpdesk (later known as the Horizon

      Service Desk). This was independent from POL and was, I recall, run/managed

      by Fujitsu at a variety of locations, including Fujitsu's Stevenage building.

25.   In 2000, when Horizon was first rolled out, questions as to how to navigate the

      Horizon system (for example, which key to press to properly record a

      transaction) were handled by Fujitsu's Horizon System Helpdesk. In the mid-

      2000s, the NBSC's remit expanded slightly to include those "navigation"

      questions and the Horizon System Helpdesk continued to focus on technical

      hardware/software questions. As I recall, there was a Horizon System

      Helpdesk/ Horizon Service Desk, focussing on the technical questions, until

      about 2016.

26.   The telephone numbers for each of the NBSC and the Horizon System

      Helpdesk were made available to Postmasters and branch staff in the Horizon

      support manual (of which they had a copy) and in the training Postmasters

      received on Horizon. The Postmasters also had guidance as to which of the

      NBSC and the Horizon System Helpdesk should be called for each type of

      issue. Despite this guidance, the NBSC would sometimes receive a call from a

      Postmaster or member of branch staff that should properly have been made to

      the Horizon System Helpdesk. This was usually resolved at the Tier 1 stage, as

      one of the outcomes from the scripts would be to transfer the caller to the


11/80453178_1                                                                         9
                                                                                        WI TNO3660200
                                                                                   WI TN03660200




      Horizon System Helpdesk. Sometimes queries from the Postmasters that

       should be resolved by the Horizon System Helpdesk were received by the

      NBSC and passed by the Tier 1 advisors to a Tier 2 advisor. If, once the Tier 2

      advisor had conducted further investigations, the Tier 2 advisor concluded that

      the Postmaster's issue was a technical hardwarelsoftware issue, they would

      transfer the call to the Horizon System Helpdesk,

27.   Postmasters and staff could also be directed to the NBSC by Retail Network

      Managers. Retail Network Managers were responsible for looking after a group

      of branches geographically and were an alternative catch-all port of call for

      issues experienced in branch. The NBSC and the Retail Network Managers

      had different remits and, in addition, the way in which Retail Network Managers

      delivered support was different to the NBSC. Whilst the NBSC was the first port

      of call for Postmasters seeking immediate assistance on a particular issue,

      Retail Network Managers could proactively check in with branches in person in

      their region. In addition, certain calls to the NBSC (in particular questions

      around the running of the branch (the NBSC did not have access to any history

      of the branch that could often prove useful) or that might have benefitted from

      an in-person visit) could be escalated to the Retail Network Managers to help

      resolve in branch, if that was deemed appropriate.

28.   When a Postmaster placed a call to the NBSC, they would first speak to a Tier

      I advisor, who provided a response, based on a standardised script of

      commonly raised issues. Often calls were resolved at the Tier 1 level as they

      frequently involved branch staff simply wanting to check that they were doing a

      basic function or process correctly. Examples of issues that could be, and

      commonly were, resolved at Tier I included Postmasters wanting to check


11/80453178_1                                                                     10
                                                                                              WI TNO3660200
                                                                                         WI TN03660200




      whether a specific form of ID could be accepted for the purposes of a passport

      "Check and Send", or whether there were certain restrictions preventing a

      particular item from being posted to a specific country. In relation to Horizon-

      based queries, an example might be where a Postmaster had input a

      transaction into Horizon but had keyed it in incorrectly. In this case, the solution

      would be to enter the Session ID number into system, and the system would

      recognise the transaction that needed to be reversed. The Tier 1 advisors could

      help with these queries.

29.   If the Tier 1 advisor could not resolve a particular issue, the call would be

      escalated to a Tier 2 advisor. Examples of issues which would typically be

      escalated to Tier 2 advisors included queries around products and services, the

      running of the business and how to carry out certain accounting functions on

      Horizon, where those queries were either not covered by the scripted response

      or the scripted response did not resolve the issue to the satisfaction of the caller.

30.   After each call, the NBSC advisor would complete a report on the case

      management system, detailing the Postmaster's question, the solution that had

      been suggested and the outcome of the call. These records would then be used

      to update the Knowledge Base, and in particular to improve the scripts available

      to Tier 1 advisors, so that more issues could be quickly resolved at the Tier I

      level and fewer calls needed to be escalated to Tier 2.

      c. Any specific requests for support or events that you consider to be

         important to the Inquiry's terms of reference;

31.   I have read, and given thought to, the Inquiry's terms of reference, as they

      appear here: https://mvw.postofficehorizoninciuir ..orq uk/publications/terms-




11/80453178_1                                                                           11
                                                                                            WI TNO3660200
                                                                                       WI TN03660200




      reference. I cannot recall any examples of specific calls, requests for support

      or other events, that I think are particularly relevant, beyond what I set out in

      this statement as a whole.

      d. The most common types of calls you received and how they were

         resolved;

32.   As I recall, I received calls on a large range of topics and most of the time there

      would be a steady inflow of calls to the NBSC on different subjects. Given the

      period of time that I worked within the NBSC (between 2000 to 2005 and then

      again from 2010 to 2017), and the amount of time that has passed since then,

      it is difficult to identify any specific trends in the nature of calls we were

      receiving. As I explained above, we met on a weekly basis to discuss (amongst

      other things) any particular trends that were coming out of the calls received.

      These meetings were between one or more teams of advisors and were chaired

      by a Team Manager. I can also recall instances of meetings being led by

      incident analysts from within POL, who shared insights that they had into any

      themes that were coming out of the queries raised with the NBSC. Any lessons

      that could be learned (in terms of updating the Tier 1 script or the training and

      knowledge of the Tier 1 team) were therefore discussed and fed back to the

      Tier I and Tier 2 teams on a regular basis. That meant that, if there was an

      increase or trend in any particular type of call, we would likely discuss it and

      seek to implement whatever changes were required fairly quickly to enable the

      Tier 1 team to be able to assist Postmasters more effectively on that issue in

      future.

33.   That said, following the introduction of a new product, or if there had been a

      mistake in some recently published guidance, there would often be a temporary


11/80453178_1                                                                         12
                                                                                         WI TNO3660200
                                                                                    WI TN03660200




      spike in calls asking for assistance with that new product or seeking help in

      relation to that part of the guidance. With the new product, calls would usually

      reduce again, once branch staff got more used to it. Any mistakes that

      appeared to be present in any of the guidance were fed back to the appropriate

      team to rectify. In both cases therefore, the spike in calls would subsequently

      reduce again.

34.   As set out above, during the rollout of Horizon, the remit of the NBSC was to

      deal with questions on how to use Horizon's functionality to perform tasks in

      branch, for example how to account for certain products or transactions on

      Horizon. More technical questions around the hardware or the Horizon system

      itself were dealt with by the Horizon System Helpdesk. As explained above, the

      Horizon System Helpdesk was separate and independent from the NBSC and

      POL and was, I recall, managed by Fujitsu. This structure was introduced

      during rollout and remained in place until the mid-2000s when the NBSC was

      recast as the single point of contact for Postmasters, with an increased remit

      (as described in paragraph 25 above). Nevertheless, many of the calls that I

      and my team received at the NBSC did not actually relate to Horizon, but would

      instead relate to other products and services, such as the transactional and

      operational calls referred to in paragraph 28. It is worth noting also that the

      network of Post Office branches was much bigger around the time Horizon was

      rolled out. There were around 20,000 Post Office branches in the early 2000s,

      compared to roughly half that number now. This meant that there was naturally

      a more continuous churn of new Postmasters and branch staff who would more

      regularly need advice as they settled into their roles.




11/80453178_1                                                                      13
                                                                                              WI TNO3660200
                                                                                          WI TN03660200




       e. What resources you had available to you to assist resolving calls for

          support and whether they were adequate;

35.   I have been asked about the resources I had available to assist in resolving

      calls for support.

36.   As a Tier 2 advisor (and then a manager of Tier 2 advisors), I had access to the

      same resources available to the Tier 1 advisors, including the call scripts. These

      were stored on the Knowledge Base and key scripts/sections could be located

      by running keyword searches. Whether or not an advisor was able to identify

      the correct script depended in part on the way that the Postmaster presented

      the issue. In relation to the more complex or unusual issues which were passed

      on to Tier 2 in particular, the Postmaster would often present a set of scenarios

      and the advisor would need to ask a series of questions to ensure                good




                                                                                   a
      understanding of the specific underlying issue that the Postmaster needed help

      with.

37.   As far as I am aware, there used to be a dedicated team responsible for

      preparing the call scripts. This team was made up of people who had been in

      the POL business for a long time, mainly with a background of directly

      managing the counter service. It likely also included those who had been

      involved in the live trial of Horizon and, in at least two cases that I can think of,

      included people who had had experience working on a regional helpline. As

      time went on, some ex-NBSC advisors joined the team that was responsible for

      maintaining and updating the scripts as they gained knowledge in the process.

      This team used incoming materials like Branch Focus (a Postmaster-facing

      weekly publication showing, amongst other things, updates to Horizon), Once




11/80453178_1                                                                            14
                                                                                          WI TNO3660200
                                                                                     WI TN03660200




      the scripts were in use, the team of advisors would suggest appropriate

      changes, coming out of product developments and internal feedback.

38.   Tier 2 advisors also had access to additional resources such as process maps

      and decision trees which showed different suggested solutions, depending on

      the scenario presented by Postmasters. These were typically useful for calls

      where an issue was presented and there could be a variety of potential

      solutions, depending on the circumstances. These process maps and decision

      trees helped the Tier 2 advisors to ask a logical series of questions to help

      clarify the actual problem and so identify the correct solution. For example,

      when receiving a call relating to a banking mis-key, the first question might be

      "has the customer got a receipt?", as the answer to this would inform what

      solutions were available. Sometimes the resources used by advisors were the

      same as those available to Postmasters, for example: the Horizon user guide.

      In this case, we would relay relevant information to the Postmaster and refer

      them to the correct section of the guide for future assistance.

39.   In processing a call, I would also speak to other people in the business who

      had experience in the area being asked about by the Postmaster, such as the

      various product managers. When this happened, I would sometimes have a

      discussion with the relevant internal expert and then relay the information or

      explanation received to the caller. In other situations, where it was appropriate

      and easier for the Postmaster for me to do so (for example where the issue

      might be more easily explained by, for example, the product manager), I might

      hand the Postmaster over to my internal colleague and they would then become

      the main point of contact for the Postmaster in resolving that issue.




11/80453178_1                                                                       15
                                                                                          WI TNO3660200
                                                                                     WI TN03660200




40.   I have been asked to comment on whether I think the resources available to me

      were adequate. Overall, I consider that the available resources to have been

      adequate, although I note also that they improved over time both in quality and

      in quantity. Where resources were lacking, insofar as they did not fully resolve

      the issue being presented, this generally reflected the complexity and

      uniqueness of the scenarios being raised by Postmasters and the fact that

      these could not always be resolved through scripted answers. That said, where

      resources were not available to assist with a particular issue, it formed part of

      the internal feedback to consider whether additional resources should be

      developed.

      f. How the team was managed;

41.   NBSC advisors were supervised by, and reported to, their Team Manager,

      which is a role that I took on from around 2003 or 2004. Team Managers were

      each responsible for overseeing the performance of a team of approximately

      twelve advisors and occasionally assisting with calls where these were

      escalated accordingly. Advisors could approach a Team Manager if they had

      questions about how to deal with a particular issue. If the Team Manager was

      not available, a more senior or experienced advisor might also step in to assist

      their colleague on an informal basis.

42.   The performance of the advisors was reviewed by the Team Manager on a

      monthly basis. As explained above, as a Team Manager, I would listen to

      approximately five calls that each advisor had taken over the previous month.

      These would be either be taken from the bank of recorded calls or I would sit in

      and listen live to a call. I would make notes on points to discuss coming out of

      these calls. I would then have a one-on-one discussion with the advisor to


11/80453178_1                                                                       16
                                                                                         WI TNO3660200
                                                                                    WI TN03660200




       provide feedback (both positive and constructive). I, and the other Team

       Managers, would provide feedback to the advisor on the way that they handled

       calls and we would make recommendations and set objectives for advisors

       where we considered that the advisors could learn more about a particular

       product or process to improve their performance. Team Managers had access

      to various tools they could refer the advisors to. For example, if the Team

      Manager had identified a coaching opportunity (e.g. a gap in knowledge on a

      certain product/issue), they would look for reference materials such as training

      guides or specific training sessions from subject matter experts to try to close

      those knowledge gaps. On a couple of occasions, we received training from

      external providers, especially during the years where the quality assurance

      frameworks were relaunched. We also had sessions with external coaches to

      help develop call-handling skills and soft skills.

43.   As a Team Manager, I reported to the Customer Services Manager for the

      contact centre. The Customer Services Manager was responsible for managing

      the quality of the contact centre as a whole.

44.   The atmosphere within the NBSC was generally collaborative. We had weekly

      team meetings as well as weekly training update sessions. In addition, there

      was an electronic notice board which people would use to share solutions to

      issues in case it was helpful to other advisors receiving similar calls.

      g. The attitude of members of the NBSC to subpostmasters.

45.   In my view, the attitude of members of the NBSC towards Postmasters was

      generally good. Part of the training we received when joining the NBSC was on

      the quality assurance framework which set out criteria around customer service.




11/80453178_1                                                                      17
                                                                                           WI TNO3660200
                                                                                      WI TN03660200




      The framework included being polite, asking questions, showing empathy,

      confirming that Postmasters understood the advisor's response, ensuring the

      advisor was answering the right question. These criteria were designed to

      ensure that the Postmaster's call experience was a positive one.

4.    In your view, did the NBSC provide adequate support to subpostmasters

      who called for assistance?

46.   I have been asked about my view as to whether the NBSC provided adequate

      support to Subpostmasters who called for assistance.

47.   My understanding is that Tier 1 advisors had a target for the number of calls

      that ended in the Postmaster receiving a satisfactory answer to their issue

      without the need for further escalation. I do not remember what this target figure

      was, but based on my understanding of the types of calls received by Tier I

      advisors, I would guess that this target was met because most calls were short

      and straightforward, and therefore easily resolved.

48.   It is difficult to comment on the outcome of Tier 2 calls because they were often

      handed over to other advisors in different areas of the business, depending on

      the type of issue. Often the call would be handed to the Retail Network Manager

      (which was later known        a Retail Line Manager as the remit changed a bit)
                               as




      who acted as a catchall for problems experienced by Postmasters.

49.   In terms of the feedback that we received from Postmasters on their experience

      with the NBSC, this was, I consider, a pretty normal mixture of both positive

      and negative feedback. I can't remember any particularly significant pieces of

      feedback but based on my recollection, the majority of this feedback was

      received anecdotally, and later through phone-surveys. I also recall that a



11/80453178_1                                                                        18
                                                                                           WI TN03660200
                                                                                      WI TN03660200




      complaints team was also introduced at one point to help resolve any issues

      where Postmasters felt unhappy with the service or where they felt that their

      issue had not been resolved to their satisfaction. These types of complaints

      were logged onto the case management system. I am not aware of what

      happened after that.

5.    Were you aware of any bugs, errors or defects within the Horizon IT

      System at the time you worked in the NBSC?

50.   I have been asked whether I was aware of any bugs, errors or defects within

      the Horizon IT System at the time I was working the NBSC.

51.   In my experience, both as an NBSC advisor and Team Manager, I do not think

      I would have thought to classify an issue raised by a caller in those terms. I was

      (and others in the NBSC were) aware of Horizon from a front-end user interface

      side and our job was to help the Postmasters and branch staff from that point

      of view. NBSC advisors therefore became aware of individual scenarios

      through the calls from Postmasters. But we focussed on the logic of the

      information available to us. We did not have the technical skills, tools or

      knowledge to identify whether there were any potential technical issues in the

      back-end of the system. Where an issue raised by a Postmaster seemed to be

      a technical one concerning the Horizon hardware or software, the Tier 1 scripts

      and/or the Tier 2 decision trees/process maps would likely direct the advisor to

      transfer the caller to the Horizon System Helpdesk. I was never aware of, or

      involved in, any formal lines of communication or feedback as between the POL

      NBSC and the Fujitsu Horizon System Helpdesk. I recall that there used to be

      service forums where the NBSC and the Horizon System Helpdesk would

      discuss the performance metrics of the two helpdesks/services centres. I think


11/804531781                                                                         19
                                                                                          WI TNO3660200
                                                                                     WI TN03660200




      that I might attended one of these. But formal communications that might have

      taken place between POL and Fujitsu on any potential problems with Horizon

      would take place above the level of a Team Manager. I would have thought that

      any such conversations would have take place above the level of the Customer

      Services Manager (who was my line manager and was responsibility for the

      performance of the NBSC), or perhaps by someone alongside of them.

52.   In any case, I am not aware of any such conversations. For my part, I thought

      that the Horizon system was working well and that we were therefore able to

      help anyone who was having issues using it, using the various scripts, process

      maps, decisions trees and product specialist support that we had access to.

53.   Often, when a Postmaster called the NBSC, it was simply to clarify or confirm

      something they were doing for the first time (or otherwise weren't familiar with)

      or it was a case of user error. Those issues were usually quickly and easily

      dealt with at the Tier 1 level. There were, though, other times when it was not

      clear whether the likely cause of an issue was user error, or an issue with the

      system. One difficulty in determining the cause was that Postmasters did not

      always explain the issue in technical terms and advisors had to learn to ask the

      right questions to distinguish the likely cause.

54.   Occasionally I would speak to a Postmaster who experienced an issue with

      Horizon that they did not understand and who would therefore suggest that it

      was a fault with the Horizon IT system. Any such technical complaints about

      Horizon would be handed over the Horizon System Helpdesk.

6.    Is there anything else you think the Chair should be aware of relating to

      the Horizon IT Project?




11/80453178_1                                                                       20
                                                                                             W I TNO3660200
                                                                                        WITN03660200




55.      1 have been asked whether there is anything else the Inquiry should be aware

         of relating to the Horizon IT Project, I have reflected on this but cannot recall

         anything that I would like to add to what I have said in my statement above,




Statement of truth

I believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:        G -O
            16/05/2023
Dated:




11/804531781                                                                            21
                                                     WI TNO3660200
                                                WI TN03660200




                        Witness Name: Alison Clark
                    Statement No.: WITN 03660200
                                Dated: 16/05/2023




                              THE POST OFFICE
                            HORIZON IT INQUIRY


                SECOND WITNESS STATEMENT OF
                                 ALISON CLARK




                       Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
                                 Exchange House
                                  Primrose Street
                                          London
                                       EC2A 2EG

                              Ref: 2066/31048180




11/80453178_1                                  22
