WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Witness Name: GARETH IDRIS JENKINS
Statement No.: WITN00460300

Dated: 21 MARCH 2024

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

THIRD WITNESS STATEMENT OF GARETH IDRIS JENKINS

|, Gareth Idris Jenkins, will say as follows:

1. | make this third witness statement in response to a request dated 4 August
2023 made under Rule 9(2) of the Inquiry Rules 2006 regarding phases 3, 4
and 5 of the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry (“the Rule 9(2) Request’).

New documents and questions relating to phase 3

2. | was due to give my phase 3 oral evidence to the Inquiry at a hearing on 6
and 7 July 2023. The Inquiry adjourned that hearing after POL belatedly
identified over 4,000 new documents that were said to be relevant to my phase
3 evidence. | first found out about this adjournment on the evening of 5 July
2023 when the Inquiry (through my lawyers) told me that | did not need to
attend the next day. | watched the hearing on the Inquiry’s video link on the
morning of 6 July 2023. | had spent a lot of time preparing to give evidence
and trying to read thousands of pages of documents that | was told that | might

Page 1 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

be asked about, right up until the day before | was due to give evidence. It was
upsetting, having prepared for so long, to suddenly find it was being postponed
and knowing | would have to go through the whole process again later. | also
appreciate that it would have been upsetting for some of the Core Participants
who had made an effort to come and listen to my evidence and had wasted

their time.

The Rule 9(2) Request asked me 229 questions about phases 3, 4 and 5 of
the Inquiry and referred to 366 documents comprising nearly 10,000 pages in
total. Most of these documents were provided to me in three tranches on 4
August, 21 August and 5 September 2023. The remaining documents were
provided throughout October and November 2023. As agreed with the Inquiry,
this third witness statement will only address questions 1-196 (i.e. the
questions going to phases 3 and 4 of the Inquiry). The Inquiry has agreed that

| may provide a witness statement in relation to phase 5 separately.

| was due to give evidence to the Inquiry between 30 November and 6
December 2023. Once again, shortly before | was due to give evidence, POL
informed the Inquiry that there was further evidence which might be relevant
to me which it had not disclosed. This meant that my evidence had to be

adjourned once more.

| understand that before | filed a draft witness statement with the Inquiry
lawyers on my behalf asked the Chair to reconsider the question of whether
he would approach the Attorney General to provide the sort of undertaking
(frequently given in public inquiries) that any evidence | gave to the Inquiry
would not be used against me in criminal proceedings. As the Chair is aware,
| was not seeking immunity from prosecution (as has been reported by the
press) and | continue to offer my cooperation in relation to any police
investigations. | am aware that the Chair refused my application in relation to
the restricted use undertaking because he was content that the process of my
giving evidence in this Inquiry would be fair. | understand that | had the right
not to answer many of the questions asked in the Rule 9(2) Request and that

it was open to me not to answer those questions in this witness statement.

Page 2 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

6. Nonetheless | decided to do so because | think it is the right thing to do. |
would like to repeat the point that has already been made on my behalf in
submissions that | deny any wrongdoing in relation to the evidence that | gave
in any of the case studies being considered by this Inquiry. | now know that I
gave evidence without understanding that | might be subject to “expert duties”
(depending upon the sort of evidence | was giving). | also thought that | could
trust the way in which POL lawyers conducted these cases and that, in turn,
my approach was appropriate and correct. | deal with these issues, in detail,
in the course of this witness statement. | have therefore waived my rights in
relation to the questions asked in the Rule 9(2) Request. | understand that |
still have rights in relation to any oral evidence that | give and that this is a

matter which the Chair will set out, at the start, when | appear before the
Inquiry.

7. | would also like to repeat the point that | emphasised in my second witness
statement to the Inquiry [WITN00460200], that | am being asked about events
that took place a very long time ago. | have had to rely upon the documentary
material in order to recall or reconstruct these events. This is particularly
important in relation to phase 4 because the underlying communications have
assisted me in explaining my approach to the giving of evidence in the case
studies.

8. When | originally looked at the 366 documents referred to in the Rule 9(2)
Request, | was struck that the vast majority of them originated from Fujitsu,
not POL. There has been further POL disclosure although | am still concerned
that there is an absence of evidence about internal POL communications
related to issues that touch upon me. | am aware that the process of disclosure
in the Inquiry is ongoing. If further evidence is disclosed prior to the hearings
scheduled for my oral evidence, then | may need to correct or amend what |
have said in this witness statement.

General observations on phase 4

Page 3 of 285
10.

11.

12.

13.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

| am aware that phase 4 of this Inquiry concerns “action against sub-
postmasters and others: policy making, audits and investigations, civil and
criminal proceedings, knowledge of and responsibility for failures in
investigation and disclosure.” | would like to make some general observations

about this in relation to my evidence in some of POL’s prosecutions.

| am very conscious that my evidence as an “expert witness” (with the legal
meaning | now understand this description to carry) in some of POL’s criminal
prosecutions is a particular focus in this Inquiry. | think that it is important to
reiterate, at the outset, that | was a software engineer for my entire career. |
had no legal background and | don’t remember that | ever received any sort
of legal training. | don’t remember that | was ever provided with written
instructions to be an expert witness in any case in which POL asked me to
give evidence. Throughout this witness statement, | have referred to having
no recollection of anyone mentioning to me that | was subject to expert duties
or of ever having received any instructions about these duties. | want to be

clear that | don’t believe that this ever happened.

| thought | was giving evidence in POL’s prosecutions as someone who had
worked for Fujitsu on Horizon for many years and who was a subject matter
expert on it. | can see that from about late 2009 onwards | was referred to as
an expert or as an expert witness by both Fujitsu colleagues and by POL but
| didn’t know that this meant that | was an expert in the sense of someone

subject to special expert duties.

| do not think that it was explained to me, at the time, that if | was giving factual
evidence about how Horizon operated then | might not be regarded an expert
witness (even if | was drawing on my experience and expertise in it) but if |
offered an opinion about how Horizon operated then this might mean that |

was subject to the special duties of an expert witness.

In the cases that | was involved in, lawyers from both POL and Fujitsu

reviewed my witness statements and none of them suggested to me (for

Page 4 of 285
14,

15.

16.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

example) that my evidence should be accompanied by an expert declaration.
| don’t believe that POL ever asked me to make a witness statement that
contained an expert declaration.

| do not recall (and | have seen no documentary evidence from the time) that
| was instructed or that it was explained to me that expert duties of disclosure
applied to me or what that might entail in any specific case. | assumed that the
lawyers with whom | dealt were acting properly and professionally, and had
the legal knowledge and insight that | lacked. | assumed that they would have
advised me if | was in any way wrong in my approach to providing witness

statements or giving evidence.

As a result of everything which has happened since the group civil
proceedings and this Inquiry, | now have a much better understanding of the
criminal justice system and, in particular, about expert evidence in criminal
proceedings (and the duties this entails). | had very little understanding of this
at the time. | was not a member of an expert institution. | had not had training
in being an expert witness. | was not familiar with the Criminal Procedure
Rules. | gave oral evidence in only one prosecution. This was far removed

from my day job as a computer engineer.

| had worked only as a computer engineer since | left university and throughout
the decades prior to being asked to assist POL in any legal case. In the
process of preparing this witness statement and reflecting upon the case
studies, | can see that my approach or understanding was shaped by all of the
years of that experience and work. | tend to think in terms of systems and
logic. | was used to writing technical papers to be shared with technical
colleagues in Fujitsu and in some cases with POL. On occasions | was asked
to describe a Horizon issue to POL but again this was to an audience which
had an understanding of how Horizon operated or how POL back office
systems interacted with Horizon. My perspective was not that of a lawyer. |
can see that there was scope for a lack of common understanding or

disconnect between my understanding of what was being asked of me and

Page 5 of 285
17.

18.

19.

20.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

theirs. | have tried to explain, in this statement, what | understood | was being

asked to do.

This may seem like an obvious point but | think, looking back on all of these
cases, that | approached them in much the same way that | approached a
problem at a branch that was passed from the SSC to fourth-line development
in the day-to-day course of our work. In the latter department, which is where
| worked, | would look at the underlying data and try to work out what might
have gone wrong at that specific branch. | think that | probably approached
legal cases in the same way. | was focused on the question of what the data
in a given case might show about that specific branch. | did not understand or
appreciate that other issues in the Horizon system, including issues that had
affected other branches, might be regarded as important in the way that | do
now.

| understood that what | could contribute to a case was the analysis of

underlying data for the specific branch and this was my focus.

And again, although this might be an obvious point, any system like Horizon
would have bugs, errors and defects. To me as a software engineer, that was
simply inevitable. Because of this, to my mind, the correct approach was to
look at the data and information available about a branch and then to ascertain
what might have caused a problem or discrepancy at the branch. In our day
to day work in fourth line support, we usually had good information to go on
about the timing of a discrepancy or the transactions that gave rise to it or
other information that pointed us to what we needed to look at. | was used to
working in a system where this sort of data was provided to fourth line support
and where we (or colleagues in Fujitsu in other lines of support) could have a
dialogue with the SPM to obtain relevant information and get to the bottom of

things.

| can now see that there was a lack of structure within Fujitsu as to how to
respond to requests from POL to assist in legal proceedings. | consider this

again in the course of this statement.

Page 6 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

21. Looking back at these case studies and the emails seeking my assistance, |
am struck by how little guidance | had about being a witness, let alone an
expert witness. | have been shown an email from 2006, when | was making
arrangements with POL to attend court for the first time in my life (in the case
of Mr Hughie Thomas). | was slightly anxious about this process and so asked
the POL investigator about giving oral evidence at a criminal trial
[FUJ00152616]:

“....Do you have any idea as to how much time will be involved and what
exactly is required? I’ve never been to Court in any capacity and my
knowledge of such things is based on films and TV (which | am sure is

inaccurate!)”.

22. The investigator replied:

“All witnesses have to be present on the 1‘ day unless the defence has
agreed there [sic] statement and dont [sic] wish to ask any questions
about that evidence. It is pretty much as you see on the TV really but
remember that you will have sight of your statement prior to taking the
stand and can only be asked questions specifically about your
statement.”

23. Looking at other emails sent by my former colleagues (such as Penny
Thomas) at Fujitsu (who | shall refer to as Penny in this statement), | cannot
see that anyone in Prosecution Support or the in-house legal team at Fujitsu
understood that, by giving evidence about Horizon, | might be regarded as an
expert witness (again in the legal sense of that term) and subject to special
duties. On a number of occasions, emails from POL asking me to ‘comment’
on defence reports or defence statements were sent to me by POL (or

forwarded to me by Fujitsu) without any explanation about what precisely POL

Page 7 of 285
24.

25.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

wanted me to do. In these and other exchanges, | cannot see that anyone
raised the question of whether | was subject to the duties of an expert. Looking
back, | am not sure that any of the lawyers working for POL or Fujitsu gave

any real thought to this question.

Separately, on a number of occasions, | raised the question of POL needing
to ensure that | was authorised to spend time on their legal cases and record
that time under particular billing codes. | asked this not because | was being
paid differently for doing this work but rather that Fujitsu invoiced POL for my
time to specific projects within the overall Horizon banner. This may seem like
another obvious point, but the fees charged by Fujitsu for my involvement in
POL’s legal cases were received by Fujitsu, not me. | simply knew that | had
to be careful to ensure that when | did any significant work for POL on a legal
case that | accounted for having spent time on it. | usually had to fit this work
(as and when it arose) around my existing and often very heavy workload. At
times, this put me under a lot of pressure. There were occasions (which | refer
to in this statement) when POL required me to undertake substantial work on

a case within very short time scales.

| also wish to point out that because there were contractual agreements
between POL and Fujitsu about the extraction of ARQ spreadsheets from the
audit data, that it was not open to me to just obtain it without POL’s
involvement or consent. As the Inquiry is aware, there were written processes
in place by which POL had to make ARQ requests. These processes had to
be followed because of the contractual agreements between POL and Fujitsu
(and which | had never been involved in and knew very little about). These
processes governed the extraction of the ARQ spreadsheets from the audit
data (by Penny and others) and which of itself took time. | was also not able
to work on POL cases (for any significant period of time) without POL having
agreed to that. Because providing analysis for a case took me away from my
day job, Fujitsu charged for that. These were not arrangements | had made
but | had to follow them. Also, | would not have obtained data or undertaken
work unless POL asked me to. These were POL's cases. | could ask POL to

see the data for the branch or propose types of analysis that | could undertake

Page 8 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

but ultimately POL made these decisions and decided what data | should

examine or analysis | should undertake.

26. In the case of Mr Khayyam Ishaq, for example, which | deal with in detail
below, POL had obtained ARQ spreadsheets and given them to the defence
(and their expert) but not to me. In that case, when | realised | might have to
give evidence about what had happened at Mr Ishaq’s branch within a very
short period of time, | asked Penny to provide the ARQ spreadsheets to me.
However, this was a case in which POL had already gone through the proper
channels of obtaining the ARQ spreadsheets — the problem was that | did not

have them.

27. Looking back on the prosecutions in which | gave evidence, | can see that my
involvement in a case was often incremental and that the nature of my
involvement varied from one case to the next. | will deal with each case study
the Inquiry has selected in detail below, and | will try to explain the approach
that | took in each one. However, in all of the criminal prosecutions in which |
gave written or oral evidence, | did so in good faith, believing my evidence to

be true.

Litigation support provided by Fujitsu to the Post Office

Rule 9(2) Request questions 1-16

Organisational structure

28. | have been asked a number of questions about the organisational structure
within Fujitsu for the provision of litigation support to POL. My understanding
was that all such litigation support was provided by the Security team and by

individuals who would be referred to as ‘Litigation Support’ or ‘Prosecution

Page 9 of 285
29.

30.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Support’ (I will use the term Prosecution Support throughout this statement). |
was not part of the Security team and did not know the exact details of its
organisational structure or whether there were any changes to this structure
over the period the Inquiry is considering. However, there were changes in
staff as people moved on in their careers. In the documents provided to me by
the Inquiry, | have seen an organisational chart at page 33 of [FUJ00122134],
which seems to set out the hierarchy and responsibilities of four individuals
working in the Security team in 2005 (of which Prosecution Support was a
part). This chart accords with my recollection of the structure. It also seems to
accord with what Brian Pinder and Peter Sewell have said in their first witness
statements to the Inquiry ([WITN04520100] and [WITNO9710100]
respectively).

The four people in the Security team in the organisational chart (working under
the Security Manager) were the people | usually dealt with when | was asked
to assist or provide evidence for a prosecution. As the chart sets out, this was
not a dedicated prosecution support team because the individuals had
additional responsibilities unconnected to prosecutions. Penny's role is
described as ‘prosecution support’ but Beatrice “Neneh” Lowther’s role (| shall
refer to her as Neneh in this statement) is described as ‘security administration
and user management’ (her responsibilities are described as including ‘policy
and legal compliance’). Andy Dunks’ role is described as ‘key manager and
vulnerability management’. Peter Sewell’s role is described as ‘deputy security
manager and projects’.

Of these people, Penny’s work title (as set out in her witness statements) was
‘security analyst’. My understanding was that Penny's main responsibility, in
terms of her role in Prosecution Support, was undertaking the regulated
process for the extraction of audit data from the audit server, turning this data
into spreadsheets (the so-called ARQ spreadsheets) and putting those
spreadsheets onto CDs to be sent to POL (and in some cases passing copies

to me).

Page 10 of 285
31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

My understanding was that Neneh’s role was similar to Penny’s. | don’t know
what her responsibility for ‘policy and legal compliance’ involved. | had more
interaction with Penny over the years than Neneh.

Andy was, to my knowledge, involved in the process of extracting and
presenting data from the helpdesks in Fujitsu’s first and second lines of
support. | believe that he also occasionally extracted ARQ data to assist
Penny when required. | understood that Penny, Neneh and Andy worked
under a number of different Security managers, including Brian Pinder and
Peter Sewell.

The Rule 9(2) Request has mentioned Gerald Barnes as being someone who
also provided Prosecution Support. As far as | can remember, he was not part
of Prosecution Support as he was a software engineer, initially in the Legacy
Horizon Counter Development team and later in the Audit Development team.
In the latter role, | was aware that he provided technical assistance to

Prosecution Support.

The Inquiry has referred me to a number of technical manuals that describe
the management of what is described as the Litigation Support Service
([FUJ00152212] (2009), [FUJ00152220] (2012), [FUJ00152225] (2012) and
[FUJ00152235] (2012)). | am not named as a mandatory or optional reviewer
on these documents. This means that | would not have been sent them for

review purposes.

| don’t recall reading any of them at the time. | note that these manuals define
‘prosecution’ as including civil proceedings, and looking back, | think that
informally people within Fujitsu (including me) used the term ‘prosecution’ to
refer to both criminal and civil proceedings. This may explain why the term

Prosecution Support was used informally for the Litigation Support Service.

My lawyers have asked me to reflect on these manuals and to consider the

nature of the support they envisaged. It appears to me that the support

Page 11 of 285
37.

38.

39.

40.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

described in the manuals was the extraction and supply of audit data and not

really anything broader.

My lawyers have shown me [FUJ00152209], which is a policy manual entitled
“Network Banking Management of Prosecution Support v2.0", dated 29
February 2005. This is not a manual | am familiar with and | did not read it at
the time. | note that Jan Holmes and Alan Holmes contributed to it. Jan was
the specialist from the audit process point of view and Alan was the technical
specialist who had designed the software which audited the data and then
extracted it into ARQ spreadsheets.

They would have had a role in producing this sort of manual because as the
audit specialists within Fujitsu, they were the people who would address the
process by which data was committed to the audit server (and became audit
data).

To be clear, when | refer to “audit data” in this witness statement, | mean all
data that was committed to the audit server (not simply the sub-sets of
transactional and business event data typically extracted from the audit server
into the ARQ spreadsheets). There were about 200 audit points in Horizon all
of which were committed to the audit server, including the entire message
store (which became the raw audit trail) and all NT events. All of these audit

points constituted the audit data.

The manual from 2005 sets out the standard categories or fields of audit data
which could be extracted from the audit server in response to an ARQ request
for potential use by POL in legal proceedings. The manual provided as follows
(at page 11):

“Each Audit Record Query shall relate only to an individual Outlet. Audit

Record Queries are limited to specific types of information/data fields
these are:

Page 12 of 285
M4.

42.

43.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Q the ID for the user logged-on,
Q Counter Position ID,

Q stock unit reference,

Q Transaction ID,

Q Transaction start time and date,
QO Customer Session ID,

QO mode (e.g. serve customer),

Q product number,

Q Product Quantity,

Q Sale Value”

The manual also stated (at page 12):

“Post Office account will consider reasonable requests from Post Office
Ltd. for a variation to the requested information/data fields. Such
variation requests should be specified in the relevant ARQ form”.

Although others will be better placed to speak about this and | was not aware
of the manual at the time, | am sure that these standard fields of
information/data had been agreed with POL — and that POL had also agreed
that it could request additional fields of information/data from the audit server
on acase by case basis, depending on the particular issues being raised in a

specific legal case.

| am aware that some of my former Fujitsu colleagues have been asked by
the Inquiry to address whether these fields of information/data, or the
information/data typically given in standard ARQ requests, were sufficient to
show that Horizon was operating correctly at a given branch. Whilst | was not
involved in drafting or reviewing any of Fujitsu’s prosecution support manuals
nor involved in agreeing with POL what fields of information/data it could select
for inclusion in the ARQ spreadsheets, | don’t think that this was the purpose
of these fields.

Page 13 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

44. With hindsight, | can understand why the Inquiry is looking at these ARQ fields
in this critical way. However, my understanding at the time was that the ARQs
were produced as a record of the transactions that had taken place at a given
branch. From POL’s point of view, | understood that the two ARQ
spreadsheets it typically requested (the transaction spreadsheet and the
business event spreadsheet) were relevant because they were evidence as
to what transactions had occurred in the branch over the given period and
provided other information of potential value (such as the identity of the user
and cash declarations). However, as explained above, these two ARQ
spreadsheets were simply sub-sets extracted from the universe of audit data
committed to the audit server. As such, | did not understand that the ARQ
spreadsheets were intended to serve any broader purpose like demonstrating
the ‘integrity’ of Horizon or the ‘health’ of Horizon at a given branch.

45. To my mind, this is why, looking at Fujitsu’s prosecution support manual
[FUJ00152209] now (and again | want to make clear that | was not familiar
with this at the time), it refers to “integrity” in relation to audit data (and the
audit server), rather than the Horizon system generally. For example, page 8

states that:

“ARQs in support of potential prosecution will be obtained solely from
the Horizon System Audit Archive / Server. The method by which the
integrity of this data is protected is described in the Audit Trail Functional
Specification. Evidence in support of data integrity will be sourced from
Audit Archive / Server and Post Office account Business logs.”

46. Section 4.1 (scope) sets out additional data which POL could ask for (beyond
the standard fields in an ARQ request) but again does so as a means of

checking the integrity of the audit data:

“Post Office account shall, in relation to an Audit Record Query, at the
request of Post Office Ltd:

Page 14 of 285
47.

48.

49.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Q Analyse appropriate Horizon Help Desk and Non-polling reports for
the specific search criteria on the Audit Record Query in order to check
the integrity of Transactions extracted for that Audit Record Query;

Q Analyse fault logs for the devices from which the records of
transactions were obtained to check the integrity of Transactions
extracted by that Audit Record Query...”

Similarly, section 7.2.3 (Analysis of Fault logs) states that any relevant PinICLs
identified in Powerhelp logs will be reviewed to identify any recorded faults
that might affect the “integrity or admissibility of the audit archive” from which
the ARQs are extracted.

These extracts from Fujitsu's prosecution support manual suggest to me that
“integrity” in this context was being defined by Fujitsu (and presumably by
POL) by reference to the audit data, audit server or audit archive. The manual
does not appear to deal with the “integrity” of the entire Horizon system or the
general health of Horizon as it operated at a particular branch. In other words,
the manual does not appear to contemplate that Fujitsu would guarantee the

integrity of anything broader than the audit data for a specific branch.

This emphasis on the integrity of the audit data for a specific branch (as
opposed to anything broader) seems consistent with the drafting of the
standard Fujitsu witness statement which | understand was used to produce
the ARQ data in POL’s legal proceedings (and which was amended from time
to time). | have seen a version of this statement from 2005 [FUJ00122099],

which included a standard paragraph “L”:

“When information relating to individual transactions is requested, the
data is extracted from the audit archive media via the Audit Workstations
(AW's). Information is presented in exactly the same way as the data
held in the archive although it can be filtered depending upon the type of
information requested. The integrity of audit data is guaranteed at all

Page 15 of 285
50.

51.

52.

53.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

times from its origination, storage and retrieval to subsequent despatch
to the requester. Controls have been established that provide
assurances to Post Office Internal Audit (POIA) that this integrity is
maintained.”

Again, to my mind, this paragraph is guaranteeing the integrity of the audit
data for the specific branch, in terms of its origination (i.e. the audit data
accurately captures everything on the message store as well as other audit
points), storage (i.e. the audit server is tamper-proof) and retrieval (i.e. the
mechanism for extracting sub-sets of the audit data into the ARQ
spreadsheets does not manipulate the data that appears in those ARQ
spreadsheets, nor does it edit or delete the audit data previously committed to
the audit server). My understanding (reading it now) is that this paragraph is
not guaranteeing the integrity of the Horizon system generally or the health of

Horizon at a particular branch.

| am aware that, in addition to paragraph L, the standard Fujitsu witness
statement contained two ‘boilerplate’ paragraphs at the very end which refer
(among other matters) to the proper functioning of the computer or system. |
will return to these two paragraphs below.

Going back to the 2005 Fujitsu prosecution support manual at [FUJ00152209],
| note that it states that Fujitsu may give an expert statement (see section 8.2:
“Expert Witness Statement’). It explains that “expert in depth analysis” and
“detailed expert" witness statements (as opposed to witness statements of
fact) would “rarely” be required. It goes on to explain that the integrity of the
witness statements of fact might be challenged by Defence Counsel in order
to discredit a prosecution. In those cases, the manual states that “additional,
granular detail about the technical working and integrity of various systems
that constitute the Horizon system” may be required if only for “unused

material".

Again, | was not aware of this manual at the time, but | understand that this is

not a full and accurate description of what expert evidence is.

Page 16 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

54. In terms of the later Fujitsu manuals describing prosecution support, | can see
that [FUJ00152212], prepared in 2009, also refers to Royal Mail Group
Account providing "expert" witnesses in support of POL's litigation activity. It
describes an expert witness as someone who is able to give “more detailed

and specific evidence” but, again, notes that this would “rarely” be required.

55. In the updated version of this manual prepared in 2012 ([FUJ00152220)), the
position remained that the provision of “expert” evidence would be “rare”. It
doesn’t appear that this manual, in any of its versions, defined what an expert
was, in terms of the legal duties they are subject to. Looking back, | think this
may have been because expert evidence was outside the scope of the
Prosecution Support Service that Fujitsu had agreed, contractually, to provide
to POL. This had the effect that separate and bespoke commercial
arrangements needed to be put in place on a case by case basis when expert
evidence was required. However, based on the material | have reviewed, it
seems that these commercial arrangements were not accompanied by any

form of guidance about the legal framework for expert witnesses.

56. | have also been asked to consider the manuals provided by the Security
Management Service ([FUJ00002033] (2006), [FUJ00080107] (2008),
[FUJ00002264] (2010), [FUJ00088868] (2013), [FUJ00002555] (2013),
[POL00002572] (2014) and [POL00002666] (2016)). Again, | was not a
reviewer of these manuals and would not have seen them at the time. Reading
them now, they suggest that the litigation support that Fujitsu envisaged
providing to POL under its contractual arrangements was quite narrow and did
not include the routine provision of expert evidence.

57. The Inquiry has asked me about the role of the SSC in providing litigation
support. As far as | was aware, the SSC did not usually provide litigation
support directly to POL, but might do so indirectly via Prosecution Support.
For example, when they were asked to check the NT event data for particular

branches.

Page 17 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

58. The Inquiry has asked me about the proposal to create the Fraud Risk
Management Service and why this service was ultimately not provided by
Fujitsu. My lawyers have drawn my attention to page 219 of [POL00115340],
which is a lengthy technical manual setting out the system design specification
for the Network Banking Service, which was introduced in Legacy Horizon in
2003. This states that the Fraud Risk Management Service “disappeared”
after the Benefits Agency withdrew from the Horizon contract. Looking at the
material given to me by the Inquiry on this topic ([FUJ00152137],
[FUJ00152138], [FUJ00152140], [FUJ00152142] and [FUJ00152145]), |
cannot see anything that suggests that | was involved with this proposal and |

have no memory of it.

59. My lawyers have asked me whether there was a lawyer at Fujitsu who had
oversight of Prosecution Support or responsibility for Fujitsu's involvement in
legal proceedings brought by POL. | am unsure whether Fujitsu had any
formal structure in place by which in-house and/or external lawyers supervised
the provision of Prosecution Support. However, some Fujitsu lawyers like
David Jones, Jean-Pierre Prenovost and Ed Philips did become involved
occasionally in the provision of Prosecution Support. This witness statement

describes my interaction with them in the case studies selected by the Inquiry.

Service provided by Fujitsu

60. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my understanding of the agreement in
place between POL and Fujitsu in respect of the provision of litigation support
by Fujitsu to POL, and how this changed over time. | was aware that there
was a written agreement between POL and Fujitsu addressing litigation
support and | knew that it was amended from time to time. | was not involved
in negotiating this agreement. | don’t recall being asked for my input into it or
reading any version of it. | don’t know the precise details of what was agreed

or how they changed over time.

Page 18 of 285
61.

62.

63.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

My basic understanding was that, under these agreements, Fujitsu was
contractually required to provide audit data to POL on request but that there
were limits on the numbers of such requests Fujitsu was obliged to respond
to (since the requests were time-consuming and Fujitsu needed to ensure
there was adequate staffing to respond). | understood that Fujitsu was entitled
to charge extra fees for audit data supplied in excess of the agreed limits.
However, | didn’t know what those limits were, how they might have gone up
or down, how they were negotiated between POL and Fujitsu, who negotiated
them or what the additional charges might be if the limits were exceeded. As
explained in paragraph 25 above, | was aware of the need to ensure that any

work | did to support POL’s litigation was authorised.

| did not know exactly how POL requested audit data (although in the course
of the Inquiry | have now seen some ARQ requests), but once a request was
received, | understood that Penny (and, in her absence, one of the Security
team) was authorised to extract and provide it. | understood that this process
could only be done by those specifically authorised members of the Security
Team, who had access to the secure room in which the dedicated audit
workstations were housed. These workstations were set up with specific logins
for audit access. | do not know the details of how the Security Team were
given this access and who arranged it. | only know how few people had this

access. | did not have it.

| cannot speak from direct knowledge or experience of the controls that
applied during the extraction of audit data. However, the Inquiry has given me
a number of operational manuals that describe the extraction process and the
controls in place ([FUJ00152176], [FUJ00152218], [FUJ00152221],
[FUJ00152228] and [POL00029169]). Again, | was not a reviewer of any of
these manuals, which means they would not have been sent to me for review

purposes. | don’t recall reading them at the time.

Although | was unaware of the detail of these manuals, | did understand at the

time that there were detailed controls in place to regulate the extraction of

Page 19 of 285
65.

66.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

audit data and | knew that these were recorded in writing. | had a working
knowledge of some of these controls. | would have read about some of the
most important controls in the standard witness statement which Penny
provided in legal proceedings describing the extraction of audit data. As far as
lam aware, Penny and everyone else in the Security Team took these controls
extremely seriously. | cannot recall learning of any occasion when any of the
controls were breached (and | have no recollection of the instances of
“operator error” referred to at paragraphs 64 to 74 of the third corporate
witness statement of Fujitsu Services Limited [WITN06650300)).

My understanding was that by far the most significant form of Prosecution
Support provided by Fujitsu was the provision of data for particular branches

(which, as noted above, took the form of ARQ spreadsheets).

When POL made a standard request for audit data, my understanding was
that up to a month’s worth of data for a particular branch would be extracted
from the raw audit trail, which would be presented to POL in two standard ARQ
spreadsheets: the transactional ARQ data spreadsheet and the business
event ARQ data spreadsheet. As | have noted above, as far as | was aware,
it was POL’s decision which subsets of data should be extracted from the audit
data for inclusion in these standard ARQ spreadsheets. My understanding is
that what was contained in these two standard spreadsheets evolved over
time as a result of the technical development of Horizon, e.g. following the
introduction of Network Banking in 2003, data relating to it was added to the
transactional ARQ data spreadsheet. | also understood that POL could use
“optional attributes” to decide which subsets of data to include (or not) within
the transactional ARQ data spreadsheet produced by the Legacy Horizon
extraction mechanism, depending on whether the data would be relevant to
the particular branch being investigated. In Horizon Online, | understood that
the extraction mechanism was simplified and was less flexible about which
subsets of data could be selected for inclusion in the transactional ARQ data

spreadsheet.

Page 20 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

67. | assume that the Inquiry has given me an email chain from May 2013
[POL00099397] so that | can comment on requests made by POL for data
which went beyond the standard ARQ data contained in these two
spreadsheets. In that email chain, | referred Andy Winn to POL’s ability to ask
for additional data contained in the raw logs. | explained that where this arose
| could help as to whether that information would be in the audit data. |
informed Andy that if the information he wanted was required on a regular
basis then the POL Security team could raise a Change Request to require
that information to be added to the standard ARQ spreadsheets. In this
particular case, it appears that the data Andy wanted was still available on the
live service, and so there was no need to extract it from the audit server using
an ARQ spreadsheet. However, the point | was trying to make to Andy was
that the information was available as audit data if POL needed it and that the
ARQ spreadsheets could be expanded to include it. It appears that this
request did not arise in relation to any litigation and had not come through

Prosecution Support.

68. Ihave heard some witnesses in this Inquiry refer to “enhanced” ARQ data and
| believe that this is what they are referring to, i.e. POL’s ability to request from
Fujitsu an ARQ spreadsheet that showed additional data stored on the audit
server but not extracted in the standard ARQ spreadsheet. Andy Winn may
have been unfamiliar with this. However, my understanding at the time is that
those who dealt with ARQ requests as part of their daily jobs (such as Penny
and her counterparts in POL) were well aware of additional data which could
be requested. Apart from the fact that additional data could be asked for within
the existing ARQ process, it was always open to POL to ask Fujitsu to expand
the fields in the standard ARQ request so that it received further sub-sets of
the audit data. | assume that this could easily have been done via a Change

Request negotiated between POL and Fujitsu.

69. In the case of Mrs Seema Misra, | was aware that Fujitsu provided all of the
audit data (from which the ARQ spreadsheets were extracted) and the NT
event logs to POL. However, | cannot speak from personal experience about

how frequently this may have happened in other cases.

Page 21 of 285
70.

71.

72;

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Over time, | came to learn that Prosecution Support was notified by POL
whenever it required ARQ data for the purposes of an investigation or legal
proceedings. Prosecution Support would then provide a standard witness
statement describing how they had carried out the audit data extraction, the
controls in place and the nature of the data that appeared in the columns in
the ARQ spreadsheets. | also came to learn that Prosecution Support might
be asked to appear in court to give oral evidence in support of their witness
statements. | do not know when this practice commenced or exactly when |
became aware of it. To my knowledge, it was mainly Penny (and, in her
absence, Neneh) who produced these witness statements. | also came to
learn that Andy Dunks produced witness statements exhibiting records of call

logs for the particular branch.

As far as | was aware, Prosecution Support was the sole channel through
which all of POL’s requests for witness statements from Fujitsu should have
been requested and provided. The evidence that | have looked at shows that
when POL made a request for assistance or evidence which went beyond
what Prosecution Support could provide, then Prosecution Support would
seek assistance from others within Fujitsu. To my knowledge, this wasn’t a
formal process. It was very much ad hoc. | think that | was asked to help
Prosecution Support in these circumstances because | understood how a
number of different components of Horizon worked, | could analyse the audit
data and (despite my workload) | was willing to help. | think that my
understanding of the meaning of the audit data was the main reason | came

to be called upon in these cases.

The Inquiry has given me a number of Fujitsu manuals which refer to witness
statements. Again, | was not a reviewer of any of them. | don’t recall reading
them at the time and, reading them now, many of the details are unfamiliar to
me. Some of them distinguish between “statements in support of data
extractions” and “statements in support of system integrity” (such as
paragraph 6 of [FUJ00152171] (“Production of System Information for
Evidential Purposes”). | note that this particular manual dates back to 2001

Page 22 of 285
73.

74.

75.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

(and is in draft) and contains a template for the former type of statement but
not the latter. It appears to set out a process for what | now understand to be
a “PACE certificate” in benefit agency cases (and that it should be given by
“ICL Outsourcing”). | note that the draft statement included in this 2001 manual
is similar in parts to the 2005 standard witness statement used by Penny or
Neneh (I address this 2005 statement further below).

My lawyers have asked me what “ICL Outsourcing” is. | am not entirely sure
but | think it may have been the name for that part of ICL at the time which
operated the Data Centres used by Horizon.

Other manuals distinguish between “witness statements of fact” and “expert
witness statements” (such as paragraphs 5.1 and 7.2 of [FUJ00152212] and
[FUJ00152225], although | note that neither of these manuals contains a
template for the latter type of statement). As far as | can see, none of these
manuals seems to prescribe a specific procedure for obtaining “statements in
support of system integrity” or “expert witness statements” (including, for
example, outlining what | now understand to be requirements for expert
evidence in criminal proceedings). Nor do they suggest that the procedure for
obtaining expert witness statements should be any different from the
procedure for obtaining witness statements of fact. These manuals suggest to
me that it was contemplated by Fujitsu and POL that statements going to
“system integrity” might be required (see the draft 2001 manual). They also
proceed on the basis that “expert” statements might be required on rare
occasions, but the manuals said nothing in terms of the formal requirements
for the contents of those statements, whether there should be specific
processes for obtaining them or whether they had to comply with particular

legal frameworks.

If POL sought litigation assistance from Fujitsu that went beyond the agreed
contractual arrangements, | was aware that Fujitsu would have to raise a
Change Proposal for this additional work. | think that on occasions | was
named as the technical sponsor of these Change Proposals because | was

going to be involved in giving the technical assistance that POL sought. There

Page 23 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

is an example of this at [FUJ00154729], which states that POL had requested
an analysis of transaction logs at a particular branch (although page 3
onwards relates to a completely different Change Proposal which | don’t think
| had any involvement in). | was not involved in the mechanics of drafting these
specific Change Proposals, defining the scope of the additional work or
negotiating the extra time and fees required (although | may well have been
asked how much of my time would be required). Administering these Change
Proposals was, to my knowledge, a job for Prosecution Support. My role was
doing the additional technical work once the Change Proposals were
approved.

76. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my understanding of whether PACE
certificates were at any point provided by Fujitsu to support a criminal
prosecution. | do not know whether they were. | was not familiar with the nature
of these certificates until | began to read some of the documents provided to
me by the Inquiry (such as [FUJ00152140], [FUJ00152142] and
[FUJ00152171] (above)). | can see that these documents described a process
for giving such a certificate. | have no memory of ever having signed such a
certificate and | have not seen anything to suggest that | did. As noted in
respect of [FUJ00152171], it suggested that ICL Outsourcing would provide a
certificate.

Relationship with individuals involved in litigation in POL and Cartwright King

Rule 9(2) Request questions 17 and 18

77. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my involvement with individuals in POL

and Cartwright King in relation to the provision of support for litigation.

78. | understood that there was supposed to be formality in the way that Fujitsu

assisted POL’s litigation so that requests for evidence should always come

Page 24 of 285
79.

80.

81.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

through Prosecution Support and should always be dealt with by them.
Prosecution Support was supposed to have oversight of POL’s requests for
evidence. In some cases, like that of Mr Lee Castleton, Brian Pinder was the
person in Fujitsu’s Security team who communicated and dealt with POL’s
lawyers. | think that Penny then took over this role, as can be seen in the case

of Mrs Seema Misra.

| had a very busy and demanding role in relation to Horizon and, as |
understand it, it wasn’t considered appropriate that POL (or its lawyers) should
contact me directly in relation to matters for which Prosecution Support had
responsibility. This nonetheless sometimes occurred, although Fujitsu (and |)
tried to prevent it. Occasionally | was contacted directly by members of POL’s
Security team, but my main memory was having to deal with Jarnail Singh and
Juliet MacFarlane, who | understood were both lawyers working in-house at
POL. | sometimes found this difficult (and explain why in more detail below).
Where | had this direct contact, | would endeavour to keep Prosecution

Support in the loop by forwarding or copying them into the relevant emails.

At some point, | think in around 2012, | became aware that POL had instructed
external lawyers called Cartwright King, and | recall having dealings with
Martin Smith, Rachael Panter and Andrew Bolc from that firm. Most of my
interactions were with Rachael Panter if | remember correctly. Very
occasionally | may also have spoken to some of the barristers instructed by
POL/Cartwright King. Again, where | had these direct dealings, | would

endeavour to make Prosecution Support aware of this.

The Inquiry has asked me to describe the level of involvement | had with these
individuals at POL and Cartwright King but | think | can only give a meaningful
answer to that question by reference to the specific case studies the Inquiry
has selected. | can say, however, that on occasions the way cases were
conducted seemed last minute and chaotic. | had specific difficulties with
Jarnail Singh and his approach. There were a number of occasions when |

had to ask POL’s lawyers for clarification of exactly what POL wanted me to

Page 25 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

do or details of the Horizon-related issues being raised by the defendant. |

also felt that POL’s lawyers resisted obtaining audit data in some cases.

82. Ihave seen an email that Penny sent to Fujitsu’s lawyers in September 2010.
| think this reflects some of the frustration | felt about the disorganisation and
informality of POL’s approach to prosecutions [FUJ00154969]:

“It is totally unacceptable that we hear about a case being heard on
Monday next only this morning. POL legal have contacted Gareth direct
and agreed process has not been followed, again — this should be via
the Fraud Team in Salford through to Prosecution Support in the Security
Department. As can be seen, Gareth is expected to provide prosecution
support in another case, at extremely close notice. The request should
be for Fujitsu to provide expert prosecution support with reasonable
return timeframes.

POL legal appear to operate in 11% hour panic mode, permanently; and
they have a total disregard for agreed service process, of which they

were reminded earlier in the year.”

83. In relation to Cartwright King, | felt that there was a similar disorganisation and
lack of formality. An email chain from March/April 2012 illustrates what | mean
by this [FUJ00156629]. | was emailed on 30 March 2012 by Andrew Bolc at
Cartwright King with the line “for your information”, forwarding me an email
(and attachment) from another solicitor. Mr Bolc did not explain what he
wanted me to do with the information he had forwarded to me. On 4 April 2012,
Mr Bolc emailed me again, asking me whether my report would be ready to
serve on the court the next day. | replied a few minutes later to say:

“Simple answer is that | don’t know. I'm still waiting fro [sic] some clear
instructions from Post Office Ltd. | certainly won't have anything for

tomorrow.

Page 26 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

By the way are you Post Office Ltd’s or the Defendant's solicitor?”

84. MrBolc subsequently apologised and clarified that he was acting as an “agent”
for POL before saying “I will try to confirm if a report is required but | suspect
not.”

85. | think that this email chain provides some insight into how POL’s prosecutions
were conducted. | didn’t know at the time who Mr Bolc was or who he acted
for. He provided no information about the case which the report related to. He
appears to have expected me to provide a report, which initially he said was
needed within a matter of days, but which he then suggested was not needed.
This is obviously one example of the approach that was taken to the conduct
of a prosecution (and it is at one end of the spectrum) but nonetheless | think
it shows how casual that approach could be.

My involvement in general litigation support

Rule 9(2) Request questions 19-28

86. The Inquiry has asked me when | started providing support in respect of POL’s
litigation and in what capacity. | cannot pin down an exact date, but | have
vague memories of someone, possibly Jan Holmes, asking me to explain what
some of the data meant in an ARQ spreadsheet (though | cannot remember
anything about this data or the case it related to). Prior to this Inquiry, my first
memory of being involved in an actual prosecution was that of Mr Hughie
Thomas in 2006 but, having reviewed the documents provided to me by the
Inquiry, | now see that | was involved in an earlier prosecution called R v Teja
in 2005.

Page 27 of 285
87.

88.

89.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

The Inquiry has asked me to provide an overview of the litigation support |
provided to POL. This varied. On occasions | might be asked to answer a
specific, quite straightforward question to help Penny, or to provide a witness
statement addressing a single issue (such as the case of Mr Hughie Thomas).
| didn’t necessarily record my time for dealing with one-off questions. It was
really only where a query or task had taken an hour or more that | would then
record time using a billing code given to me by Penny or others in Prosecution
Support. The other extreme was the case of Mrs Seema Misra, in which | was
asked to comment and provide witness statements (and investigate and
analyse data) in response to the series of reports prepared by the defence
expert, Professor Charles McLachlan. In that case, POL asked me to address
a large number of hypotheses raised by Professor McLachlan. In other cases,
by contrast, such as that of Mr Khayyam Ishaq, POL asked me to respond to
an accountancy report. In those cases, my involvement was more of an

accountancy or reconciliation exercise.

The nature of POL’s communications with me about its prosecutions was
generally informal. For example, my lawyers have drawn my attention to an
email chain | received on 14 March 2012 in relation to a prosecution called R
v Bramwell [FUJ00156530]. Whilst | do not remember this case in any detail,
the email chain reveals that a solicitor instructed by POL summarised a
message she had received from POL’s Counsel as follows: “Counsel would,
bluntly, like Fujitsu to pour as much cold water as possible on the defence
report.” | felt unable to do this. Having read the defence report, | noted on 30
March 2012 that | agreed with its conclusions and expressed the view that the
cash control at the branch was very poor [POL00104153]. | note from the email
chain that followed (that | didn’t see at the time) that POL did not regard my
response as helpful. | do not believe that | prepared any formal witness
statement in this case. This may have been because my conclusion did not

assist POL in proving its case.

Although the nature of my involvement varied in the cases | provided

assistance in, to the best of my knowledge, | only ever became involved in

Page 28 of 285
90.

91.

92.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

them after POL had charged the individual and often (it seems) quite late on
during the prosecution and once court proceedings had been in existence for
many months or sometimes years.

The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which Fujitsu
would provide a “generic witness statement” to support litigation. | understand
this question to refer to the standard witness statement that Penny (or
sometimes Neneh) produced in relation to the extraction of audit data. Penny
was, to my knowledge, the principal person authorised by Fujitsu to carry out
extractions of audit data into ARQ spreadsheets and to copy these ARQ
spreadsheets onto encrypted CDs, in accordance with the procedures outlined
in the manuals referred to above. | understood that the purpose of the
standard witness statement was to formally exhibit these ARQ spreadsheets,
to explain how they had been produced and to describe the data they

contained (without going into too much technical detail).

In these witness statements, Penny explained that she had a working
knowledge of Horizon, that she was not involved in the detailed technical
aspects of it but that the documented process allowed her to provide a general

overview.

The Inquiry has asked me to consider some emails in which Penny or Neneh
asked me to look at or review this standard witness statement and comment
on it. | have been asked by my lawyers whether there was any process of
periodic or formal review by Fujitsu of this standard witness statement or any
sort of lawyer-led process which considered whether it needed updating from
time to time. | don’t think that there was. | don’t recall that there was a formal
review mechanism by which various people at Fujitsu contributed comments
as mandatory or optional reviewers (as they did, for example, in certain
technical or operational manuals | have referred to elsewhere). | simply think
that Penny asked people (like me and, as referred to below, Alan Holmes, who
had designed the audit system) to look at it from time to time, typically in
response to system changes (such as the introduction of Network Banking).
This was informal and ad hoc.

Page 29 of 285
93.

95.

96.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

On other occasions, it appears that Fujitsu’s lawyers were involved in revisions
to the standard witness statement and | have noted this later in this statement.
| understood that much of the original wording in the standard witness
statement had been either drafted or approved by POL, and that POL may
well have approved the standard witness statement when any substantive
revision was made to it (and | refer in this witness statement to an example of
where POL reviewed Fujitsu’s standard witness statement in light of the

Craigpark issue).

| had no personal experience of extracting audit data. That process had been
mandated in the manuals and my understanding was that only a small number
of specifically authorised people in the Security team could undertake it. |
could not comment on the steps Penny had taken to ensure the integrity of the
audit extraction process in a particular case. | contributed technical input
(when asked) to certain paragraphs in the standard witness statement (for
example, paragraph N in [FUJ00122099]).

In October or November 2005, it appears (although | have no memory of this
now) that | reviewed Penny's statement as a result of my involvement in the
case of R v Teja. | think, having seen further emails, that this came about
informally. | may have noticed that parts of the statement had become out of
date about changes that had been made to parts of the Horizon system (like
the introduction of network banking) and pointed this out or Penny may have
come to realise this herself in the course of that case. Penny’s email to me
[FUJ00122130] refers to me as having “kindly agreed” to look at her mark-up
of the witness statement and she pointed out that she did not know when the
Order Book Control Service (OBCS) (which was a subsystem that ran on the
counter) had been rolled out to the estate. The reference to me having “kindly
agreed” to look at it suggests to me that this was not part of any process of

review or a formal reconsideration of her statement.

My lawyers have also drawn my attention to [FUJ00122139]. This is a draft of

Penny's statement in which | appear to have highlighted the parts of her

Page 30 of 285
97.

98.

99.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

statement that | did not feel able to comment on. | pointed out that | could not
(for example) comment on the paragraph (paragraph L) which dealt with the
integrity of audit data and that Alan Holmes (who designed the audit software)

or Simon Fawkes would be better placed to comment.

| think that my inability to comment on a number of parts of the witness
statement may have led to Penny seeking the input of a number of people. An
email of 22 December 2005 [FUJ00122163] suggests that a number of people
were to speak to Penny in relation to different parts of her statement. Alan
Holmes is noted beside “controls”; | am noted beside “harvesting
transactions”, the counter development team are noted beside “view Horizon
terminal and applications”. It would also appear from this email (in keeping
with my understanding that POL were party to changes to Fujitsu’s standard
witness statement) that the Security team would then have a meeting with

POL to discuss the areas of change.

In July 2006 | discussed with Penny the paragraph in the statement about
timestamps for “Transfers In” [FUJ00155743]. It seems that | may have
challenged whether this paragraph was accurate. | then investigated and
found that a PEAK had been raised regarding incorrect timestamps (i.e. saved
as local time rather than GMT) that had been fixed in 2005. It seems that this
PEAK referred to a separate problem that had arisen before 2001 where there
were other timestamps that had the wrong adjustment for GMT. Horizon was
designed so that the time should always be recorded in GMT, but from reading
this email, | believe that in some cases the counter code incorrectly generated
a local (i.e. BST in the summer — in winter there was no difference) timestamp

instead of a GMT one.

The Inquiry has asked me why, in these emails with Penny, | asked the
question “/ assume that we're not concerned about problems in 2001 or
earlier?” | asked this question because my assumption (in July 2006) was that
the ARQ data Penny was extracting and exhibiting in her witness statements
did not date from 2001 or earlier, and hence the earlier timestamp problem

was irrelevant. Had that not been the position, some wording could have been

Page 31 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

added to her witness statement which explained the earlier timestamp
problem (before it was fixed). Penny confirmed that the ARQ data she was
extracting and exhibiting in her statements all post-dated 2001 (specifically
that the earliest data came from May 2002). It was therefore unnecessary for
the witness statement to refer to the earlier timestamp problem (which, in any

event, had had no impact on branch accounts before it was fixed).

100. Having reviewed further disclosure in relation to the Craigpark issue (which |
deal with in more detail below), it can be seen that the audit specialists took
the lead in amending Penny’s standard witness statement in light of the
Craigpark issue. This reflected their role (seen from the early operational
manuals about litigation support) in the design of the audit trail and how that
linked to prosecution support (see for example “Network Banking
Management of Prosecution Support” (dated 29 February 2005)
[FUJ00152209)).

101. 1 think thereafter from time to time, if Penny asked, | would suggest
amendments to her statement dependent on any changes made to the
system. It appears that when it came to updating her statement in 2010 (after
Horizon Online was rolled out), Alan Holmes and | both assisted with updating
her witness statement ([FUJ00122948] and [FUJ00122949]). Again our
respective involvements would reflect our ability to comment on different parts
of the witness statement. It was decided that Penny needed two witness
statement templates as trying to combine both in a single witness statement
was too complicated. In her covering email Penny said that she would be
passing her draft witness statement for Horizon Online data extractions to the
commercial people for review. Although this is not referred to in the Rule 9(2)
Request, my lawyers have drawn my attention to an email chain in which
Penny did this: she passed her draft statement (on 16 September 2010) to
Tom Lillywhite, Guy Wilkerson and Jean-Philippe Prenovost [FUJ00123365].
| can see that Jean-Philippe passed it to a fellow Fujitsu lawyer (Roger

Williams), who in turn passed it to another Fujitsu lawyer (David Jones) for his

Page 32 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

review. Then, in January 2011, Penny emailed me to say that she had
accepted “David’s changes” [FUJ00123410].

The standard paragraphs in Fujitsu’s witness statements

102. | am aware that there is a question in the Inquiry as to what the two ‘boilerplate’
or ‘standard’ paragraphs that appear at the very end of the standard Fujitsu
witness statement which exhibits the ARQ spreadsheets actually meant.

Those two paragraphs usually read as follows:

“There is no reason to believe that the information in this statement is
inaccurate because of the improper use of the computer. To the best of
my knowledge and belief at all material times the computer was
operating properly, or if not, any respect in which it was not operating
properly, orwas out of operation was not such as to effect the
information held on it. | hold a responsible position in relation to the
working of the computer.

Any records to which | refer in my statement form part of the records
relating to the business of Fujitsu Services. These were compiled during
the ordinary course of business from information supplied by persons
who have or may reasonably be supposed to have personal knowledge
of the matter dealt with in the information supplied, but are unlikely to
have any recollection of the information or cannot be traced. As part of

my duties, | have access to these records.”

103. As | understand it, some witnesses to the Inquiry have suggested that these
paragraphs were supposed to show (or were interpreted to mean) that Horizon
was working properly at a given branch or even that Horizon was working
properly across the whole estate. This is not what | thought these paragraphs
were intended to mean.

104. As | have set out above, Fujitsu’s operational manuals concerning prosecution

support appear to deal with the integrity of audit data, rather than the integrity

Page 33 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

of the Horizon system. They do not suggest that the standard Fujitsu witness
statement would address the integrity of the overall Horizon system at a given
branch. Indeed, as | have already noted, paragraph L of this standard witness
statement referred to the integrity of the audit data exhibited to the witness

statement in terms of its origination, storage and retrieval.

105. The individuals who signed this standard witness statement (such as Penny
and Neneh) could not have given an opinion about the integrity of the Horizon
system, whether at a particular branch or generally. They did not have the
technical expertise and would have been unqualified to do this. They could
comment on the integrity of the ARQ extraction process that they had
personally undertaken.

106. All of this explains why it makes little sense to me that the standard closing
paragraphs in the Fujitsu witness statement could have been intended to have
some broader meaning about the integrity of Horizon. This witness statement
was only concerned with the production of time limited ARQ data and did not
(for example) set out an analysis of this data. | think that there is a clear
distinction between a statement that the Horizon system was working (or a
statement as to its overall health) at a given branch during a specific period
and a statement about the way in which the ARQ data for that branch had
been produced (so that it had integrity).

107. There is no explanation (that | have seen) in the Fujitsu documents as to what
these two standard paragraphs were supposed to mean. | can see from the
communications in the case study of Mr Hughie Thomas that | raised a
question about the two paragraphs. Looking back on it now, | think my
understanding was that the first of these two paragraphs related to the proper
operation of the computers involved in the production of the witness statement
and that the second standard paragraph related to the process by which any
records referred to in the witness statement had been obtained and produced.
In Mr Thomas’ case, | think that my concern was that | could not include these

Page 34 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

paragraphs because | had not extracted the ARQ spreadsheets that my draft
statement was referring to. By this | mean that | could not speak to the
computer which had extracted the spreadsheets as working properly. | deal

with the contemporaneous evidence about this below.

108. | don’t know what Penny or Neneh thought the standard paragraphs meant,
but | have noted that in her evidence to the Inquiry, Ms Donna Munro, the
manager of the Prosecution Support team, said that she understood that the
reference to “computer” in the standard paragraphs referred to the audit
workstations which Penny retrieved the data from, rather than the integrity of
Horizon itself. This reflects my own understanding at the time and it makes
sense to me now. Similarly, | believe that the reference to “records” in the
standard paragraphs refers to the specific ARQ data extracted from the audit
workstations which was referred to and exhibited to the witness statement,
rather than all data produced by Horizon. In other words, | think that these
standard paragraphs were about the integrity of the process by which the
specific ARQ data exhibited to the witness statement had been produced and

extracted from the wider pool of audit data held in the audit workstation.

My initial involvement in providing support for prosecutions: R v Teja

Rule 9(2) Request questions 29-40

109. As | have mentioned above, prior to this Inquiry, my recollection had been that
the first POL prosecution in which | was involved was that of Mr Hughie
Thomas in 2006. However, looking at the documents given to me by the
Inquiry, | realise that this recollection was incorrect. It now seems that |
assisted in a prosecution one year earlier called R v Teja. | am afraid that |
have no independent memory of this case at all. The documents given to me
by the Inquiry have not prompted any specific memories about the case, so |
am completely reliant on these documents in answering the Rule 9(2) Request

questions.

Page 35 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

110. The Inquiry has asked for a description of the circumstances in which | became
involved in this case. Based on the documents, my involvement appears to
have begun on 7 September 2005, when Penny emailed me, forwarding a list
of questions asked by the defence solicitors [FUJ00122102]. Penny asked me
whether | could assist by addressing the questions and whether there was
anyone else | could recommend (| assume that she asked this second
question in the event that | was too busy to assist). There was an urgency to
Penny's request because the next “meeting” at court was said to be scheduled
for 13 September 2005 and POL wanted the answers within a few days (by
the Friday of the same week). It appears that | produced a Word document
responding to the questions [FUJ00122103] and sent it to Penny just before
10am the next day.

111. In her email, Penny said that she and Peter Sewell had spoken and decided
that | was the “the best first port of call” [FUJ00122102]. The Inquiry has asked
what | understood them to mean by this. My understanding is that they
probably meant that | had a good overview of Legacy Horizon and might also
be able to point them towards others who could answer specific queries if |
could not. If that is what they meant, | would agree. For example, | note that
in the answers | gave, | suggested that the SSC might be able to assist with
question 5. As explained at paragraph 29 of my second witness statement to
the Inquiry [WITN00460200], my work with the Agents Team had resulted in
my having a good knowledge of the data that was transmitted between the
counters and the Data Centre and an overview of the different parts of the
Horizon system. Penny may also have assumed that | would have some
historic knowledge of how OBCS, which was the focus of the questions, had

worked before it was discontinued.

112. The Inquiry has asked me to explain my understanding of Penny’s observation
in her email that there had been a “huge depletion of POA engineers who
would normally help us” [FUJ00122102]. | find it a bit difficult to explain this
because | don’t recall an exodus of engineers from the Post Office account at
this time. Others may be better placed to assist the Inquiry on this. As |

Page 36 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

observed in my note, the OBCS function was no longer operational in
September 2005 and so knowledge may have been lost about it (so

Prosecution Support may have struggled to find people who could help them).

113. The Inquiry has asked what | understood my role in the case to be, as well as
the nature and extent of my involvement. Looking at the documents, | believe
that | understood | was providing information in response to the questions that
Penny forwarded to me. | did that by producing the Word document that
appears at [FUJ00122103]. This set out the text of the questions | had been
asked and inserted my answers after each one. Where | couldn't answer a
question (such as question 1), | said this, and gave Penny the name of
someone who might be able to assist. Where | didn’t understand the question
(such as question 7), | said this, and asked for clarification. Reading the
answers | gave, they all appear to have consisted of a factual description of

the technical operation of certain aspects of OBCS.

114. | can see that, by the following month, my answers had been turned into a
draft witness statement dated 3 October 2005 [FUJ00122127], although this
draft is confusing as it has my name on page 1 and Neneh’s name on pages
2-7.

115. | can see that, by the following month, there seems to have been a discussion
[FUJ00155699] about whether this witness statement should be given by
Neneh or me. From this email chain, | note that Brian Pinder informed me that
to date Fujitsu had not been called on to provide any “technical evidence”. He
said that evidence was usually given by Penny or Neneh in relation to data
extraction. | take it that this case may have been the first occasion on which
Fujitsu was asked to provide evidence which fell outside the standard witness

statement producing the ARQ data. Brian Pinder wrote that:

“This does seem to be a one off type of statement and not sure if it will
ever be brought to court but if it is Neneh is a little concerned what she
might be expected to know/understand/explain should the need arise.”

Page 37 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

116. The Inquiry has asked me what | understood Mr Pinder to mean in his email
when he said that Fujitsu were being asked to provide “technical evidence”. |
don’t recall these emails, but | probably assumed that he meant that POL
wanted a technical description of how the OBCS subsystem of Horizon
operated rather than a procedural explanation of how the ARQ data had been
extracted. | can see that | flagged that the statement contained some
information that | did not have knowledge of (and this was omitted from the

final version).

117. Indeed, having gone back to this email, | think that Brian Pinder himself
explains what he meant by this observation:

“To date we have never been called to provide any technical evidence,
as the courts are mostly interested in only the data, how it was recorded
and by whom and who is presenting it to the court (usually Penny or
Neneh). They are subject to questioning on those issues alone and can
happily respond, however this particular statement is nothing to do with
particular incriminating data, the recording or presentation of that data to
a court, it's more on the technical processes, which is not in issue, but
required for information.”

118. The Inquiry has asked whether | consulted anyone when | was completing my
witness statement. Again, | can’t remember. | would probably have consulted
people in Prosecution Support (such as Penny, Neneh and Brian Pinder). |
would have asked for their guidance and checked that Prosecution Support
was content that the witness statement did what it needed to do and that it
addressed the questions asked by the defence solicitors that POL wanted me
to respond to.| can’t recall whether | spoke to anyone else. Prosecution

Support put the draft witness statement into the format in which it appears.

Page 38 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

119. Separate from my witness statement, it seems that this case prompted Neneh
and Penny to ask me to look at the standard witness statement that described
the extraction of ARQ data. Neneh emailed me on 22 November 2005,
attaching this statement and noting that “it has only come to our notice that
quite a few things have changed” [FUJ00122128]. On 24 November 2005,
Penny also emailed me, asking me to highlight anything in the standard
witness statement prepared specifically for R v Teja which was factually
incorrect [FUJ00122130]. | have dealt with this at paragraphs 95 to 97 above.

120. The Inquiry has asked me to explain what | meant when | said in an email to
Brian Pinder on 28 November 2005 that “/ suggest we wait until we have a
case that actually requires analysis of Network Banking etc and worry about it
then rather than trying to put together something generic now”. | think this is
actually referring to an email | sent to Penny and Neneh (not Brian Pinder) on
28 November 2005 [FUJ00122141], which was my response to their requests
on 22 and 24 November 2005 to look at the standard witness statement.

121. | have looked at the document in which my email of 28 November 2005 also
appears [FUJ00122134], which seems to be a 51 page scan of a paper file
including various documents such as print outs of emails and attachments. It
is not straightforward to reconstruct the context for my comment, but my
interpretation is as follows. There was a particular variant of the standard ARQ
spreadsheet that included three or four fields that specifically related to OBCS
transactions. Network Banking (which effectively replaced OBCS) introduced
a number of new fields, which made it necessary to create a new ARQ extract
that included some of them. As a result, the standard witness statement would
need to be amended to describe these additional fields. My suggestion to
Prosecution Support was that this bit of work could wait until POL specifically
requested an ARQ with such additional fields (as explained above, the case

of R v Teja seems to have concerned OBCS, not Network Banking).

122. The Inquiry has asked for my understanding of what the issues in the case of
R v Teja were and whether | had any further involvement in the case. From

the emails | have seen it doesn’t appear that | was told anything about the

Page 39 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

case. | am afraid that | have no independent recollection of it. The emails given
to me by the Inquiry suggest that | initially helped and then came to provide a
draft witness statement but without (as far as | can see) being given any formal
instruction or factual background to the case. | don’t know whether | ever
signed this draft witness statement and, if so, whether it was served as
evidence in the prosecution. | don’t have any recollection that | had any further
role in this case and | cannot see anything in the documents | have read to
suggest that | did. If there are further documents about any further involvement

| had, | would be willing to look at them.

Issues affecting the integrity of the Horizon audit function

Rule 9(2) Request questions 41-48

123. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details of any limitations | considered to
be present in the design or operation of Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online
in respect of the integrity of the audit data provided to support litigation
conducted by POL.

124. The question refers to “audit data”. At paragraph 171 of my second witness
statement to the Inquiry [WITN00460200], | referred to five data groups (i.e.
the trace logs, the raw audit trail, the transactional ARQ data, the business
event ARQ data and the NT event logs). Two of these (the raw audit trail and
the NT event logs) were audited and stored on the audit server. It is these two

groups that | consider to constitute “audit data”.

125. In my second witness statement to the Inquiry, | also made the point at
paragraph 170 [WITN00460200] that | viewed the raw audit trail and NT event
logs as a gold standard in terms of the identification and examination of

whether there was any system issue.

Page 40 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

126. | have considered the evidence which has been given to the Inquiry about
audit data. It is obviously important to separate out (a) how certain subsets of
audit data were extracted (or parsed) from all of the audit data held in the audit
server and provided to POL as ARQ spreadsheets for potential use in legal
proceedings (typically the transactional ARQ data and business event ARQ
data), and (b) all of the audit data committed to the audit server (which
included a complete copy of the message store in the case of Legacy Horizon
(or the Message Journal in the case of Horizon Online), as well as all NT event
logs in both Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online). | am concerned that this
distinction has sometimes become blurred in the Inquiry and that criticisms of
the integrity or completeness of the audit data are misplaced because they

are, in fact, criticisms of the ARQ spreadsheets.

127. The evidence before the Inquiry has shown that issues sometimes arose in
respect of the audit data. | deal with these issues below in greater detail.
Again, however, there is a distinction that | think it is important to be clear
about at the outset. This is the distinction that exists between (a) data which
actually gets committed to the audit server (which becomes the audit data),
and (b) data being affected by a problem before it is committed to the audit
server (which, at that stage, is not audit data). | hope | can illustrate this
difference by reference to the Craigpark issue. In summary, the problem
(which was a very rare one) was that a transaction was lost before the data
was committed to the audit server (i.e. it was missing from the message store).
The problem was not with the audit process or with the audit data per se.

128. But overall the issues which have been considered by the Inquiry do not
change my mind that the audit data (including the raw audit trail and the NT
event logs) was a highly reliable and effective means of diagnosing system
issues. | would still agree with Mr Justice Fraser's judgment that the audit data
(once the true scope of that term is understood) was a gold standard for this
purpose. The relevance of audit data not including information generated by
POL SAP or Credence (both of which were back-end POL systems) is not
clear to me, since neither system was used by SPMs in balancing their branch

accounts.

Page 41 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

129. Having said that, the raw audit trail had a limitation which | was always careful
to bear in mind, which is that it reflected exactly what had been input at the
counter. It could not therefore demonstrate when a discrepancy arose
because of an innocent mistake made at the counter by the SPM or other end
user. However, to my mind, this did not diminish the overall value of the audit
data.

130. The question asked by the Inquiry refers to the “integrity” of audit data. | am
aware that there may be an issue as to what integrity means in different
contexts (or that it may mean something different depending on who was or is
using that term). For example, in relation to audit data, it may be used to
indicate that it was a complete record of all transactions carried out at the
counter. On other occasions, integrity was used to refer to the overall or
general operation of Horizon. In other contexts, | think it was used in the sense
of whether a bug had caused a discrepancy in the branch accounts. It was
also used in the context of whether issues like power cuts, communication
failures or hardware issues gave rise to lost data. These were all distinct

issues.

131. To draw a link with my reflections set out at the start of this statement, | think
that the fact that terms like integrity, reliability or robustness were used but
without common understanding, or used in different contexts to mean different
things, has been a significant part of the problem in some of the case studies

that the Inquiry is considering.
132. To return to the question asked by the Inquiry, | can think of some rare
occasions when an issue arose about the audit data (and as | will explain,

each of these issues was different in terms of its impact):

a. First, in Legacy Horizon, there was a risk (which arose very rarely) that

some audit data could be lost during a counter replacement or rebuild.

Page 42 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

b. Second, in Legacy Horizon, there was a “broken audit trail” issue that
caused a six day gap in the audit data in August 2000. | think | was aware
of this issue at the time but | don’t believe that | was personally involved
in responding to it and | have not seen any evidence that | was. | cannot
therefore add to the detailed description of it at paragraphs 30 to 63 of
the third corporate statement of Fujitsu Services Limited
[WITNO6650300].

c. Third, in Legacy Horizon, | was aware that there was an issue that arose
in Craigpark (and one other) branch in 2007/2008, whereby messages
were not written to the message store. These omissions within the
message store were then replicated once it was committed to the audit
server as audit data. This problem is described at paragraphs 75 to 106
of the third corporate statement of Fujitsu Services Limited
[WITNO6650300]. | will provide further detail about the Craigpark issue
later in this statement.

d. Fourth, during the pilot phase of Horizon Online, there were some very
early bugs that could result in a Journal Sequence Number (“JSN”),
which was supposed to be a unique message identifier, being duplicated
when data was committed to the audit server from the data centre. | also
now understand that this gave rise to a linked problem when the ARQ
extraction process subsequently failed to spot the duplicates. | believe
that this problem is what is being described at paragraph 124 of the third
corporate statement of Fujitsu Services Limited [WITN06650300]. It also
appears that during the pilot a limited issue arose in relation to the
occurrence of a missing JSN. | will provide further detail about this later
in this statement.

e. Fifth, in Horizon Online, a separate duplicate issue arose in 2010
whereby certain messages in Legacy Horizon which were (by design)
occasionally duplicated in the audit data were not removed when ARQ
spreadsheets were extracted using the Horizon Online audit extraction

mechanism. The extraction process via Riposte on Legacy Horizon took

Page 43 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

this potential duplication into account, but the Horizon Online extraction
process had not been designed to remove the duplicates. | referred to
this problem at paragraph 197 of my second witness statement to the
Inquiry [WITN00460200], when | said that: “under Legacy Horizon the
audit process could result in transactions being duplicated (identically)
in the audit. The Legacy Horizon retrieval process spotted this and
filtered them out but the Horizon Online version didn’t.” This problem is
also described at paragraphs 118 to 141 of the third corporate statement
of Fujitsu Services Limited [WITN06650300] (except for paragraph 124,
which as noted above, describes a separate duplication problem related
to the detection of duplicate JSNs in Horizon Online audit data). | will

provide further detail about this problem later in this statement.

133. The Inquiry has asked me to describe any concerns | had about the integrity
of audit data provided by Fujitsu to POL. | do not recall having any general
concerns about it. None of the five problems described above led me to

conclude that the audit data lacked integrity because:

a. In relation to the first problem, it would be very rare for a counter
replacement or rebuild to cause data loss. Any data loss would be clearly
visible in the audit data (in both the raw audit trail and the NT events).
The problem was that although the messages had initially been written
to the local message store, they had not been successfully replicated to
any neighbouring message store before the failure that caused the local
message store to be replaced or rebuilt. As such, this was not a problem
with the audit process in and of itself. Rather the problem was that the
message was missing from the message store, and therefore missing

once the message store was replicated as audit data.

b. In relation to the second problem, | would not see this instance of an
audit trail gap as going to the integrity of the audit data in any general
sense. As far as | was concerned it simply meant that if POL asked for
data from that period Fujitsu couldn’t supply it (although clearly senior
management at POL and Fujitsu took the issue seriously since it

Page 44 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

involved a breach of contract). | don’t recall any other gaps occurring

after this incident.

c. In relation to the third problem, the Craigpark issue gave rise to a
discrepancy in two branches and was fixed. The problem was that a
message was not written to the message store in the first instance, and
did not therefore appear when the message store was replicated as audit
data in the audit server. It was not a problem with the audit process in
and of itself. Again, that this problem had occurred would be evident from
the NT events. | deal with this in greater detail below.

d. In relation to the fourth problem, these bugs causing duplicate JSNs in
audit data occurred during the pilot of Horizon Online and it is my
understanding that they were fixed before the system was rolled out to
the whole estate. | also now understand that the related issue of those
(historic) duplicate JSNs not being automatically flagged up in the ARQ
spreadsheets as part of the extraction process was fixed by the end of
2010. | address the evidence that has been given to the Inquiry about
this below. In relation to the missing JSN, | believe that there were two
instances of this in the pilot which were picked up by monitoring and that

the issue which gave rise to the problem was fixed.

e. In relation to the fifth problem, | did not see this as going to the integrity
of the audit data. By design, there was duplication of messages within
the audit data in Legacy Horizon (this is explained further below). In
Horizon Online the extraction process for the creation of ARQ
spreadsheets ought to have removed these duplicates but did not. This
was swiftly fixed. The issue was with the ARQ extraction process, not

with the underlying audit data or the audit process.
134. To my understanding, Fujitsu informed POL about each of these problems to

ensure POL took them into account if it was contemplating legal proceedings

relying on ARQ spreadsheets for affected branches/time periods.

Page 45 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

135. The Inquiry has asked me to consider the email chain at [FUJ00155534] from
November 2001 and whether | agreed, at the time, with the comment made
by Brian Orzel that “The integrity of [the audit trail] sequencing is at the
absolute core of the product that the post office uses, and can be trusted more
than anything else”. | have no independent recollection of this email. Reading
it now, and for the reasons | have already given, | would have agreed with
Brian’s opinion that the integrity of the audit trail was very important.

136. The Inquiry has also asked for my view of the recommendation made by Brian
in the same email “that any court case relying upon “transaction log” reports
also provided the raw and unadulterated underlying message store extract as
evidence.” | cannot recall what | thought about this recommendation at the
time but | doubt that | would have thought about it in much detail. | say this
because | would have read this email about four years before | had any
involvement in Prosecution Support. | am not sure whether | would have had
a particular view in 2001 about what Prosecution Support should provide to

POL to assist with court cases.

137. However, looking at the matter now, | agree that, in theory at least, there would
have been some benefit in providing to POL the raw audit trail as well as the
ARQ spreadsheets, since the raw audit trail was effectively all audit data (bar
the NT event logs). | would caveat that in three ways. First, my understanding
(from his email) is that Brian made this recommendation to /imit the scope for
legal challenges to the integrity of the data, not because he was concerned
that the ARQ spreadsheets ordered by POL omitted important information or
were defective in some other way (and again | am not sure what his
understanding was of why POL had selected the specific fields for the
standard ARQ spreadsheets). Secondly, it is my understanding that it was
entirely POL’s decision which subsets of the audit data should be extracted
and included in the ARQ spreadsheets. | don’t know what reasons it had for
choosing what should be provided. Thirdly, in practice, the raw audit trail was
not straightforward to interpret, save perhaps to experienced software
engineers, which is precisely why ARQ spreadsheets presented subsets of

the raw audit trail in a more digestible format. In my view, a layperson could

Page 46 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

only have interpreted the raw audit trail with confidence if they had good

guidance or commentary about what to look for.

138. | have considered the views of my former colleagues John Simpkins and
Gerald Barnes (in their evidence to the Inquiry) about the fields of data that
were provided pursuant to an ARQ request. | can see the point that these
fields would not have shown that overall Horizon was working without problem
at a given branch. However, as | have noted above, | didn’t understand that
the fields of data selected by POL for inclusion in the standard ARQ
spreadsheets were supposed to serve that purpose. If | was asked to consider
whether there was a problem with how Horizon operated at a branch then
(subject to POL agreeing) | would have access to the raw audit trail and NT
event logs on the audit server. In the case of Mrs Seema Misra, it is my
understanding that Penny sent the audit data (including the raw data and
filtered NT events) directly to Professor McLachlan (this was at the same time
she sent this to me and POL). | provided him with the unfiltered NT event logs

during the trial (when it became apparent he did not have them).

139. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details of any changes made to the audit
facility, including the details of the impact of any changes on the integrity of
the audit data provided to support litigation conducted by POL. Having
reviewed the documents given to me by the Inquiry, | am reminded that, in
2013/2014, the hardware used to store the audit data had to be replaced
because it no longer had sufficient memory [FUJ00156868]. | wasn’t involved
in the detail of these discussions at the time. | have read the first witness
statement given to the Inquiry by Gerald Barnes [WITN09870100], who states
that he was involved in these discussions and who confirms that all data was
migrated from the old storage system to the new one. | am not aware of this

impacting upon the integrity of the audit data.

140. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the ability of individuals to remotely
access data in the audit trail and the impact this had on the integrity of the
system. As | understand it, the only people with any access to the audit data

were those people with express authority within Fujitsu’s Security team. To my

Page 47 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

knowledge, these people included Penny and Neneh. | assume that the
question of who had access to the audit data would have been strictly
regulated by managers in the Security team such as Brian Pinder and Peter
Sewell. When | say “access” in this context, | mean the ability to access (using
a secure workstation) the audit data on the audit server for the purpose of
extracting it either in its entirety and/or to generate subsets of it into the ARQ
spreadsheets. | did not and do not believe that this type of access through the
secure workstation conferred the ability to add to, amend or delete the audit
data in any way. | think it is important to make this clear: the audit data could
not be interfered with once it was committed to and stored in the audit server.
Sub-sets of it could be extracted onto an ARQ spreadsheet but that did not
have any effect on the underlying audit data as stored in the audit server. |
looked at this issue in more detail in 2017 following my retirement, and | will
return to it and explain it in more detail in my witness statement concerning

phase 5.

The issue at Craigpark branch

Rule 9(2) Request questions 49-67

141. The Inquiry has given me a large number of documents about what it
describes as the issue at Craigpark branch (and throughout this witness
statement, | use the phrase “the Craigpark issue” to refer to it). My lawyers
have shown me some additional documents from the Inquiry’s database that
are relevant to the Craigpark issue. Using these documents, | believe that |
have been able to reconstruct at least some of my knowledge of the Craigpark
issue. It is important that | am clear that | had forgotten about the details of the
Craigpark issue until | saw the documents referred to in the Rule 9(2) Request.
| had remembered that, at some point in the lifetime of Legacy Horizon, Fujitsu

had introduced routine checks of the NT event logs whenever they provided

Page 48 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

ARQ spreadsheets to POL, but | hadn’t recalled the exact circumstances that

gave rise to this.

142. Based on the documents | have seen, it seems that the Craigpark issue was
first discovered at Craigpark branch in December 2007, when a lengthy End
Of Day (EOD) process running on the counter created a temporary (10-30
second) “lock” event in Riposte. This had the effect that, for the short period
until the lock was released, messages written at the counter were being
discarded and not written to the message store. This in turn meant that there
was a risk that the data recorded in the message store (from which the audit
data would be extracted) might be incomplete should there be a coincidence

of the lock and the end user completing a transaction.

143. My understanding, from reading the third corporate statement of Fujitsu
Services Limited [WITNO6650300] and the documents given to me by the
Inquiry, is that:

a. The Craigpark issue was caused by a fix made to the CABSProcess,
which was an EOD process, in May 2007: see PEAK PC0152376 at
[FUJ00154684].

b. Fujitsu found that this fix caused a temporary lock event during the EOD
process. This lock event risked transactions not being written to the
message store, which in turn risked an accounting discrepancy.

c. Ultimately, Fujitsu found only two occasions when the lock event had
caused an accounting discrepancy. There had been many other
instances of the lock event (including at Craigpark branch), but on these
other occasions, there was no accounting discrepancy since all of the
messages generated at the counter had been written to the message
store.

d. The Craigpark issue was fixed in October 2008 and as far as | am aware

did not reoccur (and nor did the fix introduce any new problems).

Page 49 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

e. As a result, the period when the Craigpark issue could have affected
branches was time-limited, i.e. between May 2007 and November 2008.
It was not a latent defect present in Legacy Horizon from the very start

of the roll out.

144. | am aware that in his evidence to the Inquiry, Gerald Barnes explained poor
‘error handling’ and the possibility that, in certain circumstances, if the lock
event struck, the SPM could carry on with a transaction and not realise that it
had failed (in the sense that it did not write to the message store). He referred
to this as a ‘silent error’.

145. | understand Gerald’s point that the SPM may not have known about the error
at the time. However, the SPM had spotted the original incidence of the
Craigpark issue in December 2007 because they had reported it to the NBSC.
Because the Craigpark issue resulted in a transaction not being taken into
account, it resulted in a negative trading position seen on the Branch Trading
Statement. As | noted in [FUJ00155252], this made it visible to the SPM that
something had gone wrong. For those reasons, | do not think it is entirely
accurate to use, or to interpret, the term “silent error” to mean that the SPM

would have no awareness nor any sign that the accounting issue had arisen.

146. Moreover, as Gerald said in his evidence to the Inquiry, if the Craigpark issue
occurred, Riposte would generate a “red event” which was written into the
Windows (i.e. NT) events. These events were monitored by the SMC and
ought to have been flagged to the SSC. Apart from the fact that this
contemporaneous monitoring should have brought these sorts of events to
light, any subsequent examination of the NT event logs would also have

revealed it.

147. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which | became
aware of the Craigpark issue. As explained above, | have no independent
recollection of this issue, but | don’t believe that | was involved in the decision
in early 2008 not to implement a fix for the first occurrence of the Craigpark

Page 50 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

issue. That decision was recorded on 10 January 2008 (and appears to have
been taken by David Seddon): see [FUJ00155231] at page 9: “/t has been
decided that no fix will be carried out for the time being given the rarity of the
problem’.

148. My lawyers have drawn my attention to an email | received from Anne
Chambers (who | shall refer to as Anne in this witness statement) on 2 June
2008 [FUJ00155227], in which she asked me for a second opinion on a
problem she was looking at (and looking at it now, this relates to the Craigpark
issue). Anne referred to having some further materials, if | had time to look at
them. In light of later emails, | don’t recall whether | had time to look into it in
more detail at that time and my lawyers have not found further emails from
Anne linking back to this. That Anne was seeking a second opinion in June
may possibly have fed into the joint POL/Fujitsu P&BA workshop which then
took place on 1 August 2008, where the Craigpark issue was discussed (but |
don't know this). As | explain below, this sort of workshop was not routine and
| have not seen any POL evidence as to why Craigpark was one of the matters
considered. The action points for this workshop (recorded at [FUJ00155230])
state, at point 3, that Fujitsu will “provide detailed explanation of the issue that
impacted Craigpark BIM BE-0158102”. This action point was assigned to Mike
Stewart at Fujitsu, who was the Service Delivery Manager for Online Services.
| note that another of the action points (left to POL) was for it to take in-house
legal advice concerning communications with SPMs in relation to software
issues that impacted branch accounts.

149. | believe that this workshop probably led to an email from Anne to Mike Stewart
and me later that same day (1 August 2008) [FUJ00155238]. Anne explained
the history of the Craigpark issue by reference to two of the relevant PEAKs
and said:

“There is a fix available, but given the low incidence of problems (and
the errors introduced on the back of other fixes) it was decided not to

implement it. But maybe, since we have no way of monitoring for it, and

Page 51 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

R&P mismatches may not be reported by the PM, this decision should

be reviewed?”

150. It is the way that Anne explained the Craigpark issue in the email chain at
[FUJ00155238] that suggests that | probably had not looked in much detail at
it prior to August 2008.

151. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which Fujitsu told
POL about the Craigpark issue. | cannot help the Inquiry with what
communications there were with POL prior to August 2008. Those involved in
dealing with the issue at that time may be able to help with that. That said, |
understand from the third corporate statement of Fujitsu Services Limited
[WITN06650300] that Fujitsu passed details about the Craigpark issue to POL
by means of a BIMs report in early 2008.

152. | also note that various people from POL (including Rod Ismay, Andy Winn
and Shaun White) were present at the workshop on 1 August 2008 where the
Craigpark issue was discussed and an action point in relation to it assigned to
Mike Stewart. Based on this and the fact that Mike sent an explanation to POL
about the Craigpark issue in September 2008 (see paragraph 162 below), |
think that it was probably his responsibility to keep POL updated about the
Craigpark issue. | don’t believe that the responsibility for communicating with
POL about it lay with me.

153. My lawyers have asked me whether these sorts of meetings with P&BA were
routine or whether | can recall anything about why this meeting (or workshop)
took place. | don’t recall what triggered the workshop and evidence about that
appears to be missing. This was not a routine meeting for me and may have

been the first time I’d had this sort of support meeting with P&BA.

154. | note that it has been suggested to some witnesses in the Inquiry that there
may have been no communications with POL about the Craigpark issue until

2009. | am not sure that this is right Apart from the BIMs report in early 2008,

Page 52 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

there were communications with POL about it in August and September 2008.
| can’t say for sure (and | wasn't involved in it), but | would be surprised if POL
had not followed this up or if there had not been ongoing communication about
it.

155. | believe that my responsibility was to assist in determining its full impact. On
4 August 2008, for example, | emailed those who were dealing with the issue
in Fujitsu [FUJ00155238]. | referred to having read the relevant PEAKs. One
of those PEAKs was PC0158102 [FUJ00154683]. In the entry on this PEAK
of 27 May 2008 at 18:32:53, Anne said “there was an NT event indicating a
lock problem on the messagestore.” Hence in my email | said that, whenever
the Craigpark issue occurred, a “red event” would be written in the NT event
logs (this is the same Riposte-generated “red event” referred to by Gerald
Barnes in his evidence to the Inquiry). | asked how practical it would be for the
SSC to carry out periodic checks for this event on the NT event database
which would show that the problem had occurred (suggesting a weekly query).
| noted that this would be significantly less risky than a fix given the low number
of occurrences. | said that Fujitsu needed to be able to reassure POL that it
would spot any further occurrences and have a mechanism to correct the
accounts (if necessary).

156. Throughout the early part of August 2008, | believe that the discussion within
Fujitsu focused on whether my recommendation of checking the NT events
was the best course to take given the low incidence of occurrences and the
risks of an estate wide fix. To be clear about this, there was a view that
spending a good deal of time monitoring for events, on the basis of one or two
incidents a year, was not worth the cost (see the email thread of 11 August
2008 at [FUJ00155231]). And in terms of implementing a fix for such a rare
issue, there was a view that Fujitsu needed to be extremely careful that the fix
did not introduce new (and potentially more significant) problems. See, for
example, the assurance sought by Mik Peach on 11 August 2008 at
[FUJ00155231] that fixing the locking issue “to resolve 2 reported issues, is
NOT going to have a knock-on effect anywhere else...”

Page 53 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

157. In my response to Mr Peach later the same day at [FUJ00155231], | remained

of the view that there should be event checking:

“Given we only have a couple of instances, and a fix is as likely to cause
further problems, then we’re reluctant to make a change to Horizon.
However if Horizon data is being used in evidence for the prosecution of
a Postmaster, it is probably wise to also check to see if any such events
were produced during the period in question. Is this something that
can/should be built into the ARQ process?”

158. As my question demonstrates, even though it was rare that the lock would
cause a discrepancy, | was aware of the potential impact of the Craigpark
issue on POL’s legal proceedings, and recommended that Fujitsu introduce
checks of the NT event logs for the branches and time periods requested in
the ARQ data relied upon by POL in those proceedings.

159. | believe that updated action points for the workshop on 1 August 2008
[FUJ00155230] were circulated by email to all attendees (including the POL
attendees) on 11 August 2008 [FUJ00155229]. This copy of the action points
includes within it, in the “actions taken” column, the following text from Mike
Stewart:

“| have checked this out and we have seen this happen only 3 times in
the life of TP since S90 (2 years +) and it has happened twice at
Craigpark once which was benign. It was decided at the time that there
could be a fix introduced (I understand what is being proposed for the
bug fix and if it were to go wrong could impact the whole estate so

avoiding such a fix sounds like the correct decision.”

160. | can see that, on 22 August 2008, Mike Stewart told me that POL wanted
“further clarification” of the explanation provided on 11 August 2008
[FUJ00155238]. On 3 September 2008, after Fujitsu had carried out further

Page 54 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

analysis into the problem, | drafted a more detailed explanation for onward
transmission to POL. | sent my draft to John Burton (who was my manager)
and Anne to check whether she had any technical comments and whether |
had my facts right [FUJ00155247]. The following day | sent my draft (amended
to reflect Anne’s suggested changes (and those suggested by Mik Peach)) to
Mike Stewart so that he could forward it to POL if he was happy with it
[FUJ00155252].

161. As my draft explanation stated, the failure to write messages to the message
store was very rare. However, the event that appeared in the NT event logs
was common. In other words, it was very rare for an occurrence of this event
to be a symptom of a missing message causing an accounting discrepancy in
the branch accounts. In the vast majority of cases, the event signified a benign
issue such as a processing delay, i.e. an issue not causing any accounting

discrepancy in the branch accounts.

162. Mike replied to say that my suggested draft notification to POL covered
everything and that he would send it to “Shaun” [FUJ00155252]. This is a
reference to Shaun Turner at POL. This helps to explain why | said earlier that

| believe POL were informed about the Craigpark issue earlier than 2009.

163. The Inquiry has asked me to explain what | understood Mik Peach to mean in
his email to me dated 11 August 2008 when he said he understood that | didn’t
“want this to be left un-fixed” [FUJ00155231]. | believe that this reflects the
debate | have described above concerning the cost/benefit analysis of fixing a
relatively rare problem, i.e. there was a risk that the fix could introduce new
problems which might be more serious. Mik was saying that as the Craigpark
issue had only resulted in two accounting discrepancies, the risk of attempting
to fix it outweighed the benefit. His language indicates that he thought that |
wasn’t particularly happy (and it seems that he was probably responding to a
view | had previously expressed to him), but | think it is also clear that |
understood his approach. | think that it is important to be clear that when, in
this email, Mik referred to “....two in 35*52 (weeks) = 1820 are known to have
caused a discrepancy”, he meant that two in 1,820 events were known to have

Page 55 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

caused a discrepancy. This is why he went on to comment that monitoring

these events for one or two occurrences a year was not cost effective.

164. Ultimately the Craigpark issue was fixed. On 4 September 2008, | explained
that | had spoken to Gerald Barnes and | was “satisfied that what he proposed
was not in fact high risk and would remove this particular cause of
timeouts” [FUJ00155258]. Looking at the emails, it seems that the fix was
rolled out to the live estate in October 2008 (see [FUJ00122588]). | am not
aware of the Craigpark issue occurring at any branch after the fix was rolled
out or the fix introducing any new problems (as had been feared).

165. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my involvement in investigating the
Craigpark issue and to describe the impact of the Craigpark issue in relation
to the validity and integrity of the audit data Fujitsu provided to POL. As noted
above, | don’t believe that | was involved in the first incidence of the Craigpark
issue in December 2007/early 2008 and | think the earliest | may have become
aware of it was after Anne emailed me on 2 June 2008. Following the
workshop with POL on 1 August 2008, | was not involved in setting the
parameters of the investigation other than recommending that Fujitsu looked
at NT events generated in connection with the branches and time periods
requested in the historic ARQ data supplied to POL. | made this
recommendation so that Fujitsu could ascertain whether the Craigpark issue
(or any similar message-writing issue) could be seen in any of the ARQ data
provided to POL for potential use in legal cases. | also agreed that, whenever
Fujitsu provided ARQ data to POL in future, Fujitsu should always check the
NT events generated for the branch and time period in question.

166. There was a meeting on 13 August 2008 and Penny’s note of it is at

[FUJ00154824]. This foresaw a number of investigations, one of which was to

“consolidate all of the ARQ outlet and timeframe data requests into a
single excel spreadsheet so that ultimately any relevant errors found in
the Event logs [...] could be compared to ARQ data provided to POL for

litigation purposes to confirm the integrity of the data provided.”

Page 56 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

167. Penny's note stated that this exercise would be carried out from 8 January
2003 since prior to this date, event data had only been retained for 18 months.
| had some involvement in this strand of the investigation: between August
and December 2008, | was involved (with others such as Anne and Steven
Meek) in checking event logs to confirm whether the events were benign (i.e.
that the events were not symptomatic of an accounting discrepancy). Fujitsu
did this as a way of confirming that ARQs provided to POL historically had
“integrity”, which in this context, meant that they were not affected by any
accounting discrepancy. | have found it difficult to reconstruct the exact scope
of this investigation, but my belief, based on reading some of the available
emails now, is that Fujitsu did not simply look at events generated in the period
when the Craigpark issue could have affected branches (i.e. May 2007 to
November 2008). | can’t be sure but my understanding is that Fujitsu looked
at available event data from 8 January 2003 onwards and checked that data
for any event generated in this period that might have caused an accounting
discrepancy in any of branches/time periods covered by the ARQs provided
to POL. | say this because that is my memory of what happened and because
| have seen emails concerning checks on events generated prior to May 2007
(such as  [FUJ00155874], [FUJ00083709], [FUJ00083710] and
[FUJ00083712]) and emails concerning checks on events other than the lock
event associated with the Craigpark issue (such as [FUJ00227975],
[FUJ00083709] and [FUJ00224921]).

168. The investigations agreed in the meeting of 13 August 2008 (including the
event checking investigation in which | was involved) were managed by Roy
Birkinshaw. On 28 August 2008, he sent an email to David Johns and me
[FUJ00155239], which attached a document entitled “Potential Audit Issue —
Horizon” [FUJ00155240]. He described this as a “very drafty Aunt Sally”. |
provided some comments on this paper later the same day ([FUJ00155241]
and [FUJ00155242]). My understanding was that Roy's report was intended
to define the problem — and our response to it — for the benefit of briefing
Fujitsu management. | believe that the language of this report indicates that

Fujitsu took the problem seriously and was determined to get to the bottom of

Page 57 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

it (for example: “At the time of writing — this investigation continues as a matter
of the highest priority”). The fact that Fujitsu deployed a senior development
manager (Roy Birkinshaw) and a senior designer (Dave Johns) to investigate

the Craigpark issue also reflects that Fujitsu took it seriously.

169. The paper made the point that the timing issue (and the associated event) was
acommon one but that the incidence of it resulting in a missing message was
very rare (as explained above, Fujitsu had only detected two occurrences of
missing messages). This was the point Anne had made in her email of 22
August 2008 when she said: “There are many other instances (and have been
since the system first went live) where the Riposte lock event occurs but does
not cause a receipts and payments mismatch” [FUJ00155245]. Almost
always, the event was not symptomatic of any lost data or any accounting

discrepancy.

170. By early September 2008, it seems that a number of different responses to
the Craigpark issue had been set in train. These are documented in Roy
Birkinshaw’s email of 5 September 2008 [FUJ00155257]:

1. JB to review with Hilary over the extent to-which the programme
might need to revisit the history of ARQs that are closed.

2. RB/PS/SM Audit and Security teams to progress changes to the
current process to tighten any weaknesses perceived therein in
responding to Open ARQs.

3. AH to review and articulate a possible set of system changes- (with
cost benefit analyses) that might assist the revised process referred
to above.

4. PS with assistance from audit team - to review the words currently
offered to Post Office in support of ARQ requests and prosecutions
in the light of the review run.

5. SE to consult with Gareth Jenkins over risk and complexity of any
changes that might shorten the locks applies to the code.

Page 58 of 285
171.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

6. SE to review the recent (but as yet unreleased) PCI & EOD
implementations for manifestations of a similar issue and to present
recommendations arising from this review.

7. RB to articulate and promote within HNGx the risk arising from the

learning derived from this exercise.”

| note that strand 4 of this work was being undertaken by Peter Sewell with

help from the audit team. | will return to this point.

The Inquiry has asked me to describe the mitigation and remediation that took
place following the discovery of the issue, and my involvement in this work.
Again, | was not involved in setting the parameters of the remediation work,
but based on my reading of the emails given to me by the Inquiry, it seems
that these were the main remedial steps taken between August 2008 and
February 2009:

a. It would appear (although | don’t recall this) that Fujitsu may have
suspended or delayed providing audit data temporarily whilst it checked

the ARQ spreadsheets previously supplied to POL.

b. Penny identified the ARQ spreadsheets previously supplied to POL.

c. Security extracted all NT event logs generated in relation to the
branches/time periods covered by these ARQ spreadsheets.

d. Steven Meek (a contractor who was working on the audit system)
developed a data-driven filter that removed any events from these NT
event logs that were known always to be benign. Each event had a
number attributed to it so that it could be easily detected for the purposes
of the filter. Anne or | looked at the circumstances in which each event
could be raised and assessed whether that could indicate that data had
failed to be written to the message store. If the answer was “never”, it
was considered benign and placed into the filter. If the answer was

“sometimes” or “always” (or if the event was benign as long as the user

Page 59 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

was not logged on at the time it arose), it was not placed in the filter and

was checked for each individual occurrence.

e. Once events that were known always to be benign had been filtered out,
the remaining events (if any) were manually checked on a case by case
basis. Where there was a question whether the remaining event was
benign or not, or more information was needed, the event was passed
to the SSC for further analysis.

f. In late 2009 or early 2010, when the audit retrieval mechanism migrated
from Legacy Horizon to Horizon Online, the event filtering became an

automated part of the retrieval process.

172. In terms of the outcome of these broader investigations, | can see that they
were summarised on 19 December 2008 in an email sent by Steve Evans at
[FUJ00155397]. He noted that:

“Subsequent investigations have shown that:

+ Nowhere else in the EPOSS code is an atomic transaction attempted.

+ If the problem of Riposte being locked is falsely introduced into the
following scenarios;

0 Selling a stamp

o Existing Reversals

0 Utilities/AP Manual

o Remittances of Value and Non-Value Stock

o Balancing a shared stock unit

o Adjusting Stock

o Rolling over the Office

... in all cases tried

o There were multiple windows events generated which could be used to
warn of the error

Page 60 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

o the actual accounting records written were consistent and so no
accounting problems would have occurred.”

173. | think Steve’s email reflects the fact that, as far as | can remember (and I’ve
not seen anything to contradict this) the mitigation and remediation, despite
lasting some months and involving many technical specialists within Fujitsu,
did not demonstrate further occurrences of the Craigpark issue or any similar
message writing failures (beyond the two occurrences already identified by
August 2008). However, that does not change my view that this extensive
mitigation and remediation was the right thing to do.

174. [FUJ00155421] summarises one aspect of these investigations as at January
2009. It makes clear that the NT event logs for all data provided to POL as a
result of the 195 ARQs which fell within the time frame that the Craigpark issue
was live (i.e. May 2007 to November 2008) demonstrated that no transactions
or balancing activities carried out at the branches had been affected. As | say,
however, this email only summarises what | believe was one aspect of the
investigations. As part of the broader investigations which | believe took place
from August 2008 onwards, the emails suggest that Fujitsu had considered
events in the available data prior to May 2007 (not just the events generated
as a result of locks in the EOD process between May 2007 and November
2008) in order to be satisfied that no ARQs supplied historically to POL were
affected by any accounting discrepancies.

175. The Inquiry has asked me to explain whether the ARQ service was suspended
because of the Craigpark issue. From the documents | have seen (I cannot
remember this), it may have been temporarily suspended or delayed until
Fujitsu had a mechanism in place to check NT event logs associated with any
new ARQ spreadsheets requested by POL. | cannot tell from the documents
for how long the ARQ service may have been suspended or delayed (these
would not have been my decisions). | have no memory of being involved in

communications with POL about this.

Page 61 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

176. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the purpose of manually checking NT
events associated with ARQs. Once events that were known always to be
benign had been filtered out, Fujitsu considered that the safest (even though
it was the most labour-intensive) method for checking the remaining events
was manual. These checks did not involve a complex judgment but it did
require some technical knowledge of the system. In summary, Anne or | were
checking whether an event suggested that there was any possibility of

messages not being written to the message store.

177. The Inquiry has asked me to explain an email | sent to Peter Sewell on 8
October 2008 in which | stated [FUJ00155268]:

“| think it would be better if you arranged with Mik for SSC to do this as
part of there (sic) normal activities. Presumably they were doing this
while | was on leave, but now that I'm back Steven has started sending
them back to me. I'm happy to advise on specific questions, but | think
SSC have a better detailed knowledge of what causes these events and
what are known to be benign than | have. They also have processes in
place to cover for leave etc.”

178. At this time my designated role in Fujitsu was conducting requirements
analysis for Horizon Online, which was very time-consuming. The checking of
NT events was part of the SSC’s day to day role. | was entirely capable of
doing these checks but | think that | was questioning whether it would not
simply be better and quicker if it was done by the SSC (given their more
detailed knowledge of what caused certain events). | think that is also why |
referred to the fact that they were better set up to do it. | also think that | would
have been away for two weeks in late September 2008 (as was my normal
practice). The SSC had managed the event-checking process without me
during that time, and | was trying to say that whilst | was happy to get involved
in exceptional event checking (or provide a second opinion if they had
questions), the SSC should conduct the routine checking as part of their day

to day system support role.

Page 62 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

179. Despite this, | believe that | remained involved in the event checking until at
least the end of 2008. | say this in light of the email dated 14 October 2008 at
[FUJ00152770], which indicates that it was agreed that all events should be

sent to both Anne and me, so that we could divide them up between us.

180. The Inquiry has asked me whether | considered that the mitigation or
remediation undertaken in respect of the Craigpark issue was sufficient. It
might have been open to Fujitsu to rely on the routine monitoring of the NT
events conducted by the SMC and SSC as a response to this issue. However,
the consensus within Fujitsu, with which | agreed, was that routine monitoring
would be insufficient remediation, especially as there was a risk, however
small, that the Craigpark issue might have affected ARQ data supplied to POL
for use in legal proceedings. Hence Fujitsu adopted the more labour intensive
solution of conducting checks on past and new ARQ data. The task of
checking events was time-consuming but Anne and | took it extremely
seriously. | believe, based on the emails | have reviewed, that the mitigation
and remediation undertaken was sufficient for what was, ultimately, a very rare

problem.

181. | am aware that Alan Holmes drafted the Change Proposal which was
necessary in order to automate the process of event checking. The change
that was sought was to the future operation of Horizon Online. Although
Horizon Online was not in the process of being rolled out, its design was
concluded and its build was well advanced. There was an element of needing
to convince Change Management, which was the part of Fujitsu which would
decide whether to implement the changes, why they were necessary. The
emails at [FUJ00155380] provide some insight into this. Whilst | appreciated
this need to “sell” the change, | note that | also commented in response to the
first draft of the Change Proposal that | thought it was going a bit far
[FUJ00224808] but was content to leave Roy Birkinshaw to judge that.

182. The iterations of the Change Proposal identified limitations in the ‘tactical fix’
which was being used to check ARQ returns. The reference to it depending

on a few key people (see [FUJ00154828)) is a reference to Anne and myself

Page 63 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

(and also to Steven Meek). | think that the email at [FUJ00155275] pinpoints
that the concern about carrying on the manual checking of events into Horizon
Online was that Steven Meek might not be available on this longer-term basis

because, as a contractor, his contract was coming to an end.

183. | can see from the underlying documents (for example [FUJ00155278] and
[FUJ00155371]) that | dropped out of the process by which the Change
Proposal was drafted and implemented and specifically the consideration of
amendments required to the standard Fujitsu witness statement producing the
ARQ data.

184. It was the audit specialists (and specifically Alan Holmes) who took forward
the amendment of this standard witness statement. This would reflect the role
that the audit specialists had had in drafting the manuals which related to
prosecution support and the paragraphs in the standard witness statement
relating to audit data (as | have mentioned above). However, looking at the
documents now, | can see that the paragraph highlighted (at page 2 of
[FUJ00155371]) as needing consideration was the paragraph which said that
records of all transactions were written to audit archive media. In the draft of
the statement which follows, certain passages requiring change are
highlighted in “marching red ants”.

185. Although | was not involved in proposing or discussing these changes at the
time, looking at them now, it appears to me that the standard witness
statement was substantively amended by others in Fujitsu to reflect the
situation post-Craigpark: see the draft proposed statements Penny sent to
POL in February 2009 ([FUJ00155206] (an annotated version) and
[FUJ00155420] (a marked up version showing the changes made)). Those
involved in making these changes (who | assume were those who attended
the meetings about the statement) would be better placed to speak to them
than me, but reviewing them now for the purposes of the Inquiry, | can see
that (for example) changes were proposed to the standard paragraphs within

the witness statement which referred to the audit trail.

Page 64 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

186. My lawyers have drawn to my attention (although | don’t think | knew this at
the time) that there was a monthly meeting between the Fujitsu security team
and POL. The minutes of such a meeting held on 19 February 2009
[FUJ00155998] refer to the Craigpark issue as a bug, to the content of the
standard witness statement changing and to it not providing the correct legal
content. | was not a party to these sorts of communications and do not know
what the full discussion entailed. It would appear however that there was (as
| would have expected) channels of communication about the Craigpark issue

apart from email.

187. | was made aware that POL did not want reference made in the standard
witness statement to the Craigpark issue. Penny informed me of this on 4
February 2009: “I've attached a revised witness statement which | intend to
return to POL today - they did not want any reference to the locking issue
included in it, so this has been removed” [FUJ00122600].

188. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details of any concerns | had about how
the Craigpark issue was handled. | can’t recall what | thought at the time, but
looking at the documents now, | think that the potential importance of the
Craigpark issue should have been identified when the first of the PEAKs was
raised in December 2007. | think that it would have been better had it been

escalated internally within Fujitsu, and POL informed, at that stage.

189. However, it appears to me that once it was escalated and its possible impact
understood, the response was appropriate. | would like to expand on why |

think that this was the position:

a. The Craigpark issue itself was live (in the sense that it could have
affected branches) between May 2007 (when the fix to the EOD process
was introduced) and November 2008 (shortly after the fix for the

Craigpark issue being rolled out).

b. Investigations detected the Craigpark issue as having caused an

accounting discrepancy on only two occasions.

Page 65 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

c. It was the rarity of the Craigpark issue which led to the initial decision in

early 2008 not to implement a fix for it.

d. Upon the nature of the Craigpark issue becoming understood by people
like me, Roy Birkinshaw and Alan Holmes (in August 2008), it was fixed
(decision of 5 September 2008).

e. The potential broader significance of the Craigpark issue was also
understood by August 2008 and led to extensive investigations, involving
many Fujitsu specialists, as to whether any similar message writing

failures had occurred.

f. These broader investigations showed that the scenario which gave rise
to the Craigpark issue was the only known instance of an attempted

atomic writing of multiple transactions.

g. These broader investigations, which | believe considered NT events
generated in connection with ARQs previously provided to POL,
including those events pre-dating May 2007 and those events
unconnected to the EOD process, did not identify anything that had

caused balancing problems or discrepancies.

h. Going forward, Fujitsu put in place a process of manually checking all

events generated in connection with ARQs provided to POL.

i. This process became automated under Horizon Online (although there
was still manual checking of any events which remained after automatic

filtering).

190. Reflecting on the Craigpark issue, | think that Fujitsu and POL should already
have had a standardised approach to the checking of NT events when
supplying ARQ spreadsheets to POL for potential use in legal proceedings.
NT events were stored as part of the audit data and POL could always have

Page 66 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

requested them as additional or enhanced ARQ data for any legal case. As |
have explained elsewhere in this statement, POL had agreed what standard
fields of audit data it wanted to extract in an ARQ spreadsheet. However, |
believe that POL should have agreed with Fujitsu that NT events would always

be provided as standard.

191. | have noted the evidence that John Simpkins gave to the Inquiry about the
SSC stopping checking events at some point after January 2011. | was not
aware of any such decision by the SSC. As far as | am aware, under Horizon
Online the event checking process continued. | note John’s suggestion that
SPMs could have been given all of the events and therefore Fujitsu not check
them. | am not sure about this. Where we had a process to filter events (based
upon our understanding of them) and could identify any of concern (and check
the underlying data), then | think it was right that we did this for all ARQs. |
don't think it would have been right simply to provide thousands of events to
SPMs on the basis that they could work out for themselves whether any events

were matters of concern.

Data integrity issue between POL and subpostmasters in 2009

Rule 9(2) Request questions 68-76

192. The Inquiry has referred me to two documents - an email chain from
December 2009 [FUJ00156064] and a report titled ‘Horizon Data Integrity’
from October 2009 [FUJ00124247] — and has asked me to explain my
understanding of the “integrity issues” being raised by the SPMs “at this time”.
| assume that “at this time” is a reference to the period up to the end of 2009.

193. Prior to this Inquiry, | was aware that there had been press reports at around

this time (though | cannot be exact with the dates) detailing complaints raised

by SPMs about Horizon. Some of these | read and some were described to

Page 67 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

me. | remember becoming aware of an article in Computer Weekly after it was
published which described a number of the previous prosecutions brought by
POL, and | believe that | must have read it at some point before | became
involved in Mrs Seema Misra’s case (I address this article in more detail at

paragraph 402 of this witness statement).

194. Having read the email chain at [FUJ00156064], some of the details have now
come back to me (although | note that | was not copied into any of the later
emails in this chain). | can see that, on 7 December 2009, Suzie Kirkham sent
an email to Gavin Bounds, Jeremy Worrell and Jean-Philippe Prenovost (into
which | was copied) explaining that on 25 September 2009:

“During the conference call POL requested from Fujitsu a short paper to
describe how Horizon maintains the integrity of branch accounts when
certain issues affect the branch eg blue screen, hardware failure. Report
requested to be given to Dave Smith by 2" October.

Gareth Jenkins (FJ architect) spent the best part of one day completing
the report. The finished report was passed to Amanda Craib
(Commercial — at Dave Roberts’ request) before being sent to Dave
Smith. Report was sent to Dave Smith on Friday 2" October late

morning just prior to a second conference call.”

195. The Inquiry has asked me to confirm whether the report at [FUJ00124247] is
the report mentioned in this email chain. | believe it probably is the final version
of that report.

196. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which | compiled
this report and what | understood my role to be in compiling the report. At
paragraphs 159 to 162 of my second witness statement to the Inquiry
[WITN00460200], | answered these questions, though | did so without the
benefit of seeing the email chain at [FUJ00156064], which had not been

Page 68 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

disclosed to me at that stage. What | said at paragraph 159 of my second

witness statement was as follows:

“When the Inquiry first provided me with this report, | could not remember
how it had come about. | have now listened to the evidence given to the
Inquiry by Dave Smith of POL, in which he describes a call in which he
briefed me to prepare the report. | do not remember this call but what he
told the Inquiry makes sense to me and | am content to take his word for
it. Mr Smith’s evidence as to why he commissioned this report appears
to reflect its contents: he recalled that he wanted information on whether
Horizon could be affected by power interruptions and about the security
of the audit file.”

197. | believe that Dave Smith’s description to the Inquiry of the topics he wanted
me to cover in the report is consistent with Suzie Kirkham’s description (in her
email of 7 December 2009) of the topics that POL wanted me to cover, i.e.
“how Horizon maintains the integrity of branch accounts when certain issues
affect the branch eg blue screen, hardware failure.” These two descriptions
reflect the actual contents of the report and | believe they explain why | used
the word “integrity” in the title of the report.

198. As | explained in my second witness statement to the Inquiry (at paragraph
161) [WITN00460200], the report was not a survey of bugs or historic issues
that had affected Legacy Horizon. It was nota report on the integrity of Legacy
Horizon in terms of branches being affected by software issues which might
cause shortfalls or surpluses in branch accounts. That is not what | was asked
to do. POL wanted a report that covered the specific topics | set out at the
beginning of the report. As the report makes clear, section 2 addressed the
mechanics of the process whereby messages were written to the message
store and section 3 addressed certain hardware failure scenarios.

199. At the beginning of section 3, | made it clear that the scenarios covered in the

report were “all to do with equipment failures and these will always be visible

Page 69 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

to Fujitsu through the event logs which are retained.” This reflected that
hardware failures leave a trace in the audit data, specifically the NT event logs.
However, in section 3.1.2, | highlighted that if a counter was physically
replaced, “there is a possibility that not all data has been successfully

replicated to another system prior to this failure.”

200. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details of the sources of information |
considered in compiling the report. | am afraid that | don’t remember. Some of
the information (including how the audit trail worked in section 2) would have
been within my personal knowledge. The specific failure scenarios that |
explained in section 3 were provided to me by someone in POL. This could
have been Dave Smith but it is possible that it was Bob Booth (I cannot

remember either way).

201. Although | produced the draft report under time pressure, a number of people
within POL and Fujitsu were designated as reviewers of it (they are named in
the report). In addition to that designation, on 1 October 2009, | shared a draft
with Allan Hodgkinson, Jeremy Worrell, Anne, Jim Sweeting and Chris Bailey
[FUJ00155493]. They were all senior technical people (indeed Jeremy Worrell
was the Chief Technology Officer for Fujitsu's Post Office Account at that time,
so far more senior than me). | felt that they would be able to contribute

anything | had missed or correct anything | had got wrong.

202. | note that my email said that | had been asked to “produce a paper on Horizon
Data integrity to support POL in refuting claims by Postmasters that Horizon
is causing money to be lost.” | cannot now recall this but | assume from the
issues that POL asked me to address in my report that these sorts of hardware

issues were a focus of the claims being made by SPMs at the time.

203. The purpose of the report (as | saw it) was as explained in section 1. | regarded
the report as fairly limited and factual. It acknowledged that there could be
data loss where a counter was replaced. My report was not suggesting that
the entire Horizon system was infallible (it did not address the entire Horizon

system).

Page 70 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

204. | understood my report to be “supporting” POL because it provided an
accurate explanation of the mechanics of the audit trail and what could happen
in the event of the hardware failures referred to.

205. | think, having seen some further disclosure consisting of an email exchange
between Anne and me in the early afternoon of 1 October 2009
[FUJ00226297], that | was trying to strike the right balance in terms of the level
of detail and the audience it was aimed at. In addition to Anne, Jeremy Worrall
appears to have made comments on my draft that same afternoon
[FUJ00226302] and | can see that it was then circulated by Jeremy to Amanda
Craib (who | understand was a senior commercial manager at Fujitsu) in order
for it to be signed off [FUJ00226299].

206. Anne sent me another email about my draft in the early evening of 1 October
2009 [FUJ00155493]. | have been asked about my understanding of that part
of Anne’s email where she referred to CRC read failures and to trashing and
rebuilding the message store. | think from memory that this was a reference
to the process of rebuilding a message store where there were a number of
CRC read failures. | can see from the email trail that it seems we then spoke
by telephone about this on 2 October 2009 [FUJ000226307]. | assume that
we must have discussed her points but | can’t now remember this. The
outcome of our call appears to have been that | did not incorporate Anne’s
points, probably because reference to read failures was going into too great a

level of detail than | understood was wanted for this report.

207. | can also see that, on the morning of 2 October 2009, Ms Craib referred to
wanting my draft report to go through Legal (she copied Fujitsu lawyer Jean-
Pierre Prenovost into her email) and that it would be delayed [FUJ00226304].
| can also see that the final version of the report was sent by Jeremy Worrall
to Dave Smith at POL on the early afternoon of 2 October 2009
[FUJ00216310]. In his covering email, Jeremy noted that the paper had been
through a “commercial and legal review” and was a “purely technical

description of how Horizon ensures data integrity”. This email reflects my

Page 71 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

understanding that the report was intended to be a factual response to the
specific (and limited) questions POL had asked Fujitsu to address, and that
the response had been approved by senior technical, commercial and legal
people within Fujitsu. It seems that all of these people within Fujitsu were
working on the basis, in keeping with the instructions originally given to me,
that the report related to how Legacy Horizon maintained the integrity of
branch accounts when specific hardware and equipment issues affected the

branch.

208. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the previous legal case identified by Ms
Kirkham in her email of 7 December 2009, which she said that POL had had
to concede because the audit trails were too short to provide sufficient
evidence. When | was copied into this email, | don’t think | would have known
what case this was. Having followed the Inquiry, | believe it is probably a
reference to the Cleveleys civil case. | don’t believe | had any involvement in
that case. Reading the email now, Ms Kirkham seemed only to suggest that
the audit data in that case had been unavailable because it had been
automatically destroyed under Fujitsu’s (then) relatively short archiving

policies.

209. The Inquiry has asked me to explain any further involvement | had in assisting
POL to respond to queries from SPMs about the data integrity issues raised
in the email at [FUJ00156064]. | don’t recall having any further involvement in

2009 apart from preparing the report POL requested. After Ms Kirkham’s email

on 7 December 2009, | was not copied into the subsequent email chain.

Removal of track 2 data

Rule 9(2) Request questions 77-78

Page 72 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

210. The Inquiry has referred me to an email chain from February 2010
[FUJ00156112] and its three attachments ([FUJ00156113], [FUJ00156114]
and [FUJ00156115]) and has asked me a number of questions about the
proposal made in this email to remove “track 2” data from the audit trail. |
believe that the email chain at [FUJ00156111] is also relevant to these

questions (though | did not see it at the time).

211. The factual background to this issue is covered in some detail in the technical
paper at [FUJ00156114]. In summary, POL was keen that Horizon conformed
to the PCI (Payment Card Industry) standards for handling credit and debit
cards. A lot of work was done in 2008-2009 to attempt to make Horizon Online,
in advance of its roll out in 2010, compliant with these PCI standards (and |
recall that Horizon Online did ultimately gain PCI certification). | was not
involved in the detail of this work and | note that the email chain was sent to
me for information purposes only. My memory is that one of the PCI
requirements was that certain sensitive authentication data stored on the
magnetic strip of a card should not be stored for any longer than necessary,
and only stored securely in accordance with certain defined business
purposes. This included “track 2” data, and might include, for example, the
cardholder's name, primary account number (PAN), expiration date and
service code. The problem was that Fujitsu knew that this Track 2 data was in
fact held in the Riposte message store (in Legacy Horizon) and hence in the
audit data. That gave rise to issues as to whether the Track 2 data should be
retained as part of the audit data and, if so, what controls existed over how it
was retained.

212. | believe that Fujitsu was concerned that editing the audit data to remove track
2 data, even if required by the PCI standards, might affect its evidential
integrity in court proceedings brought by POL. Paragraph 3 of the paper at
[FUJ00156114] stated that it had been decided by POL that deleting the
legacy data was not a practical option and this was out of scope for the paper.
It explained that the solution outlined would need to be investigated further, a
final recommendation produced and agreed with POL and then the solution

developed.

Page 73 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

213. My lawyers tell me that they have searched the Inquiry’s database for any
subsequent documents about this issue but are unable to find any. Although |
cannot be sure | am fairly certain it was agreed that Fujitsu would not remove
the track 2 data.

214. To address the Inquiry’s specific questions:

a. As noted above, Geoff Butts forwarded me the email at [FUJ00159112]
for my information. | don’t recall, and haven't seen any emails that

prompt my memory, that | had any involvement in resolving this issue.

b. My understanding of the term “audit trail sanitisation” was that the audit
data would be “sanitised” or “cleansed” to remove sensitive
authentication data that the PCI standards encouraged those in the

payments industry not to hold indefinitely.

c. My understanding was that POL and Fujitsu were considering this
sanitisation in order to comply with PCI standards. | am not aware of any
other impetus.

d. The paper at [FUJ00159114] foresaw that there would be further
investigation of the proposed solution. My memory is that the data was
not removed (although as noted above | cannot be certain as to how this

issue was resolved).
e. As for my understanding of the potential impact of removing track 2 data
in respect of prosecutions conducted by POL, without knowing what

further work was done or what actually happened, | cannot comment on
this.

Duplication of transaction records

Page 74 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Rule 9(2) Request questions 79-92

215. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions about the issue of duplicate
transaction records in the ARQ spreadsheets. | think it is important to clarify
at the outset that there are two distinct duplication issues, although they were
both discovered (and fixed) in 2010. It seems to me that certain witnesses to
the Inquiry (including Paul Patterson and Gerald Barnes) may have conflated
the two.

216. The first issue relates to the duplication of Legacy Horizon transactions
extracted using the Horizon Online ARQ extraction mechanism. This is what
is being described at paragraphs 118 to 141 of the third corporate statement
of Fujitsu Services Limited [WITN06650300] (except for paragraph 124).

217. The second issue relates to the duplication of Horizon Online transactions
extracted using the Horizon Online ARQ extraction mechanism. This is what
is being described at paragraph 124 of the third corporate statement of Fujitsu
Services Limited [WITN06650300]. It is also what is being described at
paragraphs 34 to 37 of the first witness statement of Gerald Barnes
[WITNO9870100].

The first duplication issue

218. | addressed the first duplication issue in my second witness statement to the
Inquiry at paragraphs 197 to 204 [WITN00460200]. | have reviewed the new
documents referred to in the Rule 9(2) Request which were not available to
me when | signed my second witness statement. | don’t believe that these new
documents change the fundamentals of the explanation | gave in my second
witness statement but they do add some further detail. | will not repeat that

explanation here, but | will expand upon it by referring to the detail of the new

Page 75 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

documents provided and by answering the Rule 9(2) Request questions

directly.

219. At the outset, | repeat the point that this first duplication issue was not a fault
in the writing of messages in Legacy Horizon nor a problem in the auditing of
that data. The design criteria for Legacy Horizon were that it was better to
duplicate some audit data stored in the audit server rather than risk any data
not being audited. In Legacy Horizon, audit data was extracted from the
correspondence servers and then written as flat files which were picked up
and secured by the audit server. The design of the audit harvester was that
duplicate records were allowed to be included. This is reflected in the technical
manual called "High Level Design of Common Agents" (see AD/DES/042 at
[FUJ00171949]). This made it clear that the duplication of certain audit data
was a design intent.

220. That certain data was stored more than once in the audit data had no impact
upon branch accounting, since the duplicates were disregarded for this
purpose. Nor did it create misleading ARQ spreadsheets when the audit data
was extracted using the Legacy Horizon extraction mechanism: this extraction
process took into account that some audit data would be duplicated in the
audit server and disregarded those duplicates. However, the Horizon Online
extraction mechanism did not do this and therefore, if there were duplicates in
the Legacy Horizon data being extracted, those duplicates would be included
in the ARQ spreadsheets.

221. To be clear, this was only a problem with the ARQ spreadsheet extraction
process used in Horizon Online, not the ARQ spreadsheet extraction process
used in Legacy Horizon. It was also only a problem when the Horizon Online
extraction process was extracting Legacy Horizon data, not Horizon Online

data.

222. The Inquiry has asked for a detailed explanation of this duplication issue. My
second witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraphs 197 to 204
[WITN00460200] seeks to explain it and Penny's note at [FUJ00097058]

Page 76 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

provides a contemporaneous explanation. | will not repeat either explanation
here. As set out in my second witness statement, Fujitsu recognised that the
duplication problem had a clear bearing on Prosecution Support provided to
POL and that POL needed to be notified and involved in determining what

remedial action to take. As Penny said in her note:

“We need to identify which cases provided with ARQ returns since the
HNG-X application has been live have progressed to prosecution and
identify whether duplicate records were included. We will need POL
involvement to ensure all instances are covered. A very quick review
identifies that both West Byfleet and Porters Avenue are included here,

to what extent is not yet known.”

223. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which | and Fujitsu
became aware of this duplication problem. | don’t remember all of the detail,
but looking at the email Penny sent me (and others) on 23 June 2010
[FUJ00097037], which attached her report, it seems that she had identified
that some Horizon Online ARQs included duplicate records in respect of
Legacy Horizon data. This had prompted a meeting with Alan Holmes
(designer of the audit subsystem) and me to agree what to do about it. On this
basis, | believe that | first became aware of the problem on or around 22 June
2010. | believe that we agreed a plan of action, recorded in Penny’s note,

which she circulated on 23 June 2010.

224. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which Fujitsu told
POL about this duplication problem. Penny’s note of 23 June 2010 records
that | agreed to draft a statement for management review detailing the issue
for onward transmission to POL. | prepared a draft the following day (24 June
2010), which appears in the email chain at [FUJ00097037]. As | set out in my
second witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraph 202 [WITN00460200],
my draft was prepared quickly and Penny was poised to send it to POL. The
emails demonstrate that she was told not to send it to POL immediately by

Page 77 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Guy Wilkerson who wished it to be considered by Alan D'Alvarez and Geoff
Butts.

225. It was not my decision when and how POL should be informed. | did however
press that POL should be told without delay, as | made clear in an email sent
to Geoff Butts on 25 June 2010 [FUJ00097070):

“The reason POL have not raised this on the call this morning is that we
haven't told them there is a problem yet. On Guy's advice, Penny has
not said anything to POL until you give us the say so. This was really to
allow you to avoid it becoming an Acceptance Incident.

The work around would require us to tell POL about the issue. Whether
they feel it is acceptable is a different matter. We need to be careful,
since this does relate to evidence used for prosecutions, so | feel that
now we know there is an issue we do need to tell POL about it asap.

(The problem was found by Penny and Alan Holmes earlier this week.)”

226. The draft | prepared was incorporated into the email Penny sent to POL
notifying them about the issue on 30 June 2010 [FUJ00122903]: this email
demonstrates that the POL Security team then passed the issue to POL’s

lawyers.

227. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the impact of this issue in relation to the
validity and integrity of the audit data provided to POL. As | have explained,
the issue only arose in Horizon Online when extracting audit data relating to
Legacy Horizon. In Horizon Online, which did not rely on Riposte, a
mechanism of parsing the raw audit data through XML was introduced, but
this didn’t take into account the fact that there might be duplicate records within
the audit data. A fix was rapidly introduced into the Horizon Online extraction
mechanism to enhance it to take the duplicate records into account and to
remove them from the extracted ARQ spreadsheets. As well as introducing
the fix and ensuring that it was effective, it was necessary to identify and then

Page 78 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

review all of the affected ARQ spreadsheets given to POL since the Horizon
Online audit workstations were introduced (in late 2009 or early 2010) to

replace the Legacy Horizon ones.

228. | note from an internal POL document that POL investigators were aware of
the problem and provided with information about the ARQs affected
[POL00167367].

229. The Inquiry has asked me to explain my understanding of the extent of this
issue and its impact on branches. The issue had no impact on branches since
the duplicate entries did not form part of the calculation for branch accounts.
The only impact was on the way in which ARQ spreadsheets extracted from
the audit data were presented to POL and potentially in POL’s use of those
ARQ spreadsheets in legal cases. As for the extent of this issue, Penny's email
of 24 June 2010 indicates that Fujitsu had identified 112 ARQ spreadsheets
which might contain duplicated entries [FUJ00097037].

230. The Inquiry has asked me to describe any involvement | had in investigating
the issue. After the initial meeting with Alan Holmes and Penny and preparing
the draft notification to POL, | cannot recall having any involvement in the
actual investigations into the problem. These were conducted by the audit

development team (led by Alan Holmes and Andy Mansfield).

231. The Inquiry has asked me to describe any mitigation or remediation which took
place following the discovery of this issue, including details of my involvement
in this work. The actual fix was identified and implemented by the audit
development team (again Alan Holmes and Andy Mansfield would have led
this work). In terms of the affected ARQ spreadsheets, Penny reviewed all of
them, and had meetings with her counterparts in POL about them. My
understanding from the emails is that the first step which was taken was to
ascertain if POL had actually used the ARQ spreadsheets with the duplicated
information in any legal proceedings. Plainly, where the ARQ spreadsheet had
been provided or used in proceedings, it had to be replaced (see
[FUJ00154902)).

Page 79 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

232. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which | was asked
to provide a witness statement explaining this issue. One of the ARQ
spreadsheets affected by the duplication problem related to Mrs Seema
Misra’s case. Looking at the email sent by Penny on 6 July 2010
[FUJ00154905], it seems that she had spoken to Fujitsu’s lawyers (specifically
Jean-Philippe Prenovost) and explained the issues and actions taken as a
result of identifying the duplicate transaction records. The email records that
it was Jean-Philippe's view that Penny had taken the correct actions. It also
appears that they had agreed a form of words for a witness statement in the
cases where the duplicated data had been used. It appears that in Mrs Seema
Misra’s case it may not yet have been confirmed that the data had been
provided to the Court. The next day (7 July 2010), | can see that POL resolved
that | should give a witness statement explaining the problem. On 7 July 2010,
Penny forwarded me (and others) an email from Mark Dinsdale at POL which
said that the POL legal team (he referred to “Juliet” which | assume is a
reference to Juliet MacFarlane) were content if Fujitsu provided a
witness statement setting out the explanation and some additional points. This
made sense in Mrs Seema Misra’s case given my involvement in it and
obviously | wanted Professor Charles McLachlan, the defence expert, to have
the correct data. It is clear from the emails (such as [FUJ00122912]) that
Penny drafted the witness statement for me and | then signed it. My statement

in Mrs Seema Misra’s case appears at [FUJ00122906] and states that:

“The transaction log data disc is made up of ARQ's 436 to 448. It should
be noted that ARQ 447 which records the transactions between 1st
November 2007 to 30th November 2007 does contain some duplications
of audited records.”

233. As | explained in this statement, | provided my explanation of duplicate ARQ
data in Mrs Seema Misra’s case as someone who had a good deal of

experience of the Horizon system and who understood a lot about how

Page 80 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

different parts of it worked. | explained how the duplication in the ARQ data
had arisen and identified that ARQ 447 contained duplicate data. | did not
understand myself to be giving this statement as an expert (in the legal sense
of that word). No one suggested that to me. The statement does not contain
an expert declaration. To my mind, | was describing a technical problem to
assist the court and the defence, and to ensure that nobody misinterpreted the
ARQ spreadsheets.

234. The Inquiry has asked me to explain my reaction when | saw that the West
Byfleet branch (i.e. Mrs Seema Misra’s branch) had been affected by this
issue. | felt that it was an additional complication in the case. But my main
reaction was to agree that we obviously had to explain why the issue arose
and we had to identify where the duplication appeared in the ARQ
spreadsheet submitted. | tried to explain these matters clearly in my witness

statement.

235. The Inquiry has asked me to explain whether | considered the mitigation and
remediation undertaken to be sufficient, or whether | had any concerns about
how this incident was handled. | believe that Fujitsu took this issue seriously
and acted rapidly to understand the full extent of it. Penny took immediate
steps to ascertain where the duplication had appeared in the ARQ data
provided to POL and, in conjunction with POL, identified those cases in which
the data had been provided to the court or defence. A fix was introduced and,
as far as | am aware, the problem did not recur thereafter.

The second duplication issue

236. The Rule 9(2) Request has not asked me any questions about the second
duplication issue. | didn’t recall being involved in this second issue at all and |
didn’t recognise it when | began to see references to it in the Inquiry. However,
| have noted that | was copied into some email correspondence about it at the
time. | note that in his Inquiry evidence, Gerald Barnes dealt with this second

duplication issue, and having heard his evidence and looked at some of the

Page 81 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

underlying PEAKs, | am able to set out some understanding of what

happened.

237. In short, during the pilot of Horizon Online, my understanding is that a small
number of bugs were discovered that generated identical (i.e. duplicate) JSNs
for different messages. This was a problem because JSNs were intended to
be unique identifiers for audited messages from a specific branch and counter
position. As | understand it, all of these bugs were fixed at various points prior
to June 2010, i.e. during the pilot period and prior to the roll out. However,
when Horizon Online audit data affected by this problem was extracted into
ARQ spreadsheets, the extraction mechanism failed to highlight the duplicate
JSNs appearing in the audit data. This meant that the extraction mechanism
also needed to be fixed, and as | understand it, these fixes were all rolled out
by December 2010.

238. My understanding from what | have read is that until the extraction mechanism
was fixed, Penny had a workaround whereby she would manually check for
duplicate JSNs within the ARQ spreadsheets. This added to her workload but
was necessary to ensure that any ARQ spreadsheets of Horizon Online
transactions which contained duplicates were identified by her (and brought
to POL’s attention) pending a fix to the extraction mechanism. Once the
extraction mechanism was fixed, it identified any duplicates automatically
(although, as noted above, no duplicates should have existed post June 2010,

when the underlying problems were fixed).

239. From what | have read, it appears that this was a more limited and confined
issue than the duplication of data in the ARQ returns which arose in relation
to Legacy Horizon. That was an issue with the extraction tool and could (until
it was fixed) have potentially affected any Legacy Horizon ARQ provided by
Horizon Online. The JSN issue would only have potentially affected a very
small number of branches affected by the original issue during the pilot.
Additionally, the majority of ARQ requests in late 2010 would still have been

seeking Legacy Horizon audit data. Again, from my reading of the underlying

Page 82 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

materials, the main issue it presented was that it required Penny to check any
ARQs to rule out duplicates. Having reviewed the material on duplicate JSNs
(referred to in the third corporate statement of Fujitsu Services Limited dated
14 September 2023 at paragraph 124 [WITN06650300)), it appears that on
two occasions during the roll out, routine monitoring identified two instances
of a missing JSN. | believe that this turned out to be a limited issue which was
fixed.

Sysman3 matter

Rule 9(2) Request questions 93-104

240. The Inquiry has provided me with a single email chain [FUJ00154926] and
has asked me a number of questions about the “Sysman3” matter that arose

in Horizon Online in 2010.

241. Whilst | don’t remember this incident in any detail, from reading
[FUJ00154926], it seems that, in September 2010, POL requested from
Fujitsu the ARQ spreadsheets for the Derby branch for the month of March
2010. In extracting these ARQ spreadsheets, automated checks on the NT
events generated at the branch revealed errors that had occurred during
March 2010. These checks were performed by the audit extraction process on
data retrieved from Sysman3, which was the product that managed the NT
events audit trail for Horizon Online. After Sysman3 revealed the existence of
these events, Fujitsu was not prepared to guarantee that the audit data for this
branch (Derby) at that time (i.e. March 2010) had integrity. This is because
there was a risk that the figures in the audit data did not provide an accurate

picture of the transactions carried out at the branch in this period.
242. Itseems that Fujitsu sought internal legal advice from Jean-Philippe Prenovost

about how to explain this problem to POL. The email drafted by Tom Lillywhite
for onward transmission to POL (at [FUJ00154926]) referred to the errors

Page 83 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

detected at the branch during migration and which the POL technical

specialists were already aware of.

243. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the circumstances in which Fujitsu told
POL about this issue. The single email drawn to my attention by the Inquiry
contains the proposed text that Fujitsu intended to send to POL. My lawyers
have shown me [FUJ00155516], which indicates that Fujitsu did notify POL
(John Scott) later that same day. Mr Scott replied to confirm that the ARQ for
the Derby branch was only raised due to a key entry discrepancy, that there
was no investigation into the branch and that the ARQ spreadsheets would

not be used in legal proceedings.

244. The Inquiry has asked me to describe my understanding of the “issues of
integrity” referred to in Tom Lillywhite’s email. In this context, the issues of
integrity were not that the audit data captured in the ARQ spreadsheets was
incomplete (in the sense of there being missing messages). The issues of
integrity were that the audit data might not reflect the actual cash/stock
positions due to the errors that had affected the pilot of Horizon Online at this
particular branch at this time. The automated checking of the NT events logs
generated by Sysman3 had flagged this.

245. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the impact of this issue in relation to the
validity and integrity of the audit data provided to POL, as well as my
understanding of the extent of the issue and its impact on branches. This issue
was not about problems in the retrieval of audit data, the completeness of the
audit data or the creation of the ARQ spreadsheets. Rather it related to the
errors that had arisen at this branch during the particular pilot period. Fujitsu
and POL were aware of the original errors in early 2010 and NT event
checking picked these up again upon the request for the ARQ spreadsheets
several months later. | noted in my second witness statement to the Inquiry at
paragraph 28 [WITN00460200] that there had been some bugs in Horizon
Online during its pilot in early 2010 and that the purpose of a pilot was to bring
these to light. Fujitsu had sight of these and fixed them. There would be

Page 84 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

caution in the approach to the historic data generated by a branch which had

been affected by a bug during the pilot phase.

246. The Inquiry has asked me to describe any involvement | had in investigating
the issue. Tom Lillywhite asked me for my view about the draft notification to
POL [FUJ00154926] but | have not seen any reply from me. | don’t recall
having any involvement in notifying POL about this issue in September 2010.
Having checked, | believe this was because | was on holiday between 11 and
24 September 2010.

247. The Inquiry has asked me to describe any mitigation or remediation which took
place following the discovery of this issue, and to describe my involvement in
this work. My understanding was that the underlying problems at the Derby
branch had been investigated and as | understood it fixed — and POL notified
about them — earlier in 2010. The automated checks performed on NT event
logs when POL requested an ARQ spreadsheet, which highlighted these
problems to Fujitsu for a second time, had become a standard step in the ARQ
extraction process by this stage. The mitigation, in this instance, was for
Fujitsu to say to POL that the integrity of the data in this particular case could
not be guaranteed.

248. The Inquiry has asked me to provide details of any concerns about how the

issue was handled. | had no concerns at the time, and looking at it now, it
appears to have been handled well. The NT event monitoring process worked.

Involvement in the civil proceedings brought by the Post Office against Mr Lee
Castleton (Post Office Limited v Lee Castleton)

Rule 9(2) Request questions 105-114
249. Until | saw the documents provided to me by the Inquiry, | had virtually no

memory of being involved in the civil proceedings between POL and Mr Lee

Castleton (who | will refer to as Mr Castleton), bar one or two conversations.

Page 85 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

The Inquiry has referred me to 27 documents to assist my recall of it but
nonetheless | have little memory of my involvement. | am reliant upon these
documents to help me to reconstruct what happened. My lawyers have alerted
me to a number of additional documents on the Inquiry’s database to which |
refer below. Having read all of this material, | believe that my actual
involvement in the case was fairly limited. | neither signed a witness statement
nor gave evidence in court.

250. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me to set out my understanding of
Fujitsu’s role in relation to the proceedings against Mr Castleton. From the
documents | have seen, it appears that Fujitsu assisted POL in these
proceedings by the provision of information and witness statements, by
undertaking analysis of some Horizon data and by responding to ad hoc

queries.

251. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me how | first came to be involved
in Mr Castleton’s case. It has also asked what | understood Stephen Dilley to
be asking Fujitsu to provide by way of his letter dated 18 November 2005
[FUJ00152573]. | don’t believe that | had ever seen this letter until it was
shown to me for the purposes of preparing this witness statement. It appears
that at some point Brian Pinder emailed me and asked me to address a single
question about human error (which | can now see came from the list of
questions asked in the letter) and that my response to this single question
seems to have been my first involvement in Mr Castleton’s case
[FUJ00154713].

252. | don’t think that | had any further involvement until, over six months later, |
was invited to attend a meeting with POL’s solicitors on 6 June 2006. My
lawyers have shown me an email from Brian Pinder to me dated 5 June 2006
[FUJ00152601]. This email attached an agenda for the next day’s meeting and
a scanned extract from a document [FUJ00152602] which recorded issues Mr
Castleton had experienced with Horizon. | probably read both attachments in

advance of the next day’s meeting although | don’t recall doing so. Brian

Page 86 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Pinder's email stated that he was “not sure how this affects ourselves but
reading the scanned document attached (his queries re Horizon) we may well
require youre [sic] expertise in this.” Looking back at this email, | cannot recall
what my understanding of the purpose of the next day’s meeting was but |
would probably have assumed that | would be asked to respond to the Horizon
issues identified by Mr Castleton. However, | don’t think | knew at this stage
that POL intended me to become a witness in any legal proceedings.

253. | have reviewed an attendance note of the meeting [POL00071427]. It records
the attendees as Stephen Dilley and Adrian Bratt of Bond Pearce solicitors,
Mared Hughes of Hugh James solicitors, Brian Pinder, Peter Sewell, Andy
Dunks, Anne, Naomi Ellis, Graham Ward and me. | don’t recall what was
discussed at this meeting but, having seen the attendance note, it has
prompted a vague memory of a meeting with solicitors regarding Mr
Castleton’s case. | do not believe that anyone gave me this attendance note
afterwards to check its accuracy. | have reviewed the attendance note with

care for the purposes of this Inquiry.

254. | can see from the attendance note that we discussed how Horizon worked
but in general terms. The attendance note records that part of the discussion
focused on the specific complaints about Horizon raised by Mr Castleton.

From the attendance note, the focus was on the following six complaints:

Non-communication between PC terminals.
Screen freezing.

Blank Screen.

Card swipe.

Overnight cash holdings (ONCH).

Lost transactions.

~o® a9 5 D

255. Part 3 of the attendance note records my responses to each of these six
complaints. Overall, my interpretation of the note is that we discussed how
each part of Horizon worked as it related to each of those complaints. Going

by the note, this appears to have been at a fairly general level and | pointed

Page 87 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

to further work which could be done to investigate them. For example, in
relation to the first complaint raised by Mr Castleton, namely that his two PC
terminals were not communicating with each other, it was noted that the
transaction logs could be analysed. In relation to what may have happened
during the period of recovery after a communications issue, | indicated that

this could be looked for in the audit trail.

256. The attendance note records Anne, based on work she had already done,
relaying her analysis of the call logs retrieved from Mr Castleton’s branch.
Looking at her analysis, | can see that Anne offered an opinion that she had
seen no evidence that Horizon had caused losses at the branch. | can also
see that Anne was reportedly clear in the meeting that she did not consider

that there had been any fraud.

257. Because | cannot remember what was discussed at this meeting, | cannot say
with confidence whether the attendance note is complete in the sense that it
records everything people (including me) said. However, there are some
possible misunderstandings on the face of the note. For example, Section 2
records “BP” (Brian Pinder) as saying that Horizon essentially records every
transaction and key pressed. This is incorrect: whilst Horizon records every
transaction, it does not record every single keystroke (although it did record
very significant amounts of data). Section 2 records the comment (I think
attributed to Brian Pinder but | cannot be sure) that the tills are connected to
servers at Wigan and Bootle. Again this is incorrect: the tills were not directly
connected to the Wigan and Bootle servers. Only the Gateway was directly

connected.

258. What | can say is that Mr Dilley’s understanding of what | said at the meeting
appears to have been inaccurate and/or incomplete in certain respects in light
of the draft witness statement he prepared and sent me (which | understand
was based upon his understanding of what | had said at the meeting). |
corrected a number of misunderstandings which his draft revealed and which

| refer to below.

Page 88 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

259. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request asks me to explain why | was not a witness
in this case. | have a vague memory of discussing with Mr Dilley — probably in
the corridor after the meeting on 6 June 2006 — whether | would be a witness,
but | don’t remember the details of what he said. The email at [POLO007 1138]
has been drawn to my attention. This suggests that Mr Dilley regarded me as

a potential witness of fact.

260. Until | received the documents provided to me by the Inquiry, | had no clear
recollection that POL intended me to become a witness, and | certainly had
no recollection of POL’s lawyers preparing a draft witness statement for me.
However, | can now see that, in an email dated 2 August 2006, Brian Pinder
forwarded to me an email from Mr Dilley that attached a draft witness
statement that he (Mr Dilley) had drafted for me ({[FUJ00122279] and
[FUJ00122280]). | considered this statement and made written comments on
it on 3 August 2006 [FUJ00122284].

261. My comments demonstrated that | could not say a number of the things drafted
for me by Mr Dilley. Some were POL’s responsibility and fell outside my
knowledge. My comments demonstrated that | considered other passages to
be inaccurate and in need of correction (see, for example, my comments on
paragraph 16). | also explained that | needed to review further material before
agreeing with some of its conclusions. In general terms, | was indicating that |
could not make many of the statements Mr Dilley wanted me to make without
investigating the complaints which Mr Castleton had raised as affecting his
branch.

262. Perhaps most significant were my comments on the draft conclusion, which
Mr Dilley had drafted as follows:

“There are no grounds for believing that the problems Mr Castleton says
he experienced with his computer would have caused either theoretical
or real losses. However even if the computer did cause losses to be
shown on the (sic) Horizon (which | do not accept), and/or Mr Castleton

Page 89 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

had erroneously entered information on the system, this would have
been picked up when the paperwork he sent to the EDS Processing
Centre each day did not correspond with what was on the system and

an error notice would have been generated.”

263. My comment on this draft conclusion was as follows:

“Not sure that | can agree to this without looking more closely at what

has gone on.”

264. On 3 August 2018, | emailed my comments on the draft statement to Brian
Pinder [FUJ00122283], reiterating in my covering email that more work was
needed and leaving him to decide whether it was worth sending Mr Dilley the

draft statement. | said:

“I've had a go through this. It isn't a complete witness statement and |
won't have time to sort out the outstanding bits for a while. | think we
probably need to get the detailed analysis done before this can be
completed. I'm happy for you to send it as it is to Stephen if you like, but
you may decide it isn't complete enough for that.”

265. | do not know whether my comments on the draft statement were sent to Mr
Dilley or anyone at POL. | have not seen any documents that suggest that
anyone asked me to take any further steps in relation to the witness statement
drafted for me by Mr Dilley, after | passed my comments to Brian Pinder on 3
August 2006.

266. | now understand that the reason why | was not asked to take any further steps
is revealed in an attendance note of a conversation between Mr Dilley and
Counsel for POL (Richard Morgan) on 11 August 2006 [POL0007 1438]. It

records that Mr Morgan advised Mr Dilley that my draft statement was really

Page 90 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“opinion evidence” and ought to be in an expert report. It also states that Mr
Dilley would not chase me for my statement and would instruct an expert
instead. In light of that conversation, it may be that POL decided that my draft
statement should be left. If that is right, | don’t think that this was explained to
me for a number of weeks. For example, in an email | sent on 25 August 2006,
| queried what had happened to the draft statement and whether POL wanted
me to expand it [FUJ00152620].

267. To the best of my recollection, no one discussed with me what the difference
was between providing a factual statement about how Horizon worked,
providing my opinions about how Horizon worked and providing a statement
setting out my opinions about how discrepancies may or may not have
occurred. | have no memory and do not believe that anyone suggested that |
was subject to any special duties in Mr Castleton’s case because | might be
an expert witness. The witness statement drafted for me by Mr Dilley did not
refer to any special duties. The email | referred to above [POL00071138]
suggests that Mr Dilley had originally intended to use me as a witness of fact.
| note that Mr Dilley acknowledges in his witness statement to the Inquiry at
paragraph 133 [WITN04660100] that he did not draft an expert report (in the
legal sense) for anyone at Fujitsu, only witness statements of fact. Nor do |
recall that anyone discussed my employment by Fujitsu and whether this

meant that | could not be an expert witness.

268. To the contrary, on 4 September 2006, Brian Pinder emailed me explaining
why | would not be a witness [FUJ00154733]:

“[Stephen] states that although you would probably make a good
witness, it is for evidential reasons that you cannot be called. To do with
evidence of ‘opinion’ ‘expert’ evidence and ‘real’ evidence etc etc

(complicated legal issues nothing to do with personalities)”.

269. | replied to this as follows [FUJ00154733]: “Fine (I won't try and understand
what this means!).”

Page 91 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

270. | think that this email exchange demonstrates that | had no understanding of
the legal distinction between witnesses of fact and expert witnesses. Brian
Pinder's email did not attempt to explain this distinction. Looking at his email
now, | think he just wanted to assure me that it wasn’t anything personal. As
my response conveys, the reasons given didn’t mean much to me and | didn’t
give it much thought.

271. Brian Pinder's email went on to ask me to liaise with a POL expert “once
appointed”. | do not recall having any dealings with any expert appointed by
POL. My lawyers tell me that POL instructed an expert witness at BDO called
Geoff Porter, albeit it did not ultimately rely on the expert report prepared by
him. That name rings no bells with me and | have not seen any emails
suggesting that | ever had any dealings with him.

272. | note that Mr Dilley’s witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraph 78
[WITN04660100] refers to a meeting that he and his Counsel had with Anne
and other “key witnesses” on 11 September 2006. According to the records |
was not at this meeting. That tends to suggest that, by this point, POL’s
lawyers had taken the decision that | should not be a witness in Mr Castleton’s

case.

273. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request asks me to explain the circumstances in
which it was decided that Anne should be the person from Fujitsu to provide
evidence in this case, and whether | understood her to be giving evidence as
a witness of fact or as an expert witness. | am pretty sure that | was not part
of any discussions about Anne being a witness. As noted above, Anne had
already performed an analysis of the call logs from the Marine Drive branch
by the time of the meeting with POL’s lawyers on 6 June 2006. As set out
below, she and | went on to do some further analysis. | don’t know why it was
decided that she would be a witness but it was probably because she had
done some of the original analysis. | doubt | gave any thought to what sort of

witness she was.

Page 92 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

274. On 28 July 2006, Graham Ward at POL asked Brian Pinder if someone at
Fujitsu could undertake an analysis of the figures recorded on the transaction
logs supplied by Fujitsu against the figures on the completed cash account for
week 42 (08 January to 14 January 2004) [FUJ00154727]. This request was
passed to me and | replied that it would likely be very time-consuming and that
| would struggle to do it for a few weeks given my work on the ongoing
development of Legacy Horizon. | suggested that Anne might be able to help.

275. On 7 August 2006, it appears that the question of who would do the analysis
of the figures in the transaction logs arose again [FUJ00152290]. From my
email it seems as though the plan was that Anne was going to do the initial
analysis and then we would review that together. On 17 August 2006, Anne
emailed me to say that she had spent some time recalculating the Week 42
cash account (and hoped it gave me a starting point) [FUJ00152292]. On 25
August 2006, she emailed me with some further clarifications about the work
she had done [FUJ00154731].

276. Anne, using the data from the audit trail, had reconstructed a Cash Account
for Week 42. This was a very time-consuming process. | would have checked
the methodology for Anne’s calculations and double-checked some of the
data. Based on our work, | prepared a note entitled “Analysis of Marine Drive
Transactions” [POL00081490_035]. | noted that in Mr Patterson’s evidence to
the Inquiry, he referred to Mr Castleton being provided with an Excel
spreadsheet which told him very little. | am unsure what Mr Patterson was
referring to and | was not involved in providing Mr Castleton with material in
his case. What | can say is that Anne and | undertook this detailed analysis in
reconstructing the cash account for this particular week, at the request of
POL’s lawyers.

277. | emailed this note to Mr Pinder on 25 August 2006, suggesting that he forward
it to POL’s lawyers [FUJ00152620]. | said that our analysis “by no means
resolves things but I'm not clear exactly what else can be done at this stage."

| suggested that one solution might be to obtain Mr Castleton’s analysis.

Page 93 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

278. | can see that | updated this note on 6 September 2006 and emailed it to Brian
Pinder [FUJ00152633]. The last version of this note that | have seen is at
[POL00081490_010]. In summary, the analysis conducted by Anne, and
double-checked by me, confirmed that we could not find any problem with
Horizon’s operation at the Marine Drive branch over the period concerned,
and we did not understand how Mr Castleton had arrived at the figures he had
provided.

279. The exercise that Anne and | undertook was, in many respects, a
reconciliation exercise. We populated an Excel spreadsheet to reconstruct the
cash account using all of the data from the raw audit trail. We then compared
the figures in our Excel spreadsheet with the figures that Horizon had
calculated in the branch at the time. Whilst this exercise was aimed at
checking that the accounts reconciled, it demonstrated no underlying system
issues (for example a receipts and payments mismatch). Bar the one

discrepancy, we were able to reconcile the accounts exactly.

280. The discrepancy we found was one of 92 pence. We investigated what had
caused that discrepancy. My note records that this transaction did not include
its Start Time and so the ARQ extraction process ignored it. This would not
have affected the underlying accounts in the branch and a report would have
been generated on the night of the transaction as part of the overnight
checks. We indicated that we did not think this report was relevant. It was an
issue which was confined to Mails transactions (which were usually only for
tiny amount and generally never more than a few pounds) where the start time

was missing and it did not actually affect the branch accounts.

281. | have read the second witness statement that Anne has given to the Inquiry
[WITNO0170200]. At paragraph 76 she reflects that preparing the
aforementioned note was a job for an accountant and she was surprised that
POL thought Fujitsu should do it. At the time, this did not occur to me, but
looking back, | can see Anne’s point. There were other occasions when | was
asked by POL to undertake this sort of exercise and, in the case of Mr

Khayyam Ishaq, this included responding to a report by a forensic accountant.

Page 94 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

282. Beyond commenting on the draft statement Mr Dilley had prepared for me and
assisting with producing the aforementioned note with Anne in late August and
early September 2006, | believe that my involvement in Mr Castleton’s case
was limited to responding to discrete issues referred to me by Brian Pinder as
and when they arose. For example, based on the documents referred to in the
Rule 9(2) Request and those my lawyers have shown me, it seems that:

a. On 2 November 2006 | responded to a question about computer freezing
which had been raised in a witness statement from Greg Booth, who |
was told was the manager of Newbury Post Office. It appears from
[POL00081826_022] (pages 4-7) that Mr Dilley initially emailed Brian
Pinder, providing information that Mr Booth had experienced a freeze
whilst undertaking a transaction and that the transaction, for £1.47, had
been lost. Brian Pinder provided some information to Mr Dilley about this
specific transaction (the email trail suggests that this information came
from the SSC). It appears that having seen this, | emailed Mr Pinder to
say that evidence of computer freezes and restarts should be in the audit
trail, noting that restarts were a normal part of the “cleardesk” function
every evening. | noted that other restarts could be unusual and could be
searched for. | said that | had not done this and asked if anyone else
had. | also said that | could do this if required (see [FUJ00152643]). Brian
in turn (see [POL00081826_022]) informed Mr Dilley that unusual
restarts could be searched for. Mr Dilley replied to say that Mr Booth was

preparing a statement about it.

b. | conducted some analysis of cash declarations at the Marine Drive
branch [POL00069730], which | sent to Brian Pinder on 13 November
2006 [FUJ00152652].

283. | was not asked to provide a witness statement on any of these issues.

284. | did not attend any of the trial in Mr Castleton’s case although | became aware
of the judgment afterwards, because | was included on the distribution list in

Page 95 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Mr Dilley’s email dated 23 January 2007 [POL00098862]. The Inquiry has
asked me for my reaction to the outcome of the case at the time. The covering
email said that the Court had considered the issues raised by Mr Castleton
and had found no faults in the system. | do not recall reading the judgment line
by line but | may have scanned it to read the section about Anne’s evidence.
| also think that | understood, from others, that the judgment was of some
significance because the court had found that Horizon had worked soundly at
Mr Castleton’s branch.

285. The Inquiry has asked me whether | have any reflections on the case that are
relevant to the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference. It is difficult for me to provide
much insight into this case given that | was not called as a witness. Apart from
the work that | did with Anne on some of the cash account analysis, | was not
involved in considering the detail of the underlying data, and | don't believe
that | was provided with the accountancy reports that | now understand Mr
Castleton had commissioned. If it is correct that Mr Dilley did not see my
comments on the draft witness statement (or if he was not informed that |
thought more work needed to be done to support a number of the points he
had drafted) then that may have been a missed opportunity to ensure that he
properly understood that | couldn’t make general statements in response to
Mr Castleton’s points without undertaking some analysis of the data. That
said, | understand Anne to have done her investigation to see if she could see

any underlying system cause of the discrepancies and she could not.

286. At paragraph 139 of his witness statement to the Inquiry [WITN04660100], Mr
Dilley refers to a call that his then boss, Tom Beezer, had with POL in April
2006 in which they reportedly told POL that evidence from Fujitsu would not
be “independent” expert evidence. As noted above, | do not think that anyone
explained to me that | could not be a witness because my evidence was
opinion evidence or because | was employed by Fujitsu. The email from Brian
Pinder about the decision not to use me as a witness and my reply suggests
there was no considered discussion of my position with me and | certainly

don't recall this having happened.

Page 96 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

287. | am now aware of the “afterthoughts” note Anne wrote after she appeared as
a witness in Mr Castleton’s case [FUJ00152299]. | do not believe that | was
sent this note. It goes without saying, knowing everything | do now and given
the position that | am in, | obviously wish that her note had been acted on.
Fundamentally, it would have formalised the process when Fujitsu staff gave
evidence in legal proceedings which went beyond simply producing ARQ data.
Again, | am aware that this is an obvious point, but | particularly wish that there
had been formality in respect of the provision of expert evidence and proper

training and guidance given about the legal duties that this gave rise to.

288. At some point after Mr Castleton’s case, | became aware that Anne was
reluctant to give evidence and didn’t want to do it again. | don’t think that this
prompted a discussion between us about any points in her note or specifically
that she was treated as an expert when she thought she was giving factual

evidence about her investigations.

Involvement in criminal prosecution case studies being examined by the Inquiry

R v Hughie Thomas

Rule 9(2) Request questions 115-125

289. | understand that Mr Hughie Thomas (who | will refer to as Mr Thomas) was
the SPM at Gaerwen branch and that he was prosecuted by POL in relation
to shortfalls at his branch in 2004 and 2005.

290. | have very little independent memory of this case and | am dependent on the
documents to reconstruct my involvement in it.

291. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request refers to 12 documents to assist with my

recollection. All of them originate from Fujitsu, not POL. My lawyers have

Page 97 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

drawn my attention to a number of additional documents on the Inquiry’s
database which | refer to below. It is clear from all of these documents that my
witness statement went through a number of drafts circulated by email,
although as explained below, | cannot be sure which particular drafts were the
attachments for which particular emails. As | shall explain, | also cannot be
sure whether | saw or approved what appears to be the last draft (dated 6 April
2006), which is not signed by me.

292. The Inquiry has asked me how | came to be involved in this case. In the Rule
9(2) Request, the Inquiry has referred to an email dated 10 March 2006 from
Graham Ward at POL to Fujitsu employees (their names are not visible on the
email but they appear to be Brian Pinder, Neneh and Penny), in which Mr
Ward said that he needed a witness statement in relation to Gaerwen branch
[FUJ00122203]. Mr Ward asked, “Can you add an extra paragraph in your
statement explaining how on-line banking transactions are processed and the
data downloaded and how nil transactions can occur.” | believe that Mr Ward’s
request for this additional paragraph concerning “nil transactions” explains
how | came to be involved in Mr Thomas's case. | understand that this was
some months after POL had concluded its investigation of Mr Thomas and

charged him with theft.

293. On 21 March 2006 at 4.32pm, Brian Pinder emailed me, asking me to put
something together in response to Mr Ward’s email. He sent me some ARQs
that displayed a number of nil transactions [FUJ00152582]. | emailed with
some draft wording and asked whether this provided enough detail
[FUJ00152582].

294. Brian Pinder replied to me the following morning (22 March 2006), noting that
he would ask Neneh to put my email into statement form [FUJ00152582].
Later that same day at 1.03pm, Neneh emailed Mr Ward, attaching a draft
witness statement [FUJ00122203]. My lawyers tell me that they cannot find a
copy of this draft statement on the Inquiry’s database but | believe — based on
my email to Brian Pinder the previous day and the further drafts described

below — that it focused only on the issue of nil transactions, as requested by

Page 98 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Mr Ward. Although | was not copied into the email, | believe that, as indicated
by Brian Pinder, Neneh would have prepared this draft statement using the

proposed wording | had emailed to Brian Pinder the previous day.

295. At 2.11pm on 22 March 2006, Mr Ward replied to Neneh, identifying parts of
the draft he wasn’t happy with [FUJ00122203]. This included the fact that he
was concerned with my use of the term “system failure”.

296. Neneh forwarded this email to me and | replied to her at 5.40pm, copying Brian
Pinder, explaining that any value of Response Code greater than 10 did imply
some end to end system failure and that the actual value made it clearer what
exactly the failure was and where it had been detected.| asked Neneh
whether specific language should be used in my statement to describe what
these system failures were or whether to keep the wording general but clearer.
| addressed my request for guidance to Neneh because | had been liaising

with her about the case already.

297. The next day (23 March 2006) at 3.29pm, Neneh emailed me, attaching a
revised draft of my witness statement and referring to a conversation that we
had had earlier that day [FUJ00122203]. Neneh explained that she believed
that Mr Ward thought that “system failures” were “drastic events”, whereas in
our conversation, she noted that | had said that they were “normal system
occurrences”. | don’t recall having a specific conversation with Neneh about
these system failures at Gaerwen branch being “normal system occurrences”

but | would have discussed them in those sorts of terms with her. This is for

the reasons | gave in my email sent at 5.40pm on 22 March 2006.

298. To expand on these reasons and provide some technical context: the
response codes greater than 10 appearing in the ARQ data given to me for
Gaerwen branch (response codes 23, 26 and 32) all meant that there had
been an end to end failure to carry out an online banking transaction
successfully. | regarded these codes as a normal occurrence in a distributed
system (i.e. a system where there is a series of communications needed to

complete a bank transaction). They meant that somewhere along the chain of

Page 99 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

communications between the Post Office branch and the bank (and back
again), there had been a failure within the chain, and so the payment
transaction had not completed. The fact that these system failures were
anticipated is why particular response codes had been configured to assist in

diagnosing them.

299. At 3.50pm on the same day (23 March 2006), | replied to Neneh, attaching my
draft statement with a few revisions [FUJ00122203]. The Rule 9(2) Request
implies that the draft statement attached to this email may be [FUJ00122204],
but | am unsure whether this was the attachment to this particular email (sent
at 3.50pm) or an attachment to a different email sent earlier in the same email
chain. My lawyers tell me that there is another draft of this statement on the
Inquiry’s database at [FUJ00122201], which, like [FUJ00122204], is also
dated 23 March 2006. The format of these draft statements, including the
references to the “CJ Act 1967” and the other text that appears as their

headers and footers, was the format that they were put into by Neneh.

300. Both of these drafts contained a general description of nil transactions which
reflects the proposed wording | had emailed to Brian Pinder on 21 March 2006.
They explained that response codes 23 and 26 indicated that the transactions
had been “failed by FI”. “FI” stands for “Financial Institution.” (I am unsure why
they did not address response code 32 but | can see that reference to this was
added in subsequent drafts). This meant that there had been a failure in the
banking side of the chain of communications, rather than a failure in the branch
side. In other words, these response codes did not indicate a failure within
Horizon but (most likely) a technical failure associated with the bank’s
payment processing software. Looking at the documents now, | am afraid that

| cannot provide any further detail about what type of technical failure it was.

301. On 24 March 2006 at 9.35am, Neneh sent to Mr Ward what she described as
a “second draft” of my statement [FUJ00152587]. Mr Ward replied at 11.37am,
attaching a new draft, noting that the draft needed “more work”, and repeating
that he was still not happy with my wording in relation to “systems failures”
[FUJ00152587]. Neneh forwarded this email and the draft to me at 12.06pm

Page 100 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

[FUJ00152587]. | replied at 8.59am on 28 March 2006, attaching a draft that
responded to Mr Ward’s annotations [FUJ00152587]. Mr Ward replied to Brian
Pinder, copying Neneh and me, at 2.15pm on the same day, expressing
frustration that the witness statement was taking so long to finalise
[FUJ00152587].

302. | believe that [FUJ00122211] is the draft that Mr Ward sent to Neneh at
11.37am on 24 March 2006. This shows his track changes in red. | believe
that [FUJ00122216] is the draft that | sent back to Mr Ward at 8.59am on 28
March 2006 (although the draft itself is still dated 24 March 2006 and the track

changes do not appear in any colour).

303. | note that, when Mr Ward marked up my draft, he deleted part of my
explanation of zero transactions. My draft (on page 1) had set out “three main
reasons why a zero transaction may be generated as part of the banking
system”, and then gave three numbered reasons, including as the third
reason, “there has been some sort of System Failure. Such failures are normal
occurrences.” It seems that in the draft he marked up at [FUJ00122211], Mr
Ward deleted this third reason. Next to this deletion he added a comment
criticising my explanation of zero transactions (“This is a really poor choice of

words...”).

304. When | sent the draft back to Mr Ward on 28 March 2006 [FUJ00122216], |
can see that | responded to his comment, explaining why my description of
zero transactions as system failures was not significant in the way that he

seemed to think:

“Please can you suggest something better then? What we have here are
genuine failures of the end to end system which are not part of normal
operation, but are anticipated and the system is designed to cope with
them [...] In all cases the system is designed to identify such failures and
handle them in such a way that the Customer, the Postmaster, Post
Office Ltd and the Fis are all clear as the status of the transaction and

Page 101 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

any necessary financial reconciliation takes place. | guess one option is
to delete the paragraph since it is purely an introduction to the following

more detailed description.”

305. | believe | was trying to explain that whilst these failures were not part of the
normal operation of the system in one sense (because plainly most banking
transactions would just go through) they were normal in another sense, in that
these sorts of end to end failures were to be expected occasionally and the
system was designed to cope with them. In the specific case of response
codes 23 and 26 (failures at the banking not the branch end), these were
designed to notify all relevant people in the payment chain that the payment
transaction had not completed. Within the branch, for example, the counter
was designed to receive these response codes and display a message
warning the SPM or other end user that a payment failure had occurred. In
addition, the system should also have printed out a ‘failure receipt’ with a

similar message for the customer.

306. The next significant email appears to be on 28 March 2006, when Penny
emailed Brian Pinder, copying me [FUJ00155719]. It seems that Brian may
have asked Penny to include an explanation of nil transactions in her witness
statement in Mr Thomas's case but she refused to do so, suggesting that | do
it.

307. The next day, 29 March 2006, Brian forwarded me Penny's email and asked
me whether there was a possibility that | could “re-produce the spreadsheets
for the statement”, as Penny had suggested [FUJ00152591]. | cannot recall
what my response was to this but | can see that on the next day (30 March
2006), | emailed Brian, commenting that "/'ve taken the data off the Peak and
carried out my own analysis of it and presented the results in the attached
Word Document. Hopefully this is the sort of thing that POL want"
[FUJ00122230]. My email attached a Word document headed ‘Analysis of
Zero Value Transactions’ [FUJ00122229] and three ARQ data spreadsheets
[FUJ00122231], [FUJ00122232] and [FUJ00122233].

Page 102 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

308. My Word document set out a table that itemised the total number of banking
transactions at Gaerwen branch within the three specified time periods and,
within these figures, the total number of nil transactions for each period. |
explained that | had created the accompanying spreadsheets listing the data
for all nil transactions (one spreadsheet for each of the three time periods). |
explained how to interpret this data and listed the response codes found
amongst the data. Of the three response codes in these spreadsheets which

were greater than 10:

a. | explained that response codes 23 and 26 indicated an “unusual
response from the Financial Institution” but that these were still normal
occurrences and should result in clear instructions to the end user
warning them that no cash should change hands.

b. | explained that response code 32 indicated that Horizon had not
received any “response from the Financial Institution within a timeout
period” but that this was also a normal occurrence and should again
result in clear instructions to the end user warning them that no cash

should change hands.

309. As my initial drafts indicate, | would have been entirely happy to use the words
“system failure” or “system error” as | had put it. However, | could see from
Graham Ward's responses that this was capable of leading to confusion and
being taken the wrong way, and would have been happy to use what |
considered to be less emotive (though still correct) wording in my description.
When | say taken the wrong way, | mean that the three response codes greater
than 10 could be taken as a system failure within Horizon (which they were
not) rather than a system failure on the banking side of a transaction (which
they were). My Word document dated 30 March 2006 at [FUJ00122229] tried

to explain this point.

310. The last draft of my witness statement that | have seen in Mr Thomas’ case
(dated 6 April 2006 [FUJ00122237]) adopted the language of my earlier Word

Page 103 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

document dated 30 March 2006 in part. My Word document had just set out
the technical points but not the other parts of this draft witness statement.

311. | am now unclear as to how this draft of my witness statement, which is
unsigned, came into existence. Through documents disclosed by the Inquiry
(such as [FUJ00152591]), | can see that Diane Matthews from POL came to
take my statement, and from [FUJ00155721], | can see that this seems to
have happened on 6 April 2006. The email of 19 April 2006 at [FUJ00152592]
also suggests that | had met Ms Matthews a few weeks before.

312. | am afraid that | do not recall meeting Ms Matthews. | cannot help the Inquiry
with any information or guidance that she gave me about giving my statement.
In summary, | do not know who prepared the draft dated 6 April 2006
[FUJ00122237], whether | was ever shown this draft, whether | approved or

signed it, or whether there were subsequent drafts that | did approve and sign.

313. What I can say is that the data that | examined, from the PEAK, was specific
to the three time periods that POL asked me to analyse. | examined this data
in relation to nil transactions because that is what POL asked me to do. | do
not recall receiving any briefing from POL (or anyone else) setting out the
factual history of the case or summarising the prosecution evidence or the
issues raised by Mr Thomas. As far as | am aware, all of the instructions |
received from POL to prepare my witness statement in Mr Thomas’ case were
contained in the emails from Mr Ward.

314. | have been asked by my lawyers if any investigator or lawyer from POL ever
mentioned to me that POL might have a duty to disclose to the defence drafts
of any witness statements | provided to POL (if they differed from the final

draft). This was never mentioned to me.

315. | recall that certain preparations were made for me to attend court to give
evidence in Mr Thomas ' trial as | had to rearrange some of my family holiday
plans. Some of the emails given to me by the Inquiry have brought these

details back to me. On 12 July 2006, for example, there was an exchange of

Page 104 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

emails between me and Diane Matthews, POL’s investigation manager
[FUJ00152641]. This is the email | referred to at the start of this witness
statement in which | told her that | had never given evidence before and that
what I knew was based on films and TV. As | have explained, she told me '/...]
it is pretty much as you see on TV” and that | would only be asked questions
specifically about my statement. | think that this was the only guidance | was
given.

316. The Inquiry has asked whether | considered myself to be providing evidence
in Mr Thomas’ case as an expert witness. | have no clear memory of anyone
mentioning the word “expert” at any point in this case and | doubt | gave it any
thought. | understood that | was giving evidence about Horizon because of my
experience and knowledge of it. | considered myself to be an expert in that
sense. | repeat the point that | made at the outset of this witness statement
that | don’t think that it was ever explained to me that there might be a legal
difference between my giving factual evidence about Horizon (for example
what a failure code meant); my giving evidence about how Horizon worked
based upon my experience and understanding of it (for, example, what ought
to happen in a given scenario); and my giving evidence about any data |
examined in relation to a specific branch (for example, whether it explained a

discrepancy in the accounts).

317. The format of my draft witness statements in Mr Thomas’ case were given to
me by Neneh. They contained no expert declarations. The earlier drafts (such
as [FUJ00122204]) initially contained the two standard paragraphs which

appear at the very end of many Fujitsu statements:

“There is no reason to believe that the information in this statement is
inaccurate because of the improper use of the computer. To the best of
my knowledge and belief at all material times the computer was
operating properly, or if not, any respect in which it was not operating
properly, or was out of operation was not such as to effect the
information held on it.

Page 105 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Any records to which | refer in my statement form part of the records
relating to the business of Fujitsu Services. These were compiled during
the ordinary course of business from information supplied by persons
who have or who may reasonably be supposed to have personal
knowledge of the matter dealt with in the information supplied, but are
unlikely to have any recollection of the information or cannot be traced.
As part of my duties, | have access to these records.”

318. In highlighting my uncertainty as to whether these paragraphs were true, | said
in [FUJ00122204] that all | done was to interpret the data in the spreadsheets
sent to me. In [FUJ00122218] | also commented within the text that:

“I've had nothing to do with producing the spreadsheets. All I've done is
made some statements based on what is in the spreadsheets. | assume
that Neneh or Penny produced the spreadsheets, but | have no
personal knowledge as to what was included within them and what was
excluded. For all | know, you could have typed them up from scratch...”

319. As my comments indicate, | did not understand that these two paragraphs,
which also appeared in the standard witness statements signed by people like
Penny and Neneh when they produced ARQ data, were about the operation
of Horizon or the ‘integrity’ or ‘robustness’ of Horizon at a given branch, or
across the estate. As | have explained above, that would not have made much
sense to me. Simply producing fields of ARQ data for specific time periods
would not provide a basis for saying that the Horizon system was operating
properly at a branch. As | have explained above, doing my best to recall what
| thought at the time or what | was told, | think the first of these two paragraphs
related to the proper operation of the computers involved in the production of
the witness statement. | think the second of the two paragraphs related to the
process by which any records referred to in the witness statement had been
obtained.

Page 106 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

320. This is consistent with my being uncomfortable in Mr Thomas’ case that | had
not extracted the nil transactions data myself. | had the extracts of the nil
transactions which | had been provided with originally but! could not speak to
that process of extraction and say that the audit workstation was operating
properly. | also had no ability to access the audit server to produce the
transactions myself. | therefore (as | set out in my Word document of 30 March
2006 at [FUJ00122229]) obtained the extracts through the PEAK system:

“Fujitsu have a fault management system called the PEAK system,
which is used for passing faults around the team and tracking faults
raised regarding the Post Office Account. | extracted data from this
system concerning Gaerwen Post Office.”

321. As | have said, | cannot recall meeting Ms Matthews but she may have
discussed the two standard paragraphs with me. | am sure that | would have
discussed the paragraphs with Neneh or Penny (and sought their guidance
about them) given that they were standard on the Fujitsu witness statements
and that Neneh had used those paragraphs when she first put together my
draft witness statement for Mr Thomas’ case. | obviously did resolve to
produce the spreadsheets myself and it may be the case that after | had
extracted the data from the PEAK system, | felt that the standard paragraphs
could be reinserted into the statement. This is because | had obtained the
three spreadsheets of ARQ data myself so could speak personally to the
process by which | had obtained them. However, | note that only the first of
the two standard paragraphs was reinserted into the draft dated 6 April 2006.
| am afraid that after eighteen years or so | cannot recall why this is the case
or what advice or guidance was given to me about it. As explained above, |
am unsure whether this is the final version of the statement. In any event, | did
not think that either of the two standard paragraphs represented an assurance
that Horizon was working properly at Gaerwen branch. Rather | had been
asked by POL to consider three spreadsheets of ARQ data for the purpose of

identifying and explaining the nil transactions appearing in them.

Page 107 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

322. Reflecting on the case, | note that my Word document dated 30 March 2006
(and my draft witness statement dated 6 April 2006) referred to Fujitsu’s PEAK
fault management system, which | said was “used for passing faults around
the team and tracking faults raised regarding the Post Office Account.” | don't
believe that this reference led Mr Ward or Ms Matthews (or anyone else at
POL) to ask me for any further information concerning faults in Horizon. |
assumed that POL was well aware that Fujitsu had a system like this for

tracking and fixing faults in Horizon since such faults were inevitable.

323. The Inquiry has asked me what my reaction was to the outcome of the case
at the time. On 8 November 2006, | was one of a number of people who
received an email from Diane Matthews to say that Mr Thomas had been
sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment. | have some recollection of being a
bit taken aback that he had received a custodial sentence, although | didn’t
know whether this was the outcome that POL expected. Beyond this, | cannot
recall now what my thoughts were. It doesn’t appear that | knew much in terms

of the background to the case and | had not had to go to court.

324. The Inquiry has asked me whether | had any concerns about the proceedings
against Mr Thomas at the time. | did not. | didn’t know that much about the
investigation into Mr Thomas or the background to the prosecution apart from
the one issue (nil transactions appearing in three periods of ARQ data) that

POL had asked me to consider.

325. | have read Mr Thomas’ witness statement to the Inquiry [WITN01620100]. |
was very concerned by his description of his treatment at court and in prison.

| am incredibly sorry for everything that he went through.

R v Seema Misra

Rule 9(2) Request questions 126-145

Page 108 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Background

326. | am aware that Mrs Seema Misra (who | will refer to as Mrs Misra) was the
SPM at West Byfleet branch and that she was prosecuted by POL in relation
to shortfalls she experienced when using Legacy Horizon between 2005 and
2008.

327. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request refers to 85 documents to assist with my
recollection of this prosecution. My lawyers have shown me many more
documents on the Inquiry’s database which | think are relevant and to which |

refer below.

328. My involvement in Mrs Misra’s prosecution marked a distinct change to other
cases POL had sought my assistance in. To the best of my recollection, prior
to Mrs Misra’s case, | had assisted POL in a fairly small number of cases
(including the prosecution of Mr Thomas). In each of these prosecutions, my
witness statements were short and focused on single technical issues. In Mrs
Misra’s case, my role evolved from providing informal comments upon the ‘24
interim technical expert's report’ written by the defence expert, Professor
Charles McLachlan, to producing five witness statements in total. This was the
only case in which | gave oral evidence. | can see that my role in Mrs Misra’s
case developed over many months and, looking at it now, without any formality
or clarity about my status. It is only now that | understand this.

329. | did not receive any letter of instruction for my work on Mrs Misra’s case,
whether from POL or Fujitsu. | did not receive any written instructions about
expert duties. | do not recall that anyone explained to me that | needed to
record and retain underlying analysis that | did or the work that colleagues did.
| do not recall that anyone explained to me that | was subject to duties of
disclosure as an expert or what that might mean in Mrs Misra’s case. | was
not given any sort of schedule to fill in nor was it suggested to me that | should
keep one. | provided witness statements in the same format as | did in Mr

Thomas’ case. None of them contained an expert declaration. When | gave

Page 109 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

oral evidence, | was not asked to confirm that | understood any expert
declaration. | was not asked to confirm that | had prepared my evidence in
accordance with the duties to which experts are subject. Neither prosecuting
counsel nor defence counsel nor the Judge asked me any questions about the
fact that my statements did not contain an expert declaration or whether |

understood that | was subject to a number of duties as an expert.

330. In large part, what POL asked me to do in Mrs Misra’s case was to respond to
the hypotheses about Legacy Horizon raised by the defence expert, Professor
McLachlan. Where | had insufficient information to agree or disagree, or |
simply did not know the answer, | set this out in my witness statements and
explained what information | would need to review to be able to properly
assess the matter. Also, in some cases, Professor McLachlan’s hypotheses
related to back-end POL business systems of which | had no direct
knowledge, and in such cases | made it clear that it was POL’s responsibility

to respond to these points.

331. | knew that, like any witness, | was required to be truthful, although it would
never have occurred to me to be anything else. The approach that | took was
the one | was asked to take by POL’s lawyers. David Jones, a lawyer at

Fujitsu, also read at least some of my witness statements.

332. Whilst my involvement in Mrs Misra’s case was more extensive than my
involvement in any prosecution previously (or indeed subsequently), it was still
only a very small part of my working life throughout the end of 2009 and 2010.
During this period, | was almost fully engaged in preparations for the rollout of

Horizon Online and working on enhancements to it, which was a huge project.
333. For reasons | shall explain, POL’s management of Mrs Misra’s case seemed

fairly chaotic and at times | struggled to deal with the demands which were

made of me to respond to POL.

Initial involvement in the case

Page 110 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

334. The Inquiry has asked how | first came to be involved in Mrs Misra’s case.
Although it is not referred to in the Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request, | have seen an
email exchange between Penny and David Hinde (a Project Manager working
for Fujitsu) on 7 December 2009 about Mrs Misra’s case. During this
exchange, Penny described a conversation the previous week, in which David
had apparently advised Penny that she should not ask me to support POL’s
prosecutions in future [FUJ00152866]. | think that this was probably to do with
my workload. However, according to David, they had not identified anyone
else who could take on the work in Mrs Misra’s case [FUJ00152866]. He then
emailed me to ask if | could deal with it “in the usual way” but said that these
cases might “be dealt with differently in the future” [FUJ00152863]. | assume
from this that there were discussions that | was not involved in about
Prosecution Support dealing with POL’s requests for assistance differently
and in a way which did not involve me. | probably thought that the “usual way”
meant responding to the questions POL asked about Mrs Misra’s case in the

way | had done before.

335. [FUJ00152866] appears to be a related email chain between David Jennings
and me on 7 December in which | answered his questions about what was
involved in being what he described as a “... sort of an expert witness”. | don’t
recall who David Jennings was but | think he would have been a manager in
Customer Services. | explained to him that it involved “various questions from
Penny a couple of times a month” and that whilst it varied this took about half
an hour or so at a time. It appears he checked some records and that this had
amounted to about a week of work over the previous year. | think that this
reflects (as | have described above) that my usual involvement in POL’s legal
cases involved dealing with or answering questions about one-off issues and
that Mrs Misra’s case involved a step change in this regard.

336. | indicated in these emails that | thought Alan Holmes provided guidance on

audit matters and that Gerald Barnes assisted in filtering events. He then

asked me: “Is there anyone else who should cover this activity as well

Page 111 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

as/instead of yourself? | replied: “Should’, then probably Yes. ‘Could’, then
probably No!” | don’t remember writing these words, but | probably thought
that someone else should undertake this role because | didn't think it was
really part of my job and | had a very considerable workload. However, |
probably also felt that there was nobody else who had the same broad
knowledge of Legacy Horizon that | had. As | have mentioned above, | knew
that Anne was reluctant to give evidence. | didn’t want to be unhelpful and
ultimately felt that | had no real option but to give the assistance sought in

these cases.

337. This same email chain indicates that Jane Owen (who worked in POL’s
Security division) had contacted Penny on 1 December 2009, forwarding an
email she had received from her colleague John Longman (who also worked
in POL’s Security division) about Mrs Misra’s case. This email attached a
document described as the ‘2™ interim technical expert’s report’. Mr

Longman’s request stated:

“l attach a report from the defence expert where he has highlighted a
number of problems with the Horizon system. Our barrister, Warwick
Tatford has asked that the problems with Horizon that he has raised in
his report are replied to in a witness statement form. | presume that an
employee of Fujitsu would have to produce the witness statement”.

338. The email sequence is not clear but it appears that this request for a witness
statement was first passed to me on 7 December 2009. | understood that my
role was to respond to Professor McLachlan’s report. | didn’t think it was my

role, at this point, to prepare the witness statement.

339. There is a separate email chain from 7 December 2009 between Penny and
me in which she refers to the defence in Mrs Misra’s case having three further
questions [FUJ00152872]. Penny said that the first two questions would be
addressed by engineering but she asked me to deal with the third question,

which was to explain the steps being taken to preserve the architecture of

Page 112 of 285
340.

341.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Legacy Horizon, particularly in the West Byfleet branch where Mrs Misra had

worked, given that Horizon Online was being rolled out.

| think that these emails represent all of the instructions | received at the outset
of my involvement in Mrs Misra’s case. | do not recall ever having been
provided with Professor McLachlan’s 1* interim technical report (and can see
that | noted this in an email to Mr Singh in February 2010 [FUJ00152988}), nor
does it appear that any other documents about Mrs Misra’s case were sent to
me at that time to assist me in responding to Professor McLachlan’s 2" interim
technical report. | did not, as noted above, receive any instructions from a
lawyer (or anyone else) about specific issues or questions | should address.
On 8 December 2009, | told Penny that | had “ploughed through” Professor
McLachlan’s 2" interim technical report and asked “What exactly is it you want
from me? Shall | pop up for a chat in the morning?” [FUJ00152870]. | would
have looked to Penny for some help as to how | should approach this task.
[FUJ00152858], which contains a handwritten note by Penny, reflects that we
had a discussion about my providing comments in response to Professor
McLachlan’s hypotheses.

On 17 December 2009, | emailed Penny my informal comments on Professor
McLachlan’s 2" interim technical report [FUJ00152872]. This was so that she
could pass them on to POL and check what was required. | had indicated in
respect of many points that they were for POL to respond to. | had pointed to
the availability of audit data as evidence in relation to some of the hypotheses
Professor McLachlan raised. | also indicated that some of the work Professor
McLachlan suggested could be facilitated by Fujitsu (for example, his
suggestion that he access the Fujitsu test environment). | note that
[POL00065560] is a version of Professor McLachlan’s report which seems to
contain some additional commentary which does not appear in
[FUJ00152872]. All of the text is in one colour which makes it difficult to
decipher and it seems that someone else has added comments to mine. | don’t
believe | saw this additional commentary at the time and | don’t think it was
incorporated into the witness statements | signed. For reasons | shall explain,
| believe that this additional commentary was written by Dave King of POL. |

Page 113 of 285
342.

343.

344.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

can see that the additional comments at paragraph 2.2.3.3 refer to the
expectation that the audit logs for the branch would be obtained in this case.
That was also my expectation — and by this stage in late 2009, ordering the
audit logs via an ARQ request would have automatically triggered a check for

the NT event logs for the branch.

In my covering email to Penny at [FUJ00152874], | addressed the third
question (from the list of three) she had passed to me about the preservation
of Legacy Horizon architecture (looking now at my response, it seems that |
may have misunderstood the question, but | don’t think anyone came back to
me for clarification). Penny replied to me “Your response to the technical
report and comments regarding question 3 have been channelled back to
POL. | have said that we will discuss in the New Year how we should present
your input” [FUJ00152874].

Neither Penny nor | presented my comments as a witness statement or in any
sort of report. | understood that she was to discuss this with POL and |
expected that POL would provide guidance as to what it wanted next when

she spoke to them.

| understand (from the materials that the Inquiry has provided) that there had
been a number of significant developments in Mrs Misra’s case prior to POL’s
request that | provide my comments on Professor McLachlan’s 2"¢ interim
report. | cannot remember whether POL told me, at this stage, that Mrs Misra
had already been charged. | haven’t seen any emails which spell this out. | am
as sure as | can be that nobody told me at this stage that Mrs Misra had
pleaded guilty to false accounting but not guilty to theft on 20 March 2009; that
the trial for the theft charge was going to start on 2 June 2009 but had been
adjourned after Mrs Misra raised the reliability of Horizon in her defence; and
that the defence had already made applications for disclosure relating to
Horizon on 30 September 2009 and 30 November 2009. | mention all of this
to indicate why, looking back, | don’t think | received any kind of briefing or
explanation about the background to Mrs Misra’s case (but rather received

piecemeal information as matters progressed).

Page 114 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

My witness statement dated 2 February 2010

345. On 27 January 2010, Penny received an email from John Longman of POL
which stated [FUJ00152887]:

“Our defence barrister has asked for all of Gareth’s replies in relation to
the Defences 24 Interim Report (see attachment below) to be produced
as a witness statement. | would suggest that the question from the
defence is reproduced and then Gareth’s replies are recorded

immediately after for clarity purposes...”

346. | assume that by “defence barrister” Mr Longman meant the prosecution
barrister. His email appears to me to be the extent of the instruction | received
at this stage to provide a witness statement. There was no mention of
producing an expert report or receiving any sort of instruction as an expert. It
appears that I, in turn, asked Penny to put the witness statement together for
me to sign [FUJ00152891].

347. Over a month had passed since | had provided my comments on Professor
McLachlan’s report. My lawyers and | have tried to work out what prompted
this request from Mr Longman at this point. | have seen a number of
documents on the Inquiry’s database from December 2009 and January 2010
that | did not see at the time. | think it is important that | make clear that | was
not involved in responding to the disclosure issues that | now understand were
being raised by Mrs Misra’s lawyers at this time. However, these issues
appear to form an important part of the background to POL’s request for my

witness statement.

348. For example, my lawyers have shown me an email chain of 22 December
2009, in which Jarnail Singh (a solicitor at POL) emailed Warwick Tatford
(POL’s barrister in Mrs Misra’s case), forwarding an email from Mark Dinsdale
(who | understood to work in POL’s Security department) [POL00053723]. |

Page 115 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

note that Mr Dinsdale had sent his original email to Rob Wilson (I don’t think |
knew at the time that he was POL’s Head of Criminal Law and only learned
that recently), raising concerns about the disclosure requests being made by
Mrs Misra’s defence. In his email to Mr Tatford forwarding this exchange, Mr

Singh wrote that Mr Dinsdale:

"[...] wants solutions to the disclosure which have in my view
unreasonably and unnecessarily been raised by the defence. | would be
grateful for your advice as to the parameters of disclosure in this case.
This may have a wider implication for the Business..."

349. My lawyers have drawn to my attention that Mr Tatford responded to this
request for advice in a written note dated 5 January 2010 [POL00044557]. It
states that Fujitsu should be asked to give a full explanation as to what
happened at the Callendar Square branch because it had been raised by the

defence in a disclosure application. Mr Tatford then stated:

"L also think that our disclosure duty requires us to ask Fujitsu whether
they are aware of any other Horizon error that has been found at any
other sub-post office. | anticipate that there will be none, but it is
important that the check is made [...] Gareth Jenkins at Fujitsu has
provided Mr Longman with a number of comments about the Defence
2nd interim report which confirmed my suspicion that the theory that
Horizon cannot deal with refused credit card transactions is simply wrong
[..] it seems that it would be relatively easy to disprove the theories of
the 2nd report by witness statements from Mr Jenkins and from a
suitable witness at POL. Those statements should be sought now."

350. | did not see Mr Tatford’s advice at the time. Looking at it now, however, | can
see that what Mr Longman requested from me in his email of 27 January 2010
[FUJ00152887] was not what Mr Tatford had advised be requested from
Fujitsu. As | have said above, Mr Longman requested that | produce, in a

Page 116 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

witness statement, the replies | had already drafted in response to Professor

McLachlan’s 2" interim report, rather than anything broader.

351. On 28 January 2010, Penny emailed me my draft statement [FUJ00122670].
The draft itself is at [FUJ00122669]. | believe that Penny prepared this draft
by cutting and pasting my initial comments responding to Professor
McLachlan’s 2" interim report (from 17 December 2009) into the template
witness statement that she had on Fujitsu’s systems. | had no reason to think
that this was not the right form of statement. The words at the beginning of the
draft statement reflected my understanding of what POL wanted my evidence

to encompass:

“| have been asked to make comments on the 2” Interim Technical
expert's report to the Court prepared by Charles Alistair McLachlan, a
Director of Amsphere Consulting Ltd. | have listed below the statement
contained within the above mentioned report in italics and recorded my

comment underneath in bold.”

352. | note that Penny’s draft includes, at the end, the first of the two standard
paragraphs that appeared in many of Fujitsu’s witness statements. | am sure
that | would have been guided by Penny about the need to include this
paragraph. As explained above (in the context of Mr Thomas’ case study), my
recollection is that | thought this paragraph related to the proper operation of

the computers involved in the production of the witness statement.

353. | also note that this draft did not include the additional commentary from Dave
King of POL which appears at [POLO0065560], which helps to explain why |

don't think | saw his additional commentary at the time.

354. The informal tone of my initial comments, which were drafted as an internal
response, was wholly retained within the witness statement. | didn’t think this
was inappropriate given that producing these comments in a witness

statement was what POL (specifically Mr Longman) had asked me to do.

Page 117 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

These comments were also of a provisional nature in that! pointed to issues |
could not answer. | queried and asked questions about points | did not
understand in the report. | noted points Professor McLachlan had raised which
were part of the design of Horizon. | pointed to the availability of the audit data

as evidence which would assist in responding to some of his hypotheses.

355. My lawyers have shown me an email of 30 January 2010 that refers to other
individuals from POL including Sue Lowther and Dave King considering the
disclosure issues raised by Mrs Misra [POL00175710]. | cannot recall if | knew
of their involvement. However, Mr King appears to have commented on a draft
of Professor McLachlan’s report [POL00167137], and these comments
appear to be identical to those at [POLO0065560] (see above). As | have
already noted, these comments referred to the expectation (which | shared)
that POL would obtain the underlying data for Mrs Misra’s branch
[POL00167136].

356. | have been informed by my lawyers that there was a hearing in Mrs Misra’s
case on 1 February 2010 where disclosure was raised. My attention has been
drawn to part of a note which Mr Singh made of that hearing in which he says:

“... We discussed the unreasonable disclosure requested by the

Defence and that in what (sic) has been functioning properly and that a

statement from Mr Jenkins will deal with the Horizon aspect of the case.”

[UKG100014903].

357. As noted above, | did not know, at the time, that POL was requesting my
responses to Professor McLachlan’s 2" interim technical report as a way of
responding to disclosure requests by the defence, or that the intention behind
my statement was as broad as to “deal with the Horizon aspect of the case” (I
am unsure | would have understood what “the Horizon aspect” would have
encompassed). As far as | was concerned, | had simply been asked to respond

to Professor McLachlan’s hypotheses in his 2" interim technical report.

Page 118 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

358. My lawyers have also drawn my attention to an email from Mrs Misra’s
solicitor, Issy Hogg, to Mr Singh dated 3 February 2010 [UKGI00014895],
which includes the following paragraph:

"You have indicated that you do not propose to rely on an expert but on
the employees of Fujitsu. For the first time, at the hearing on 01/02/10,
you identified that witness as an employee named Jenkins. However,
not only have you not served his evidence prior to suggesting a meeting,
you accept that you haven't even yet taken a statement."

359. | did not see this email at the time. It suggests that POL had not served my
statement on the defence by 3 February 2010 (and indeed, as explained
below, Mr Singh subsequently seems to have served an unsigned version of
it on 8 February 2010).

My witness statement dated 8 February 2010

360. On 1 February 2010, Mr Longman emailed Penny and referred to a “‘pre-court
hearing” that day [FUJ00152902]. He went on to say:

“My barrister telephoned me yesterday evening and requested that | find
out any information that Fujitsu may hold in relation to an office called
Callender Square in Falkirk. Apparently, Anne Chambers a Systems
Specialist employed by Fujitsu was cross examined and it is said that
she had full knowledge of an error in the in the Horizon system at this
Post Office. Our barrister would like Gareth to deal with this matter
and expand upon whatever issue Anne Chambers raised at court
within his statement [...] When Gareth completes his statement could
he also mention whether there are any known problems with the
Horizon system that Fujitsu are aware of. If none could this be clarified

in the statement.”

Page 119 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

361. Penny forwarded this email to Tom Lillywhite (Fujitsu's Post Office Account’s
Chief Security Officer) and me, saying that it was “extremely urgent”. There
was no further instruction or guidance as to what POL meant by “dealing with”
Callendar Square, “expanding upon whatever issue Anne Chambers raised at
court” or mentioning “known problems” with Horizon.

362. | responded to Penny’s email the next day (2 February 2010) at 9.18am
[FUJ00152902]. | noted that | had finally managed to read the draft statement
that she had prepared for me and had made some minor amendments to it

(having noted how busy | had been on Horizon Online). | also said this:

"| don’t know anything at present about Falkirk. I’m not aware of issues
in Horizon other than the event timeouts. Not sure how to cover that in

the witness statement.”

363. As explained in my second witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraph 73
[WITN00460200], my email reflects the fact that, at this point in time, | knew
very little, if anything, about the Callendar Square bug (in terms of the specific
event storms experienced at the Callendar Square branch in Falkirk in 2005).
The “Event timeouts” | referred to in this email were those related to the
Craigpark issue. | think | probably mentioned this because | would have been
aware that this was an issue which could have caused messages not to have
been committed to the message store and which would need to be checked
(through an analysis of the NT events). By flagging this up and saying that |
was not sure how to cover this in my witness statement, | was seeking
guidance from POL (through Penny) about how they wanted me to approach

this question.

364. | was then off work sick for a few days starting on 3 February 2010 and leading
up to 5 February 2010. It was very rare for me to be off work sick, which is
why | remember this. When | visited my GP as a result of this sickness | was

also diagnosed with high blood pressure for the first time (and have been

Page 120 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

taking daily medication since, which is another reason why | remember this).
| went into the office briefly on 5 February 2010 to speak to David Jones but
still felt unwell. | spoke to him and then went home (but must then have logged

into emails at home that afternoon to reply to the emails about this case).

365. The relevant emails from 5 February 2010 were as follows:

a. At 12.34pm Mr Singh emailed David Jones asking if | could give a
witness statement in Mrs Misra’s case once | returned from sick leave
[FUJ001227 13].

b. At 2.04pm | emailed Dave Keeling (who was Operations Director in
Fujitsu’s Royal Mail Group Account at that time) in response to a chain
of emails suggesting that Fujitsu might have to find a replacement for me
due to my illness, and because | was struggling to manage my workload
and what had been asked of me in Mrs Misra’s case. | confirmed that |
thought Dave Johns was a possible replacement [FUJ00154877]. | think
this shows again that Fujitsu were not wedded to the idea of using me

as a witness and that other people were being considered.

c. At 2.46pm David Jones replied to Mr Singh to say that he had met me
that day and that | could assist [FUJ00122713]. David attached what he
described as the “first draft” of my statement, and whilst | cannot be
certain, | believe that this “first draft” was an unsigned version of my
statement dated 2 February 2010 that Penny had prepared for me. In his
email David noted that:

"You will see that there are some areas where Fujitsu cannot deal
with the Defendant's expert’s criticisms as they are about POL
procedures or requirements and it seems evident that there will
need to be a POL internal “expert” who can work with Gareth to
deal with these areas. One concern is that POL have not
apparently requested transaction data for West Byfleet for the
period and transactions in question. This would normally be

Page 121 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

provided in previous cases and would include Fujitsu extracting
log files from the system to enable us to provide details of
transactions. Surprisingly this has not been requested in this
case. Perhaps you would consider the need for this."

| cannot remember much about my meeting with David earlier that day
but | must have agreed to assist and said that | would need to see the
audit data for West Byfleet branch. | seem to recall that David told me

that Fujitsu would support me if required.

. At 2.53pm Mr Singh forwarded to Mr Longman and Mr Tatford the draft
statement and asked whether this was "adequate for our purpose"
[POL00029369].

. At3.39pm Mr Longman responded to Mr Singh, noting that my statement
had not answered three points which he reproduced in the body of his
email [POL00029369]. Included in those three points was a request that
| deal with the Callendar Square issue (point 2) and a request that |
mention “any known problems in the Horizon system of which Fujitsu are
aware” (point 3). | note that the last email in this chain is from Mr Tatford
(sent only to Mr Singh) who advised that: “The areas where Mr Jenkins
says "for POL to respond" should be deleted from the statement. These
areas will only lead to a flood of further disclosure requests and |

am afraid that POL will never respond.”

At 3.49pm Mr Singh emailed David Jones (copying me), effectively
copying the email he had just received from Mr Longman, including the
request to address the three points (including points 2 and 3) described
above [FUJ00122729].

. At4.06pm | emailed David Jones and Penny and said, in relation to point
2, “I need information and time to research the background to this case
[i.e. Callendar Square] before providing any response” (see email chain
at [FUJ00152930)). In relation to point 3, | said that | could not make a

Page 122 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

clear statement because it was possible for transactions to have been
"lost" due to locking issues but that these could be checked in the event
logs (and as | have explained above, this was a reference to the

Craigpark issue).

. At 4.07pm | emailed Anne (forwarding Mr Singh’s email containing the
question about Callendar Square) to say: “/ think | am going to need to
talk to you about Callendar Square in Falkirk. This is all getting very
messy! Please can you did (sic) out anything you have about it’
[FUJ00152941]. By “did” | meant “dig”. | said this because | did not have

that information and needed Anne’s help to gather it.

At 4.28pm Mr Singh emailed David Jones, in a different email chain,
attaching a 3" interim report of Professor McLachlan, and requesting
that | comment on it before 4pm on 8 February 2010 [FUJ00122731].

His request was put in these terms:

“Please also get Gareth Jenkins to comment on the enclosed
report. Please note the deadline is Monday 8th February 2010 at

4pm.

At 4.40pm David Jones forwarded to me the email he had just received
from Mr Singh, asking me whether the timeframe for commenting on the
3 interim report of Professor McLachlan was _ acceptable
[FUJ00122733].

. At4.47pm | replied to David Jones, attaching my comments on Professor
McLachlan’s 3° interim report [FUJ00122735]. The swiftness of my reply
reflects my frustration that POL didn’t seem to understand that | needed
to review the audit data for the branch and carry out significant work in
order to respond to their requests. | was off work ill, trying to deal with
emails from home. It seemed unrealistic to me that | was being asked at

4.40pm on a Friday to produce comments in response to an entirely new

Page 123 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

report that | had never seen before by 4pm the following Monday. Hence

in my covering email | noted:

"I've provided in line comments to the document as revisions. I'm
happy for this to be passed to POL if you feel it is appropriate.
The simple answer is that without retrieving the logs everybody is
speculating and as discussed this morning nobody has bothered
to ask us for any logs. At this stage it is not at all clear what
transactions are thought to be missing at what time or even in
what time period. Analysing logs over a long period (and | think
this is over two or three months) is very, very time consuming.
This is NOT going to happen by Monday."

|. At 4.57pm David Jones forwarded to Mr Singh my email attaching my
comments on Professor McLachlan's 3rd interim report [FUJ00122735].

m. At 5.10pm David Jones emailed Mr Singh [FUJ00152930], stating that:

“....2. He needs information and time to research the background
to this case before providing any response;

3. He is not currently in a position to make a clear statement. It is
possible for there to be problems where transactions have been
"lost" in particular circumstances due to locking issues. When this
happens then we have events in the underlying eventing logs to
indicate that there was anissue. Whenever we_ provide
transaction logs to POL we check for any such events. In the case
of West Byfleet we have not been asked to provide any
transaction logs and so have not made these checks.”

366. These emails on 5 February 2010 show that | informed a lawyer from Fujitsu
(David Jones) who conveyed to a lawyer from POL (Mr Singh) that there was
an issue in Horizon whereby transactions could be lost and that | could not

make a general statement in Mrs Misra’s case that Horizon had no known

Page 124 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

problems without looking at the audit data for West Byfleet. | was unsure how

POL wanted me to address these matters in my witness statement.

367. | note that there is another email chain of 5 February 2010 in which David

Jones forwarded his email to Mr Singh to Roger Williams and David Roberts

(of Fujitsu) in which he referred to
[FUJ00152966]. | was not copied into this part of the email chain.

... keeping close to it for a while

368. This approach, of examining the NT events and the other audit data to
ascertain whether there was any system issue with a branch, was the one that
| and others would take day to day if an issue raised by an SPM about their
branch accounts was referred to the development team. Our approach would
be to understand from the SPM how or when the issue arose, and then

examine the underlying data to see if we could work out what had occurred.

369. | have seen no emails that suggest that my raising these event timeout/locking
issues prompted anyone within POL or Fujitsu to ask me to include details
about them in any of my witness statements. | have not seen any emails
between the lawyers that suggests that they discussed whether they should
explain this to the defence. Nor do | recall the lawyers suggesting this to me.
| do not know whether Mr Singh passed my email mentioning the event
timeout/locking issues to anyone else in POL or POL’s barrister Mr Tatford.
Nor have | seen any emails that suggest that my raising these event
timeout/locking issues prompted anyone within POL or Fujitsu to ask me to
provide a witness statement about any other past problems that had affected

Horizon.

370. As | believe the emails on 5 February 2010 show, | thought the best way
forward was for Fujitsu to examine the audit data for West Byfleet, in order to
investigate whether it revealed any Horizon-related problems at this branch
that might explain the losses Mrs Misra had experienced. No one suggested

to me that this was the wrong approach.

371. The relevant emails from Monday 8 February 2010 were as follows:

Page 125 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

a. At 10.53am Mr Singh emailed David Jones (copying me) saying that
[FUJ00122808]:

"The areas where Mr Jenkins says for POL to respond should be
deleted from his statement. Mr Jenkins needs to comment on
the third interim report received from the Defence Expert. The
quality of training of SPMs is obviously outside Mr Jenkins
expertise. However | wonder if he might be prepared to comment
on how it might be possible to examine the Horizon data to
investigate mistakes. We are keen that the Defence are given
suggestions as to how they can efficiently test their theories
against the Horizon data. We do not want them to say that they
will not have time before the Trial. We anticipate that it would not
be very difficult to test their theories against a short but
represented span of data example from the months when Mrs
Misra has admitted to false accounting. (15th November 2006 to
14th December 2006, 16th May 2007 to 16th June 2007, 14th
November 2007 to 15th December 2007 and 9th January 2008.
It would be helpful if Mr Jenkins could consider practical and
efficient ways in which the Defence might be able to test their
theories. | also refer you to my E-Mail to you of Friday 5th
February 2010 at 15.39 paragraphs 2, 3 and 4."

| think | felt frustrated by this email, because it implied that Mr Singh had
not read the emails David Jones had sent him at 4.57pm and 5.10pm on
5 February 2010. Mr Singh was asking the same questions that we had
responded to in those two emails and we appeared to be going in circles.

b. At 11.36am | forwarded to Mr Singh the email that David Jones had sent
to him at 4.57pm on 5 February 2010, which attached my comments on
Professor McLachlan's 3rd interim report [FUJ00152962]. My email
simply said “as discussed", so | presume that | had had a conversation

Page 126 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

with Mr Singh, perhaps to cut through the confusion in his emails, but |

cannot recall the details of this.

. At 12.00pm David Jones forwarded Mr Singh an email from Penny
confirming that we could have data for West Byfleet available by the end
of the week or early the next week but needed an ARQ request from
Jane Owens at POL to proceed [FUJ00152957].

. At 2.16pm Anne emailed me, forwarding an email chain from 2006 (into
which | had not been copied) discussing the Callendar Square bug
[FUJ00083721]. Anne told me:

“Gareth,

KEL CObeng2025L (amongst others) - can you see KELs?

I'd forgotten - this did give a discrepancy, but also a receipts and
payments mismatch, if they persisted and rolled over (though it
was usually obvious that something was wrong).

And a flood of NT events (not ‘riposte events'!) which SMC should
have noticed at the time.

Since we are now checking for these particular events, and did a
catch up for old retrievals, can you say that the current branch did
not have this problem??

Anyway it stopped happening once S90 was installed (around 4th
March 2006, according to info below)

This particular problem would only affect branches with more than
one stock unit. It happened several times at Callander Square,
though we never found why they were so badly affected.

Is this sufficient?

Anne”

(In passing | note that Anne’s email referred to a “catch up for old
retrievals”. | believe is a reference to the manual event checking of
historic ARQs instituted following the escalation of the Craigpark issue
in August 2008).

Page 127 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

e. At 2.33pm | emailed Mr Singh, attaching a draft witness statement which,
as | explained (in short terms), said "what | don't know about Falkirk and
also the comments on the 3rd report. | doubt if they are of much use
without getting the various detailed logs" [FUJ00122808]. The attached
statement [POL00001569] noted that at that stage | was not aware of
the details of the problems in Callendar Square but that | expected to be
able to find them out and also to compare the failure scenarios with the
detailed logs that were to be extracted for Mrs Misra’s case. | agreed
with Professor McLachlan about the need to obtain the logs in order to
consider other points he raised. The draft contained a number of other
references to the fact that POL had not made any request to Fujitsu for
any data relating to the branch that would enable me to respond to
Professor McLachlan. As with my witness statement of 2 February 2010,
this draft witness statement contained the first of the two standard
paragraphs at the very end concerning the proper use of the computer.
| have already explained my understanding of this paragraph. Given that
this statement of 8 February 2010 was basically a complaint that POL
had not given me the data | needed to undertake an analysis of Horizon
at the branch, it again would make no sense to me that this paragraph
was being included to confirm the health of Horizon at West Byfleet

branch.

f. At 3.09pm Mr Singh emailed Mr Tatford and Mr Longman, attaching my
statements dated 2 and 8 February 2010 and saying that he had served
them on the defence [POL00054056]. | wasn’t aware of this email until
my lawyers brought it to my attention in this Inquiry. | am surprised that
my two statements were served on the defence at that stage given that
they appear to have been unsigned. Neither of these two witness
statements contained a general statement about “known problems in
Horizon” because POL had not yet responded to my question of how to

approach event timeouts/locking issues.

Page 128 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

g. At 4.01pm | emailed Anne, saying that the information she had provided
about Callendar Square was sufficient for now and noting that
[FUJ00083722):

“Penny pointed out on Friday, that POL have not asked us to
retrieve any data for this branch yet! Therefore we have no
message stores to check against Event Logs.”

372. As explained above, | did not have the authority to obtain the audit data for
West Byfleet branch. It was for POL to authorise its release to me because
the costs of accessing and extracting the data (as well as my time in analysing
the data) would be charged to POL and it needed to approve these costs in
advance. All | could therefore do was to press the point that POL needed to
get the audit data from Fujitsu.

My witness statement dated 9 March 2010

373. My lawyers have drawn my attention to an email from Mr Singh to Mrs Misra’s
solicitors dated 9 February 2010 providing my contact details “in order for
Professor McLachlan to discuss the matters in this case” [POLO0054095].

374. On 11 February 2010 | emailed David Jones and Penny to say that | had just
had a telephone call with Professor McLachlan and that we had agreed to
speak at 9am the next morning [FUJ00156108]. | don’t think anyone explained
to me what the purpose of us speaking was or what issues we would discuss.
| was not given any guidance about how this conversation should be
conducted, or any formal requirements | might need to follow in speaking to a
defence expert.

375. | had a long phone call with Professor McLachlan on 12 February 2010, which

was the first of a number of calls and meetings we had throughout Mrs Misra’s

case. | did not take any notes of any of these calls and meetings. | had never

Page 129 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

spoken to a defence expert previously. | have not seen any notes of the calls
and meetings taken by Professor McLachlan (apart from his 4" Interim
Technical Report, which | address below). | am therefore reliant on my
memory (which by now is not very clear) and some of the documentary

material, to assist me as to what we may have discussed.

376. In terms of this documentary material, | note that in his 4" Interim Technical
Report [POL00054126], Professor McLachlan referred to having conducted
an “interview” with me on 12 February 2010, and in this report set out his
record of what we had discussed. Looking at this report now, there is nothing
he attributes to me that | think is inaccurate or that | disagree with, although |
cannot now recall whether it is a complete record of everything we discussed.
He appears to have used what | told him as a foundation for points he wanted
to make or to request information | had told him about and which he wanted
to review.

377. Consistent with what Professor McLachlan recorded in his 4" interim report,
my memory of our call on 12 February 2010 was that | responded to his
hypotheses, suggested some lines of enquiry he might wish to take and
explained some general background to how Horizon worked. | am not sure
that | understood our call to be an “interview” as such. | thought of it as a

conversation, which was professional but also friendly and informal.

378. | was surprised when, on 22 February 2010, Mr Singh emailed me asking me
to call Professor McLachlan [POL00054220]. | replied to say that | had already
spoken to him and queried whether | needed to speak to him again
[POL00054220].

379. Mr Singh then asked for a detailed attendance note of my call with Professor
McLachlan [POL00054220]. | had not known that | needed to make an
attendance note when speaking to Professor McLachlan. No one had
discussed any formalities with me about speaking to Professor McLachlan. |
replied on 25 February 2010 to say that | had no attendance note, but gave
Mr Singh a summary of what we had discussed [POL00054220):

Page 130 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“Basically what we did was to go through his two reports (actually 2nd
and 3rd report - I've not seen the first report!) and my comments on them.
| also explained to him some of how Horizon works and why this means
that some of his hypotheses were invalid. | also pointed out that in
order to identify exactly what was happening, then it would be
necessary to go through the detailed logs of the relevant times and
that as far as | was aware, no request had been made for any such
logs (though | think they may now have been requested). told (sic) him
that if we looked at the logs that we would be able to confirm whether or
not the scenario in Falkirk applied, but | thought it was unlikely.”

380. | had made it clear to Professor McLachlan in our call that POL had not
requested the logs for West Byfleet. My reference to the Falkirk scenario being
“unlikely” to apply to West Byfleet may have reflected what Anne had told me
on 8 February 2010 that the Callendar Square problem had been fixed in
March 2006 (see paragraph 371(d) above).

381. On 22 February 2010, Penny tasked Gerald Barnes with checking all NT
events for Mrs Misra’s branch between 30 June 2005 and 31 December 2009
[FUJ00152983].

382. On 25 February 2010, Anne emailed me her analysis of these events
[FUJ00155509], noting in passing that it was difficult to undertake further
analysis without knowing what the defence were saying the problem was.
Anne said that she had identified specific dates that could be checked against
the power help calls. Anne also noted that there were isolated time out waiting
for lock messages but that these were associated with checksums being
written (and again suggested that a check could be made to see if anyone was
logged on at the times she identified). Finally, Anne stated that it was “notable
that the branch does not have the repeated lock messages which were a
feature of the Callendar Square problem."

Page 131 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

383. On 26 February 2010, | emailed Penny to say that Anne had looked at the
event logs and that she had found points to be checked [FUJ00155189]. |
asked Penny to check the specific times referred to by Anne to see if anyone
was logged on and to check them against the call logs. | did this because |
wanted to check that the Craigpark issue (or anything like it) had not occurred
at West Byfleet in light of Anne's analysis. | believed that we should resolve
these outstanding points to make sure that there weren't any missing

transactions in the data for Mrs Misra’s branch.

384. My lawyers have directed my attention to an application served by the defence
dated 24 February 2010, which | am told was a legal argument to stay the
criminal proceedings against Mrs Misra as an abuse of process
[POL00093946]. | did not see this at the time. | note in passing that paragraph
13 of this application states, in relation to my statement dated 8 February
2010, that "/t is apparent that the Prosecution has given no clear instructions
to its own expert, or provided him with adequate material to assist the court."
Looking at this now (not having seen it before the Inquiry), this observation by
the defence was accurate: | had not been given any formal instructions nor

any guidance in relation to the defence material | had been sent.

385. Although | did not see this application of 24 February 2010, | can see looking
at the documentary evidence that, in the days after 24 February 2010, both
Mr Singh and Mr Tatford contacted me and that the application seems to have

prompted something of a change of approach.

386. On 26 February at 12.22pm, Jarnail Singh emailed me [POL00054227],
asking me to consider what logs | needed to look at and how long the exercise
might take, and suggesting that | consider that with Professor McLachlan. |
responded to Mr Singh later that day at 12.35pm [FUJ00152992]. My email
reflects my ongoing frustration and confusion (I had said these needed to be

considered weeks before):

Page 132 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

"As I've no idea exactly what is being alleged | can't really advise as to
what evidence might be required either to support the prosecution or the
defence. POL's prosecution support team have a formal mechanism to
request logs for specific periods and there is a process to do that.
Although I have suggested for some time that these logs are
requested, | understand that no such request has been made to
Fujitsu. Trying to analyse transactions over a period of 2 or 3 years is
likely to take several weeks or months of effort - especially if it is not clear
what is being looked for - and | certainly cannot commit that amount of
time to it [...] Trawling through logs to show that nothing has happened
is next to impossible what we need to be looking for is something specific
and | have no idea what exactly is alleged to have happened. Therefore
I'm not sure what I can do to help."

387. Despite the fact that | had been saying for weeks that the logs could and
should be obtained (and despite the fact that Mr Singh knew | had made the

same point to Professor McLachlan), | felt that | was simply repeating myself.

388. | think it is important to make clear at this stage that | had only been given
Professor McLachlan’s 2nd and 3" reports (and the emails from Mr Singh) to
assist with my understanding of what Mrs Misra was saying about any
problems she encountered with Horizon. These reports set out theoretical
suggestions about what could have gone wrong in the Horizon system. | was
trying to explain that data could be provided to me and to Professor McLachlan
so that there could be an examination by us of whether something had gone
wrong. | was also making the point that responding to hypothetical
suggestions was difficult without anything to hang it on. By this | mean that
there no information about dates when issues arose or a description of the
issues that were noticed in the branch (or any of the usual information that the
development team would have to go on whenever a discrepancy at a branch
was brought to our attention in our day to day role). It was like being asked to
look for a problem which | didn’t know to exist, where | had no idea what it
might look like. | thought POL should be able to assist with this.

Page 133 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

389. It wasn’t clear to me what | was supposed to be doing in response to these
general directions from Mr Singh. It also seemed to be the wrong away around.
Rather than POL give me a specific instruction as to what it wanted checked,
given the issues in the case, it was asking me to rule out that any issue might
have caused a loss. | wanted Mr Singh to understand that what was being
asked was difficult and would take time.

390. The email correspondence demonstrates that, within minutes of my email to
Mr Singh at 12.35pm, | was telephoned by POL’s Counsel (Mr Tatford)
[FUJ00152996]. | don’t recall how long the call lasted but at 12.59pm | sent

the following email:

“Following the email exchange below I’ve now had another call from
POL’s Prosecution Barrister (Warwick Tatford) asking me to do some

analysis of the various logs associated with the case.

He is going to arrange for me to be sent details of what has been alleged
and also what has been admitted so that | can identify some part of the
logs to look through and discuss with the defence expert. Even if we
limit the scope this sounds like a very time consuming task. | am not sure
| really want to be doing that and need some guidance as to the priority
of this compared with everything else.

Apparently the defence are saying it is too hard to get detailed info and
therefore there can’t be a fair trial and POL are clearly keen to counter

that argument. Trial date is in two weeks time so this is likely to be urgent!

What do | do and who can sort out with POL what exactly we should and
shouldn't be dong (sic) to support this.”

391. | sent this email to Tom Lillywhite and Graham Allen (who was my boss at the

time), and copied it to Penny and Suzie Kirkham (who was Head of Fujitsu’s

Page 134 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Post Office Account). My email was sent at 12.59pm, and | believe it was sent
immediately after Mr Tatford had called me, since | noted that the phone
conversation was further to my previous email in the same email chain, which
was sent at 12.35pm. | don’t recall the detail of our call and, looking at the
timings of the emails, it must have been a fairly short one. But | believe that
the email | sent immediately afterwards summarised all of the points Mr
Tatford had just conveyed to me. From this email, it seems clear that | was
being instructed by him to analyse the logs for West Byfleet branch, and to do
so in light of further information about Mrs Misra’s case which he said POL

would send to me.

392. | don’t recall that Mr Tatford explained to me over the telephone that | owed
expert duties to the court or what those duties entailed in legal or practical
terms. | don’t recall him referring to the Criminal Procedure Rules. | don’t recall
that he explained that | had disclosure duties or again what those duties might
entail in Mrs Misra’s case. There is nothing to suggest from my email that we
discussed this. | would have mentioned this in the email given that the purpose
of it was to tell my boss and Prosecution Support what Mr Tatford was asking
me to do (and because | was asking for a bit of guidance). | don’t believe that

Mr Tatford ever discussed these matters with me.

393. My lawyers have asked me whether | was concerned or surprised that | was
being telephoned by Mr Tatford directly and being tasked to do work by him
without Mr Singh’s involvement. | doubt | thought about this since | would not
have known whether this was usual or not. | was more concerned about the
possibly open-ended nature of the task of analysing the logs for West Byfleet
branch and the time that would be involved in doing it, especially given the
tight deadlines.

394. | don’t now know what the response was to my email to Tom Lillywhite and
Graham Allen, but | don’t think it prompted Fujitsu (or POL) to consider
whether there needed to be more clarity and formality about my role. Again, |
have no memory that it prompted anyone to speak to me about the nature of

my role or to offer me more legal support or guidance. Whilst | wasn’t sure

Page 135 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

what | was supposed to do (and did not like the way Mr Singh wanted me to
deal with things), | wasn’t aware that there was anything unusual or
concerning about the way the prosecution was being conducted. No one
suggested there was. | probably thought | should just get on with it, provided
my manager (Graham Allen) agreed to me doing it having regard to my other

work.

395. My lawyers have shown me an email that Penny sent to Mr Singh at 3.18pm
the same day (26 February 2010), which seems to be her attempt to manage
the concerns | had expressed about what | should and shouldn’t be doing to
support POL, by pointing out the correct process he should be following to
retrieve the logs [FUJ00152991]. Penny informed Mr Singh that | was heavily
involved in the migration to Horizon Online and she referred him to the formal
process agreed between POL and Fujitsu for litigation support (attaching it to

her email). She said:

“We have been talking to you in some detail regarding the information
required for us to identify what has happened in this case and, at this
late stage, it will clearly not be possible to provide the depth of
information we could have a few weeks ago based on analysis of
transaction logs. Further, the identification of which transaction logs are
required should be identified by the POL investigation team based on
their knowledge of the case, as is the norm in such cases, not our
expert.”

396. Mr Singh emailed me later that same day (26 February 2010), attaching the
case summary, indictment, defence statement, copy of the interview with Mrs
Misra and the name of the defence expert (| am unsure why he gave me this
last piece of information, since he knew | had already spoken to Professor
McLachlan) [POL00054213]. This appears to have been the first time that |
had been provided with any case papers in Mrs Misra’s case. | assume that
this was prompted by Mr Tatford. In terms of any instructions he gave me, Mr

Singh just stated:

Page 136 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

"It is important that we are pro-active on this and that you contact him as
soon as possible with a view to concluding this.”

397. | did not know what Mr Singh or POL wanted me to do with all of this material.
Mr Tatford appears to have suggested that I would be sent material that might
help to identify what period of logs to look at. | did not know what the “this”
was that | was being urged to conclude. | can’t remember whether | spoke to

Mr Singh to get further clarity but | do recall feeling pretty fed up.

398. My lawyers have shown me an amended defence case statement
[POL00054237] (which | am told by the Inquiry was dated January 2010,
amending a previous version dated March 2009). | cannot be completely sure
that this is the version of the defence case statement that Mr Singh sent me
on 26 February 2010, but assuming it was, it sets out that Mrs Misra
considered that staff had been stealing from her (and refers to a member of
staff having admitted to theft in the presence of police). It then refers to an
£80,000 discrepancy which had arisen by the summer of 2006. But it also
states at paragraph 8 that the losses continued until 2008. It says that despite
Mrs Misra having sacked members of staff she put these losses down to theft
or incompetence and only considered that it might be a system issue when
she saw the article in Computer Weekly. Mrs Misra’s general defence at
paragraph 12 was that she had suffered from unquantifiable thefts by her staff
but that these had been “compounded by operational faults in the Horizon
system.” This did not give much of a foothold as to what Horizon problem Mrs
Misra had experienced. None of the other documents Mr Singh sent me on 26
February 2010 (the indictment, case summary and interview transcript) went
into any detail at all about what Mrs Misra was saying had gone wrong with
Horizon.

399. | don’t think that | got any separate response from Mr Singh to my email of 26
February 2010 (which was a Friday). As a result, | think that what may have
happened is that, on the following Monday, | sat down with the material he had

given me and tried to work out for myself what to make of it. | believe this led

Page 137 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

to an email from me to Mr Singh on 1 March 2010, in which | tried to summarise
my understanding of the case [POL00054252].

400. In that email | suggested that Fujitsu needed a clear statement as to what was
being looked for by the defence and when Horizon had allegedly made
mistakes. | said that | appreciated that it was for the prosecution to prove
Horizon was reliable rather than the defence to prove it wasn’t, but that it was
difficult to prove that there were no errors, particularly over such a long period
of time. | said | thought it was down to POL’s investigators to identify what was
in dispute and that | could then assist with some technical knowledge to help
interpret the various logs to support such areas of dispute. | thought that POL
should go back to Mrs Misra and try to investigate further what the issue might
be, for example, what specific symptoms she had experienced consistent with

a computer problem during the time she said losses were occurring.

401. | used the term “bandwagon” in that email. It doesn’t sound like me, but |
clearly used the term and | regret it as it was inappropriate. | think (and this is
not to cast blame) that | had heard others use it. | think my use of it may have
reflected what | had taken from the defence case statement; that Mrs Misra
had apparently not considered that there was a Horizon issue until after the
Computer Weekly article came out. | think that my email reflected that she still
seemed to be saying that she had been stolen from, but that Horizon was also
to blame for these losses since it had compounded the thefts (albeit in a way
which was unquantifiable and which she had not noticed at the time). None of
this is to excuse my use of the term. | should not have used it and | apologise
to Mrs Misra for doing so. | do not believe that this had any bearing upon the
work which | did on her case (as | describe below). | had been clear for some
time with POL and had been clear with Professor McLachlan that the
underlying logs for West Byfleet ought to be considered to see if there was
evidence of a system issue at Mrs Misra’s branch. This did not change. | think
that emails like the one | sent on 6 May 2010 demonstrate my consideration
of further investigations | could carry out which might point to an explanation
for the discrepancies (on this occasion in relation to transaction corrections)
[POL00167181].

Page 138 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

402. In relation to the Computer Weekly article, | can see from my email of 1 March
2010 [POL00054252] that | probably read it at some point in time after its
publication in May 2009. | am conscious that this article has assumed a lot of
significance as time as gone on. At the time, however, | don’t think that | (or
my colleagues) attached great significance to it. Historically, there had been a
perception on Fujitsu’s part that Computer Weekly was quite “anti” ICL. As
regards the article itself, looking back at it and trying to recall what | thought
at the time, | think | regarded it as quite generalised and not adding anything
in terms of specific detail about faults in Horizon.

403. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me whether the email at
[POL00054252] reveals that | was involved in commenting on the merits of the
disclosure requests made by the defence and the rationale behind those
requests. | am not sure | understand this question because the email sending
me the case papers (on 26 February 2010) did not ask me to comment on
disclosure. My lawyers have drawn my attention to the defence case
statement and the disclosure requests made in it. These refer back to (but do
not spell out) some disclosure requests Mrs Misra had already made for quite
specific items like notes of the audit. To be clear, this request for audit notes
had nothing to do with audit data or any audit of Horizon. It was referring to
the notes of POL’s audit of the branch.

404. | have already explained that | had referred to the event timeout/locking issues
causing missing transactions in Legacy Horizon and that Fujitsu had drawn
these to Mr Singh’s attention. | don’t believe that POL asked me whether it
should disclose these (or any other Horizon problems) to Mrs Misra. | haven't
seen any emails from around this time which suggest that. | hadn’t been
involved in responding to the defence requests for disclosure in 2009, nor in
the abuse of process application made by the defence in February 2010. |

don’t think my email of 1 March 2010 is about disclosure at all.

405. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me whether my understanding of

the issues in Mr Castleton’s case had any impact upon my assessment of Mrs

Page 139 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Misra’s case. | was not aware of any link between the issues in Mr Castleton’s
case and Mrs Misra’s case. | raised Mr Castleton’s case in my email to Mr
Singh on 1 March 2010 because of my understanding that in his case the

Judge had actually found that Horizon was reliable.

406. | believe that my email overall reflected the same point that | made to Penny
later that day (which | have mentioned in paragraph 412 below), namely that |
was not clear about my role. There seemed to be no active investigation by

anyone at POL to get to the bottom of what Mrs Misra said had gone wrong.

407. My lawyers have directed my attention to the fact that Mr Singh forwarded my
email to POL’s Security department, copying Mr Longman and Mr Tatford,
noting that “the content does not appear to be very helpful” [POLO0058502]. |
did not see this email at the time. Mr Singh may have thought that my email
was unhelpful because | was suggesting that POL should carry out further

investigation before involving me again.

408. In response to my email, Mr Singh sent me copies of Professor McLachlan’s
4% and 5 interim technical reports at 2.39pm on 1 March 2010
[POL00054267]. His email stated that:

"As you are our Horizon Expert you need to telephone Charles
McLachlan [...] to arrange a meeting where you can discuss all his
reports and his concerns about the Horizon so you can deal with it
and rebut it which you have done in your long telephone
conversation about his various hypothesis and then write a
detailed report which would go to some way of progressing and
concluding this matter and importantly preserving the Horizon
system. May be the simplest and practical way of dealing with this whole
question is to find a shortest span of logs, analyse it, disprove or rebut
what the Defence Expert is saying in his reports. Just a reminder you
are an Expert for Fujitsu, you will be giving evidence in Court, the
Judge and Jury will be listening to you very carefully and a lot will hang
on the evidence. The way forward is for you to arrange an immediate

Page 140 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

meeting with the Defence Expert and conclude this matter once and for
all."

409. When Mr Singh used the term “Horizon Expert” or “Expert for Fujitsu” |
assumed that this meant that, as someone who had worked for many years
on Horizon and had a senior role in relation to its development, that | was a
technical expert on Horizon. | would have agreed that | was. This email made
no reference to my being subject to any special or specific duties that experts

owe to a court.

410. | had not understood it to be my role to “disprove or rebut” the defence case.
Mr Singh was wrong to suggest that in my conversation with Professor
McLachlan | had rebutted what he had said. | had expressly told Mr Singh that
| thought Professor McLachlan and | needed to see the data for West Byfleet

branch (and expressed my irritation that it had not been obtained).

411. In addition, | had understood that my role was to test whether Professor
McLachlan’s hypotheses might or might not be correct, including by reference
to the data for Mrs Misra’s branch. Had | been unable to disprove or rebut the
defence case, or had | found something in the data which explained the
shortfalls experienced by Mrs Misra or which pointed to any kind of problem
with Horizon, | would have told POL immediately. | had an open mind as to
what the data might show, as demonstrated by my insistence that we get it in
the first place and my refusal to proceed unless it was obtained.

412. | must have been concerned about Mr Singh’s email, since | emailed Penny
about it later the same day (1 March 2010) and said [FUJ00153006]:

“....Again | think we need to emphasise that it is not Fujitsu’s role to put
together and analyse the evidence. Our role is to provide the evidence

and support POL’s investigators.

Page 141 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

| don’t like the implication in the email below that | should be a witness

in this case. | don’t have anything really to contribute at this point.”

413. | think | was trying to communicate (again) that | did not feel comfortable with
Mr Singh’s approach. | felt | was being asked to investigate, not to provide
analysis. | was a bit weary of this. | also did not like the way in which Mr Singh
explained what my role would be in Court since he seemed to be saying that

it was all down to me to rebut the defence hypotheses.

414. In relation to the date range for the transaction logs, | understand that this was
the period selected by POL on advice from its lawyers. | have been shown the
email sent to Penny on 1 March 2010 in which she was informed by Mr
Longman that the legal advice was that logs should be analysed for the whole
of the false accounting period (from December 2006 to December 2007)
[FUJ00153005]. | understood this period to have been selected deliberately to
correspond with the period that Mrs Misra accepted that she had been
falsifying her accounts (i.e. that this was a period of time within which she was
suggesting something was still going wrong with Horizon). | also understood
that it would exclude the period of the thefts that Mrs Misra alleged had been

carried out by former staff members.

415. My lawyers have shown me an extract from an argument which the
prosecution put forward in response to the defence disclosure requests. It is
dated 7 March 2010. | did not see this at the time but it accords with my
understanding of why POL selected this time period [POL00054346]. The
argument states:

“7. One of the main sticking points in the disclosure process has been
the cost of obtaining Horizon data. Transaction logs can be obtained
from Fujitsu that show the details of every single transaction at a post
office. The Defence’s request has been for logs from 6 months prior to
the Defendant's tenure to the present day. This request is far too wide
and the cost of obtaining that data would frankly be astronomical (see

Page 142 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

below at para 8 for the cost of providing limited data). The Crown has
explained on numerous occasions how expensive it is to obtain this
material. The expense simply results from Royal Mail’s contractual
obligations to Fujitsu. We have asked the Defence repeatedly to
consider a narrow time span for their request or a narrow field of types
of transactions. The reason for this suggestion was that the Defendant's
false inflations increased consistently over a long period of time. They
indicate some kind of continuing problem, rather than a few one-off
events. If there really was an innocent reason for the Defendant's false
figures it could be searched for rather more easily in a short,
representative cross-section of data than in a mountain of information
covering more than 5 years. The Crown has made it clear that if
significant problems/errors were found in an analysis of a narrow span

of data it would review its case on count 1.

8. The Defence has made no proposal as to an appropriate span of data,
even though it has the potential advantage of the Defendant's insider
knowledge. This failure by the Defence has been rather frustrating but it
may have been in part because the Defence put its request on hold while
it asked for justification of the cost of obtaining this data. The Crown has
chosen therefore, at a cost of over £20,000, to obtain logs for the period
December 2006-December 2007. The logs consist of 431,490 separate
transactions. The chosen time period covers the full extent of the
Defendant's admitted false accounting. It also post-dates the time when

the Defendant claims to have put a stop to thefts by employees....”

416. On 3 March 2010 (at 2.18pm), | emailed Mr Tatford directly, providing my
comments on Professor McLachlan's 5th interim technical report
[FUJ00156128]. My email indicates that | had, by this point, been supplied
with the material from the 13 separate ARQ data requests for West Byfleet for
the period 1 December 2006 to 31 December 2007.

Page 143 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

417. As explained in my second witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraph 171
[WITN00460200] and earlier in this witness statement, ARQ data is a
spreadsheet of all transactions carried out within the branch together with a
separate spreadsheet of significant business activities (known as Business
Events) such as user logins and cash declarations. In the ARQ transaction
data | received for West Byfleet, there were 431,490 entries for the 13 month
period concerned.

418. As well as this ARQ data, | was provided with the raw audit trail for the same
period, which was even more voluminous (in the millions of entries) because
they included all of the back office communications between Horizon and third
parties (e.g. banks). | understood at the time that both the ARQ data and raw
audit trail (including the message store) were provided to Professor
McLachlan (see [FUJ00153084)]).

419. My email dated 3 March 2010 to Mr Tatford summarised my analysis of the
ARQ data. It had become clear to me from the ARQ data that Mrs Misra (or
her staff) had declared the exact same cash figures on consecutive days ona
number of occasions, and that these and other cash declarations that had
been made did not correlate to the same day’s cash movements. This made
my task harder in assessing where discrepancies may have occurred (since if
the cash declarations had been done accurately, a mismatch between the
system cash figures and the declared cash figures would be evident). | did not,
though, see any indications of a system failure in the ARQ data.

420. | also noted to Mr Tatford that | had pulled out all of the transaction corrections
from the ARQ data to see how they had been handled. | then examined the
transaction corrections to see if | could spot any pattern that might indicate

that Horizon had malfunctioned. | didn’t see anything unusual.
421. | also noted that, as a separate exercise, | had analysed the ARQ data for

Debit Card transactions which had not been successful. | did this because it

was a specific hypothesis raised by Professor McLachlan that this could

Page 144 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

account for discrepancies. | set out why | didn’t see how these failed Debit

Card transactions could be the cause of the alleged losses.

422. | also noted that | had looked at Pouch Reversals (where cash or currency
was packed for despatch to POL's Cash Centre and the pouch is subsequently
cancelled), since | was aware that this method could be used to hide losses
when balancing. Again, | didn’t see how it could have caused the alleged

losses in Mrs Misra’s case.

423. Having summarised my findings, | asked Mr Tatford whether | should pass my
comments to Professor McLachlan. | told him that | was not sure what further
analysis to carry out but that | had identified some possible areas to pursue,
such as Stock Adjustments and Discrepancies. | think that this indicates that |
was, on my own initiative, actively considering areas of the underlying data or

accounts which might explain how any discrepancies may have arisen.

424. In summary, | reviewed the ARQ data with Professor McLachlan’s hypotheses
in mind to assess, one way or the other, whether they could be substantiated.
| found that they could not. | hoped to find something that would explain what
had caused the discrepancies Mrs Misra had experienced. But there was
nothing | could see which might explain them. And despite working hard to
spot patterns in the data, | found nothing (such as large discrepancies on a
particular day) that pointed towards a system error. Had | spotted something
like this, | would have told POL’s lawyers immediately. | noted that Mrs Misra
had entered false figures to hide losses from POL but this simply meant that
those figures were inaccurate. | was not, by this, suggesting that Mrs Misra

had stolen any money.

425. On 4 March 2010, Penny forwarded to me another email from Mr Singh
[FUJ00153027]. It stated:

“Thank you for your Email today. What has been requested through
Mark Dinsdale is transaction log details for West Byfleet (this is the
whole of the false accounting period to which Ms Misra has pleaded

Page 145 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

guilty to) from 1 December 2006 to 31 December 2007. This should
then be given to Gareth Jenkins at Fujitsu to confirm by his witness
statement whether there are any errors within the Horizon system

for the transaction log period.

Gareth Jenkins will need to study the Defence experts reports which he
has in hand and he had lengthy discussions with the Defence expert
Charles McLachlan (mobile number [GRO]) on 12 February 2010. There
is a need for an urgent meeting where these two experts can meet where
the Defence expert reports and his concerns about the Horizon system
can be discussed. Gareth Jenkins can then use his expertise to rebut
or answer his various hypotheses or theories. He has done that to a

certain extent in his telephone discussion with him on 12 February 2010.

It may be the practical approach for Gareth Jenkins to find the
shortest period span of transaction log data for West Byfleet,
analyse it, disprove or rebut what the Defence expert is saying in his
reports. Mr Gareth Jenkins is an expert for Fujitsu. He will give evidence
in Court. The Judge and Jury will be listening to his every word very
carefully and a lot will hang on his evidence.”

426. This email is somewhat confusing in that it referred to my having been
provided with the entire year of data and to finding the shortest period of time
to disprove or rebut the defence case (and also repeats parts of the 1 March
2010 email that Mr Singh had already sent me). Additionally, | had already
started doing what | understood was wanted (which was to consider the entire
year of data rather than a shorter period extracted from it). Mr Singh did,
however, at least state that | should examine the data for West Byfleet for
errors in Horizon during the transaction log period, and that | should address
the defence hypotheses advanced by Professor McLachlan. Mr Singh did not
ask me to explain problems such as the timeout issues causing missing
transactions which | had referred to previously (although as | have explained,

Fujitsu had already checked for these through the NT event logs).

Page 146 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

427. On 4 March 2010, | emailed Professor McLachlan with my comments on his
draft report [FUJ00153029], which reflected my email the previous day to Mr
Tatford. | also summarised the investigations | had made so far on the
transactions. | indicated to Professor McLachlan that | was uncertain what else
| could look at (to invite any suggestions he might have) and | outlined some

avenues that he might wish to investigate further or ask me to.

428. At some point in the first week of March 2010, | believe that | also obtained
more information about the Falkirk bug that had affected the Callendar Square
branch to understand how this bug had manifested itself in the NT event logs
for Callendar Square. The impact of the Callendar Square bug was obvious
since it had resulted in thousands of duplicated entries (the so-called “event
storms”) in the NT event logs as the system repeatedly tried to replicate the
same data between counters. This is an example of how a BED will leave
noticeable traces in the audit data. As noted above, Anne had examined the
NT event logs for West Byfleet for the whole of the indictment period from June
2005 to December 2009. | reviewed her analysis and | believe that | examined
the NT event logs myself. This is consistent with a handwritten note | believe
Penny made, which says “Gareth Jenkins reviewed all txn data & events when
providing txn analysis” [FUJ00154689]. There was no trace in the NT event
logs for West Byfleet of the event storms characteristic of the Callendar

Square bug, or indeed anything else that looked like a BED.

429. | emailed Professor McLachlan on 8 March 2010, setting out the reasons why
| thought the Callendar Square bug was irrelevant to Mrs Misra’s case
[POL00054345]. Although my lawyers tell me they cannot find any emails on
Relativity about this, | checked the wording of my email with Anne Chambers
before | sent it to ensure it was technically accurate and she provided a few
comments. | also sent it to Warwick Tatford beforehand to ensure that he was

content with it (see [FUJ00154887]). My email made the following points:

a. That the Callendar Square bug had occurred when transferring Cash

or Stock between Stock Units. | pointed out that the West Byfleet

Page 147 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

branch did operate multiple Stock Units so the Callendar Square bug

could have occurred.

. It manifested itself by the Receiving Stock Unit not being able to “see”
the transfer made by the Sending Stock Unit and was then
compounded by attempting to make a further transfer. | noted that such
transactions usually reappeared the next day. | was therefore
explaining that the discrepancy in Callendar Square occurred because
of the steps taken by the end user (entirely understandably) to attempt
to correct the problem.

| explained that it was clearly visible to the User as a ‘Receipts and
Payments mismatch’ at the time that one of the Stock Units was
balanced and that this would usually result in the Branch raising a call.

There were no such calls in Andy Dunks’ Witness Statement.

. | said that it could be checked on any Balance Reports or Branch
Trading Statements that were available from the Branch which should
show that Receipts and Payments did match and that the Trading
Position was zero (reading this email again, | realise that this was a

typo and should have said “non-zero”).

. | pointed out that the Callendar Square problem was visible when
looking at system (i.e. NT) events associated with the Branch.

| noted that the system events from 30 June 2005 to 31 December 2009
for West Byfleet had been checked and no such events were found.

. | explained that the Callendar Square problem had been fixed in the
S90 Release which went live in March 2006 and so would not have
been relevant at the time of the Transaction Logs obtained for West
Byfleet between December 2006 and December 2007.

Page 148 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

430. Having conducted this work, | prepared and signed my next witness
statement, which was dated 9 March 2010 [POL00001643]. This was a
response to the hypotheses set out in Professor McLachlan’s 5th interim
technical report (I do not recall why | did not respond to Professor McLachlan’s
4" interim technical report, but it was probably because this report consisted
entirely of reporting our previous conversation). | note that another of these
conversations with Professor McLachlan seems to have taken place on 5
March 2010, but | do not recall it, and nobody suggested that | needed to
respond to his 4" interim technical report.

431. In summary, my statement dated 9 March 2010 responded to each area
Professor McLachlan hypothesised could have been the source of the

discrepancy. This included:

a. In relation to his suggestion that the Fast Cash button could result in
rejected card payments being treated as over the counter cash or that
the use of cards could result in other discrepancies, | stated that | had
now checked all cases of Rejected Card payments and they did not

explain the discrepancies.

b. | stated that | could not comment where it was suggested that a lack of

training had given rise to problems in operating Horizon.

c. | stated that | could not comment where it was suggested that training or
documentation, in conjunction with considerations about whether
English was a first language, could have given rise to problems in

operating Horizon.

d. In relation to the suggestion that the Horizon system failed to properly
process transactions as part of a much larger integrated system which
included a SAP, a data warehouse technology connecting to a merchant
service provider for card payment services, | noted that what happened
in the branch was recorded in the branch logs. | said that | could not

prove that anything was missing from the logs in the period | had

Page 149 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

examined, but | had seen no evidence in the NT events to indicate any

system faults that would result in missing transactions.

. In relation to incorrect data entry not resolved by sub post office
reconciliation and reliant upon resolution of discrepancies by the Post
Office and operators of the Horizon system, | had previously informed
Professor McLachlan about the availability of audit data. | referred to the
fact that the logs were now available and that | had started to look at the
431,490 transactions between 2006 and 2007 (and by this, | wanted to
be clear that | was willing to carry on looking at the logs to consider other

hypotheses from the defence if that would be necessary or helpful).

In relation to the point that the Horizon system was not a
single monolithic mainframe based system (but encompassed parts of
the back end system), | made the point that the back end systems were
not relevant in relation to problems at the branch and that we now had

the logs.

. In relation to the point that in a card payment system that involved an
end to end dialogue between the counter terminal, the card authorisation
terminal, the network, the core Horizon system, the electronic funds
transfer component, the authorising merchant service and the central
post office branch accounting system is a long running transaction with
multiple points of possible failure, | again made the point that the Branch
accounts were based on whether the Branch thinks the Debit Card was
authorized or not and that any subsequent failures after that point in the

transactional process were irrelevant to the branch accounts.

. | had reviewed the transaction logs from 1 December 2006 to 31
December 2007 to look for all examples of Debit Card transactions
which had not been successful. | set out my analysis as to why these did
not account for the losses seen. | also said that without some clearer
directive as to what may have been a cause for any errors, | was not

sure of what other analysis to carry out. | did however refer to other areas

Page 150 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

that could possibly be examined (these are the same ones | had referred

to in email correspondence with Professor McLachlan).

i. In relation to Callendar Square, | acknowledged that in relation to any
large system there would be occasional faults such as the one in
Callendar Square. | also set out the reasons why | did not think that the
Callendar Square bug applied so as to explain the losses in Mrs Misra’s
branch. | noted that the system events (i.e. the NT events) for West

Byfleet had been checked for the whole of the indictment period.

432. My reference to system events (both in my email dated 8 March 2010 and my
witness statement dated 9 March 2010) does not seem to have caused POL
to disclose them to the defence, or to request that | do so. | don’t think that
Professor McLachlan or the defence requested them at this point. | did not

know that | might be under a personal duty to disclose them.

433. | also pointed to the report | had written on 2 October 2009 (the report about
data integrity in Legacy Horizon) and produced it as exhibit GJ/01. | did this
because | thought it would be helpful to Professor McLachlan to see an outline
of the mechanics of how the data was usually (but not always) preserved in
relation to certain hardware failures. As noted above, this report also referred
to my belief that data lost due to hardware failures could be diagnosed using

the transactional data ARQ spreadsheet and NT event logs.

434. | tried to assist Professor McLachlan where | could. For example, on 8 March
2009, | sent him architecture diagrams and a summary of the message flows
for processing Debit Card transactions [FUJ00153035]. On 23 April 2010, |
explained to him what the transaction logs he had been provided with
consisted of and he replied thanking me [FUJ00153084]. | suggested to him
(as mentioned above) other investigations which could be carried out.
Because Professor McLachlan had been provided with the raw logs, he was
able to conduct the same sort of analyses as me in order to consider whether
there was evidence of a system cause for the discrepancies at Mrs Misra’s

branch.

Page 151 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

435. | am informed by my lawyers that, shortly after | prepared my statement dated
9 March 2010, there was a disclosure hearing in Mrs Misra’s case, at which
the defence formally made its application for disclosure of material about
Horizon, which the Judge refused a couple of days later. | have not seen any
emails indicating that | saw (or had any input into) any response that POL
made to this disclosure application.

436. Finally, | note that my witness statement dated 9 March 2010 did not contain
either of the two standard paragraphs that appear at the end of many of
Fujitsu’s witness statements. | am unsure why that is. It may just have been
overlooked. But in any case, and as | have explained, | saw this witness
statement as a response to Professor McLachlan’s hypotheses. | did not see
it as providing any broader assurance about the integrity or health of Horizon
at West Byfleet branch.

My witness statement dated 8 July 2010 and duplicate ARQ data

437. The next witness statement | produced was on 8 July 2010 [FUJ00122906].
This was not produced in response to a report by Professor McLachlan. It was
produced in order to explain the duplication issue in the ARQ data. | have dealt
with the technical nature of this issue in my second witness statement to the
Inquiry at paragraphs 197 to 204 [WITN00460200]. Since then, the Inquiry has
provided me with additional documents about this issue, which | have

addressed earlier at paragraphs 218 to 235 of this witness statement.

438. The reason that | explained this duplication issue formally in a witness
statement in Mrs Misra’s case was because this was a case in which ARQ
spreadsheets had been extracted that contained duplicates. | knew that
Fujitsu had provided these spreadsheets to Professor McLachlan and | did not
want his analysis to proceed on the basis of duplicate entries. As the evidence

referred to above demonstrates, there was legal involvement in terms of how

Page 152 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

to respond to this issue in those cases where ARQ spreadsheets containing

duplicate entries had been provided to POL.

439. My witness statement in Mrs Misra’s case explained that the problem of
duplication in the ARQ data extracted for West Byfleet branch did not affect
the branch accounts:

"It should be noted that ARQ 447 which records the transactions
between 1 November 2007 to 30 November 2007 does contain some
duplication of audited records [...] duplication of audited records has not,
in any way, affected actual physical transactions recorded on any
counter at any outlet."

440. This witness statement dated 8 July 2010 contained, at the end, the first of the
two standard paragraphs that appear in many Fujitsu witness statements.
Again, | assume that Penny inserted this paragraph when she prepared the
draft witness statement for me and | would have been guided by her about
this. This was a statement about the problem of duplication of the ARQ data
and clearly it was not attesting to the broader integrity or health of Horizon at
West Byfleet branch.

Professor McLachlan’s requests to conduct investigations on Horizon

441. | met Professor McLachlan at Fujitsu’s offices in Bracknell on 20 July 2010.
This is because he telephoned to say we should meet because the Judge had
suggested it. | recall that the meeting was friendly and professional. | showed
him a Horizon test rig and we discussed his hypotheses. As always with
Professor McLachlan, | found the conversation interesting and constructive. |
recall that one of the outcomes of this meeting was that Professor McLachlan
wanted to conduct various investigations on Horizon, as a way of proving or
disproving his hypotheses. | don’t remember the exact wording | used, but |

Page 153 of 285
442.

443.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

believe that | suggested that he should raise the matter with POL through Mrs
Misra’s lawyers. | said this because | had no authority to grant him access to

conduct these investigations, whereas POL did.

It seems that this is what Professor McLachlan did, since on 22 July 2010,
there was an email from Ms Issy Hogg (Mrs Misra’s solicitor) to Mr Singh
[POL00055059]. In this email, Ms Hogg said “As a result of the meeting that
took place between Charles McLachlan and Gareth Jenkins as directed by the
judge, we now need to have...” and listed system change requests and the
Known Error Log (KEL) as among the material she wanted to see. | believe
that Ms Hogg became aware of the existence of the KEL because | had told
Professor McLachlan about it, and he in turn had told her. In his email of 27
July 2010, Mr Singh sought “urgent instructions” about providing access to the
“error logs” [POL00044999]. It appears that the request was also passed to
Mr Bradshaw [POL00175978].

On 27 July 2010, | was copied into an email chain forwarding Ms Hogg’s
requests and which set out the investigations which Professor McLachlan
wanted to carry out [FUJ00153159]. POL wanted to know how these requests
had come about and asked for my views on them. | responded to Penny about
this at 12.05pm on that day. For each request, | explained what would be
involved in implementing what Professor McLachlan wanted. | expressed
some doubts about whether the proposed investigations were practical or
whether they would shed any light on matters, but my email reflected that
these were not decisions for me but rather for POL. In relation to the three

investigations proposed by Professor McLachlan, | said:

“1. Access to system in Midlands: This was not something we discussed
in detail. It would appear that Charles is aware of a Post Office which is
having issues similar to those which have resulted in prosecution, but
that there are currently no prosecutions in place. He would like to monitor
exactly what happens in this branch (probably with a video camera) and
compare that with the system logs (hoping to find a mismatch!). However
the Postmaster is covered by confidentiality agreements, which mean

Page 154 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

that this cannot be done without permission of POL. | assume that this
is a request to be able to do this. I'm also assuming that help would be
required from Fujitsu in retrieving logs from the system to compare with

the video. NB this probably needs to be done quickly before migrating to
HNG-X. Charles's first report refers to such a branch | believe. I've no
idea where this postmaster would stand in respect of any problems that
they have had but which are not yet visible to POL, or in respect of what
they have already said to Charles.

2. Access to Chesterfield: Charles is still of the opinion that
understanding how P&BA operate and in particular how they identify
errors and process them as Transaction Corrections may help his case.

I've pointed out that anything in this area that could affect the accounts
is already visible to him in the Horizon logs and so | don't see that this is
likely to be of help to him. However he would still like to pursue this line

of exploration.

3. System Change Requests: Basically, he was asking to look at all
system faults. | suggested that as we kept all testing and Live faults in
the same system and that there were around 200,000 of them, then this
wasn't going to get him far. He then suggested looking at system
changes and would like to see all changes that have happened to the
system. Again, | don't think this will help and | don't know how practical
it is for Fujitsu's Release Management to provide that. | think all we can
do is ask the question.”

444. At 2.40pm on the same day (27 July 2010), Penny sent an email to POL setting
out this response [FUJ00153157].

445. As the email chain shows, Professor McLachlan and | discussed the KEL.
There was no secrecy about this on my part and | am not aware of any
reluctance on the part of Fujitsu (in any case in which | was involved) to
disclose the KEL in legal proceedings.

Page 155 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

446. Although | raised the KEL with Professor McLachlan, | would not have
regarded it as particularly helpful in this context. It was geared towards
symptoms not causes and was intended to help first and second line
personnel identify known problems rather than identify new problems (so they
were not reported again). | didn’t find KELs particularly useful when
undertaking analysis as to where funds may have gone missing in a given
case. | would sometimes use PEAKs in my work instead, which were much
more detailed. Also | think that KELs may have been of less use in those cases
(such as this one) where there was a general reliance upon Horizon as having
caused a loss as opposed to those cases where the SPM could identify

specific symptoms or information in relation to the loss.

447. As my response to Professor McLachlan’s third request indicates, | had told
him during our meeting (and | was now telling Mr Singh and Mr Bradshaw)
that there were 200,000 “faults” raised on Horizon. The reference to “faults”

was to PEAKs and the figure of 200,000 would have included all of the faults

which arose in testing or which were closed, as well as a small number of live
faults. Personally, | didn’t think that looking at all of these system faults would
take matters further; it would be a huge task, take months and would be highly
unlikely to throw light on whether there was a system issue at Mrs Misra’s
branch (particularly given how little information we had to go on as to any
problems noticed by her, time frames as to when losses were noted etc.). This
is why | subsequently said that he was “fishing”. However, | also said that
these requests seemed “harmless”. But ultimately, whether Professor

McLachlan’s proposed investigations should be implemented, and whether

Ms Hogg’s requests for material about Horizon should be provided, were not

decisions for me. | had told Professor McLachlan about the material that

existed for tracking bugs, errors and defects in Horizon — namely KELs,

PEAKs and system changes — and | had discussed his proposed

investigations with him. As | noted at the end of my email, “/ think all we can

do is ask the question”. In other words, ask POL whether they would consent
to providing any of this material to Professor McLachlan or to allowing any of

his proposed investigations to take place.

Page 156 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

448. | note that no one in POL queried what the KEL was or that there were 200,000
faults recorded on the PEAK system. This does not surprise me because |
would have thought it well understood by POL that Fujitsu had detailed records

in which bugs, errors and defects were identified and fixed.

449. Mr Longman did ask that Fujitsu check what assistance could be provided
about the change requests [POL00175988]. There is an email chain at
[FUJ00153170] in which one of my colleagues commented that POL already
held details concerning all system changes and | noted that this made sense
given that POL signed off on them all.

450. My lawyers have shown me [POL00047329], which indicates that POL told
the defence on 28 July 2010 that they were not entitled to the information
which Professor McLachlan had sought. The internal POL emails of 27 July
2010 (which | was not part of) suggest that, by 12.43pm on that day, the
“general consensus of opinion” within POL was to refuse access to system
changes (and the other material requested by Ms Hogg) [POL00055100]. This
was a couple of hours before Penny emailed POL my comments on Professor
McLachlan’s requests [FUJ00153157]. POL appears therefore to have come
to a view that the requests should be declined prior to receiving my explanation

of the position (and what Fujitsu’s Release Management could do to assist).

451. Although POL had told the defence that they were declining these requests, |
don’t think Fujitsu knew that at the time. Fujitsu (specifically Penny and Guy
Wilkerson) continued to work on how we could provide the information on
system changes sought by the defence. | explained what | understood the
defence to want: a detailed list of every fix Fujitsu had ever applied to Horizon
giving details of the problems that the fix was addressing and when it was

applied.

452. Although this was an internal discussion, | noted to my colleagues that |
thought it was a huge task and would not help the defence but nonetheless

that was what the defence were asking for (i.e. that we had to get on and work

Page 157 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

out what would be involved). Despite my personal views, | asked that Fujitsu
provide the costs estimate for providing the information the defence sought
[FUJ00156200].

453. It seems that this discussion was ongoing throughout August 2010. On 18
August 2010, for example, there was an email from John Budworth (who was
a member of the Release Management Team in Fujitsu’s Post Office Account
responsible for managing software changes to Horizon Counters) to me and
others, noting that he had spoken to me about the request for details of all
system changes and the amount of work involved [FUJ00156216]. He
indicated that he had had difficulty in producing a cost estimate and did not

want to give me a commitment to doing the work.

454. As noted above, | now understand that POL had refused (on 18 July 2010) the
requests that Professor McLachlan made. On 24 August 2010, there was an
exchange of emails between Penny and John Budworth, copying me, in which
Penny confirmed that POL would be resisting the request for system changes
and that the defence would have to ask the Court for these [FUJ00156216].
John Budworth then noted that, for the record, POL would be looking at about
four weeks of work to implement the request. It therefore appears that POL
had decided not to provide the information sought prior to Fujitsu providing the

estimate of time and costs.

Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug

455. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me what consideration | gave in
Mrs Misra’s case to any known BEDs in Horizon, and has referred in particular
to a document concerning the Receipts and Payments Mismatch Bug in
Horizon Online. As explained above, | did not understand that | had any duty
to disclose in my witness statements in Mrs Misra’s case all historic problems
with Legacy Horizon, or indeed any problem that had arisen with Horizon
Online. That there were 200,000 system errors recorded was openly referred

Page 158 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

to by me in my communications with Professor McLachlan, the defence
expert. POL was aware of a number of previous incidents whereby a bug in
Horizon had caused discrepancies in branch accounts. It was aware of the
Callendar Square bug in Legacy Horizon (and had dealt with it in relation to
Mr Castleton’s case). It was aware of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch
Bug in Horizon Online. | had raised the issue of event timeouts/locking at the
outset of my involvement in Mrs Misra’s case (and in any case Fujitsu had
informed POL about the Craigpark issue in 2008/2009). No one ever
suggested to me that | needed to give a statement detailing these sort of
issues (save for Callendar Square).

456. My approach, as | have explained, was to consider the data specific to Mrs
Misra’s branch and whether there was evidence of a system issue in it. Again,
this was the approach my colleagues and | took in our day to day work in fourth
line support when we were asked to investigate the cause of a discrepancy
referred to us. It was the approach Mr Singh asked me to take in his emails of
1 and 3 March 2010. It did not occur to me to refer to the existence of bugs
which | thought had no relevance to explaining the discrepancies Mrs Misra

had experienced.

457. My second witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraphs 83 to 123
[WITN00460200] gives what | hope is a detailed explanation of the Receipts
and Payments Mismatch bug, which came to my attention on or around 27
September 2010. As explained in that witness statement, | attended a
teleconference which | think took place on 4 October 2010 with members of
POL and Fujitsu to discuss the bug. At paragraph 106 of my second witness
statement to the Inquiry [WITN00460200], | described the “Receipts and
Payments issue notes” [FUJ00081584] as a note of this call. However,
reflecting on it, | don’t think this is correct. | now believe that this was an
internal POL note prepared about the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug,
given the references to “we” and the sentences “We have asked Fujitsu why
it has taken so long to react to and escalate an issue which began in May.
They will provide feedback in due course.” | don’t recall ever seeing this note

at the time. It does not look like a verbatim note of a call or meeting.

Page 159 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

458. There is a reference within POL’s note to “ongoing legal cases.” | don’t believe
| ever discussed the impact of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug on
any legal case. | would not have regarded the Receipts and Payments
Mismatch bug as at all relevant to Mrs Misra’s case. This is because the bug
did not affect and could not have affected Legacy Horizon, which was the
software system operating at Mrs Misra’s branch for the entire period of the
allegations. The Receipts and Payments bug was a Horizon Online bug and
could only have affected data produced after Horizon Online was in use at a
branch. It was a completely different software system to Legacy Horizon. This
distinction between the two systems was fundamental. It was not a case of
weighing up whether to disclose the bug in Mrs Misra’s case and then
choosing not to. From my perspective (had | thought about it at the time) the
bug would not have been relevant to a loss which arose a number of years
before Horizon Online was introduced. It simply never occurred to me that it
could be of any relevance to Mrs Misra’s case. | was not a lawyer and had no
understanding of disclosure in criminal cases. | never realised that notes about

this bug might need to be disclosed.

459. | also want to repeat the point that | made in my second witness statement to
the Inquiry, which was that the note | prepared on the Receipts and Payments
Mismatch Bug [FUJ00154231] was premised upon the SPMs being told about
any corrective action taken in relation to the branch data. My note did not
mention any concern about ongoing legal cases.

460. | note that my paper on the bug was circulated in advance of a call with POL
on 4 October 2010 (see [POL00169845]); that a P&BA Excel file listing
affected branches was circulated before a call on 6 October 2010 (see
[POL00169848)]); and that there was a further call with POL on 8 October 2010
(see [POL00169851]). None of the calendar invites for these calls attached
the internal POL paper about the Receipts and Payments Mismatch Bug
[FUJ00081584]. My memory is that there was a consensus that the
appropriate course was to remedy the position through P&BA (with the

affected branches being informed).

Page 160 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

461. These calls in early October 2010 clearly show that a number of people within
POL were aware of the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug. | am also now
aware that, on 8 October 2010, my note on this bug was forwarded by Alan
Simpson in POL’s Security Team to Rob Wilson, POL’s Head of Criminal Law,
and then from Rob Wilson to Jarnail Singh [POL00055410]. | have no
recollection of Mr Singh asking me about the bug or raising with me the

question of disclosing it to the defence.

My witness statement dated 8 October 2010

462. On 1 October 2010, Professor McLachlan emailed me, attaching what he
described as his final report, asking for comments [FUJ00156248]. | scanned
the report quickly and, several minutes later, emailed Mr Singh, noting that
[FUJ00156248]:

"I'm concerned about the tone and some of the things being attributed to
me. I’m in the process of annotating the document with my thoughts /
comments. Charles spoke to me earlier this morning and has arranged
to discuss my views with me at 4pm this afternoon. At this point I’m
reluctant to have that conversation without some further guidance."

463. | don’t think that Mr Singh replied to my email or gave me any further guidance,
so | worked through Professor McLachlan’s report myself and spoke to him

that afternoon. At 5.45pm | sent him my marked up draft.
464. My marked up draft is at [POL00055408], and most of my comments found

their way into my final witness statement dated 8 October 2010, so | will
address them below in the context of that statement.

Page 161 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

465. On 5 October 2010, | attended a meeting with Mr Tatford, Mr Singh and Mr
Longman at Mr Tatford’s Chambers. | think that this was the first time | had
met Mr Tatford in person. | did not take any notes of the meeting. My lawyers
tell me that they cannot find any note made by Mr Singh or Mr Longman on
the Inquiry’s database. If a note was made of it then | would be much assisted
by seeing it. This meeting was 13 years ago and | have very little recollection
of it. What | can remember is that it focused on the draft report that Professor
McLachlan had sent me on 1 October 2010 (I don’t think we had a signed
version by this stage). | recall that | explained my responses to this report and
| agreed that | would draft a witness statement containing those responses, as
well as incorporating the main points | had made in my witness statements
dated 2 February, 8 February and 9 March 2010. | understood that Mr Tatford
wanted a single witness statement from me that covered everything of any
relevance. Mr Tatford must also have asked me if | could carry out an analysis
of the changes in the amount of cash held by the branch (given my email of

the next day) which | did and added at the end of my statement.

466. On 6 October 2010 at 11.47am, | emailed a draft witness statement to Mr
Tatford, Mr Singh and Mr Longman [FUJ00122999]. | used the same template
as | had for all of my previous witness statements. | specifically asked for their
feedback as to whether it was correct in terms of the approach and style. No
one suggested that | needed to add any sort of expert declaration to it. Mr
Tatford made comments on this draft which are visible at [FUJ00123013]. He
appeared to want me to make some points more strongly in favour of POL
than | had done. In particular, he wanted me to say that it looked as though

Mrs Misra had stolen money rather than that it was incompetence.

467.1 responded to Mr Tatford’s comments and these are also visible at
[FUJ00123013]. | did not incorporate each comment made by Mr Tatford, only
those that reflected what | thought that | could properly say. Mr Tatford seemed
to recognise this when he replied to me on 8 October 2010, saying that | had
been "quite right to rebuff me when | have been asking too much"
[FUJ00123042].

Page 162 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

468. | think that overall my responses to Mr Tatford’s comments demonstrate that

| was not comfortable with some of the points he tried to press.

469. On 7 October 2010, | received an updated version of Professor McLachlan’s
final report [FUJ00153366], and | believe that | checked this and updated my
witness statement in response. On 8 October 2010, | prepared a final draft of
my witness statement and | emailed it to Mr Singh and Mr Tatford at 12.26pm
[FUJ00123050]. The draft itself is at [FUJO0083737]. My lawyers tell me that

they cannot find a signed version of the statement on the Inquiry’s database.

470. | understand that my witness statement dated 8 October 2010 was the only
one of my five witness statements referred to in any detail during Mrs Misra’s
trial. Again, my understanding of the purpose of this witness statement was to
respond to Professor McLachlan’s final report, as is clear from its opening
lines, where | stated that, “) have been asked to comment upon the final
‘Technical Expert’s Report’ of Professor McLachlan dated 7 October 2010”.
| note that it did not contain either of the two standard paragraphs at the end
which routinely appeared in Fujitsu’s witness statements. | am unsure why that
is and it may well be because Penny had no involvement in its creation (and

my focus would have been on the technical aspects of the statement).

471. My witness statement dated 8 October 2010 responded to over 20 hypotheses
that Professor McLachlan had advanced and covered a lot of ground. The
Inquiry has not asked me any specific questions about my statement but | am

aware that the issue of remote access may be of interest to the Inquiry.

472. One of Professor McLachlan’s hypotheses concerned transaction corrections,
which | addressed at paragraph 2.1.3 of my statement as follows:

“Finally, in Section 1.2.3 there is the Hypothesis that "External systems
across the wider Post Office Limited Operating Environment provide
incorrect externally entered information to the Horizon accounts through
system or operator error outside Horizon." | was not quite clear what

Page 163 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Professor McLachlan was referring to here. In the updated version of the
report, Professor McLachlan has clarified this by adding "For example,
incorrect transaction corrections are submitted from the central systems
for acceptance by the sub post master." However in my view this is not
really relevant since any transaction that is recorded on Horizon must be
authorised by a User of the Horizon system who is taking responsibility
for the impact that such a transaction has on the Branch's accounts.
There are no cases where external systems can manipulate the Branch's
accounts without the Users in the Branch being aware of what is
happening and authorising the transactions.”

473. In this paragraph, | addressed Professor McLachlan’s hypothesis about
transaction corrections (which were the most common means by which POL
could, externally, impact the accounts of a branch). | noted that this could only
happen with the consent of the SPM or an authorised supervisor or manager.
| was not addressing the issue of remote access as it has been considered in
the group litigation and this Inquiry. | understand that remote access by Fujitsu
is now regarded as an issue of some significance. But at that time, remote
access by Fujitsu didn’t occur to me in the context of responding to Professor
McLachlan’s hypothesis, which related to POL’s ability to impact branch
accounts through transaction corrections. Aside from the fact that | was
responding to his hypothesis, | understood then that remote access by Fujitsu
was an exceptional and regulated course. There was nothing in Mrs Misra’s
case to have suggested that a need for remote access had ever arisen or that
it could in any way explain ongoing losses in the region of £70,000. It was just

not something that | had considered.

Attendance at Guildford Crown Court

474. | was not sitting inside the courtroom (or present at court) for the whole
duration of Mrs Misra’s trial. After my evidence and the evidence of Professor
McLachlan, | was told that | could go home, which | did. | was not present for

Page 164 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Mrs Misra’s evidence or indeed any of the second week of the trial. | recall
spending some of the time that | was in Court in meetings with Professor
McLachlan. | did not make any notes of those meetings and have not seen
notes made by him. | am therefore reliant on what | can remember and the

email records to assist me with what we may have discussed.

475. | am aware that on 11 October 2010, | emailed Professor McLachlan
[FUJ00156267], providing him with further information about Callendar
Square. Specifically, | provided him with:

a. The NT event logs for the whole indictment period (which it appears |

had shown him that afternoon).

b. The NT events that were filtered out when the spreadsheet was

produced.

c. The incident report from Callendar Square describing the problem there.

476. | understand that the incident report is at [FUJ00083663], which is the relevant
PEAK for Callendar Square and provides a detailed description of the

problems experienced at this branch.

477. | recall being surprised that Professor McLachlan did not have the NT event
logs for West Byfleet branch as | had assumed that POL had sent them to him.
As | have said, | had previously mentioned the NT event logs (which | had
called the system logs) in my email to Professor McLachlan on 8 March 2010
[POL00054345] and in my witness statement dated 9 March 2010
[POL00001643]. | recall sitting down with him in a meeting room at court and
going through the NT event logs together so that | could explain them. | also
recall being surprised that POL had not already provided him with the PEAK

for Callendar Square.

Page 165 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

478. My discussions with Professor McLachlan led to his producing an addendum
to his expert report dated 11 October 2010, which is at [POL00030298], and
a joint statement between us dated 11 October 2010, which is at
[POL00001882]. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me to explain the
process by which this joint statement was produced. From my perspective, |
don't recall that there was any formality to it. | do not remember being given
any letter of instruction, briefing or guidance about how to interact with
Professor McLachlan or how to produce a joint statement. The joint statement
was very much a document created there and then by Professor McLachlan
to clarify a few matters arising from his report dated 7 October 2010. As far as

| am aware, that was its only purpose.

479. | have re-read Professor McLachlan’s addendum report and note that at
paragraph 3.7, he said that Mr Castleton had given him an alternative
explanation for Callendar Square to that which | had provided, and said that
there should be disclosure of archive material to uncover it. The report doesn’t
say what this alternative explanation was but | was not aware of any alternative
explanation for Callendar Square. | do not know whether the issue of
disclosure about this alternative explanation was discussed between the
lawyers. | don’t recall discussing the alternative explanation with Professor

McLachlan.

My oral evidence

480. | gave oral evidence on day 4 of Mrs Misra’s trial, which was 14 October 2010.
This was the first and only time | gave oral evidence in a trial and | did not find
it a pleasant experience (as reflected in the email | sent the next day to Penny
and Anne [FUJ00154966]). | had no experience of being formally cross-
examined. It felt adversarial but | am not complaining about the conduct of

anyone in court. | just found the experience unfamiliar and unpleasant.

Page 166 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

481. | have reviewed the transcript of this evidence [POL00029406]. | think the

following errors or typos have crept into the transcript:

a. “Gareth Clifford Jenkins” (page 2F) should read “Gareth Idris Jenkins”.

b. “Backing systems” (page 3E) should, | think, read “back-end systems”.

c. “What the stake was” (page 26H) should, | think, read “what the state

was

d. “Signed off by now” (page 101H) should, | think, read “archived off by

now

482. | am unable to identify whether there are any other errors in the transcript
given the time which has elapsed.

483. Throughout my oral evidence, | was referred to as an “expert” or “expert
witness”. For the reasons | have set out above, | understood this to reflect that
| was regarded as a technical expert in the Horizon system. As the transcript
shows, Mr Tatford did not ask me if | had prepared my evidence in accordance
with the duties of an expert. He did not ask me any questions about my
statements not having an expert declaration. The defence barrister Stephen
Hadrill did not ask me any questions as to why my statements did not have
expert declarations or if | knew that | was subject to these duties. Nor did the
Judge. As far as | was aware, | was giving both factual information and
opinions about Horizon based on my experience of working with it, including

my ability to explain how parts of it worked and the data generated by it.

484. On anumber of occasions during my evidence | said that certain matters were
“outside my remit”, or that | hadn’t been asked to address them or that they
were matters for POL to address, not me. In making these comments, | was

trying to clarify the limits of my knowledge and expertise.

485. | will now address particular comments | made during my oral evidence.

Page 167 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

486. At the very beginning of my examination-in-chief at page 4A, | was asked:

“Q. Now, | am going to ask you, first of all, about what you were asked
to do. What did the Post Office legal department request that you should
do? A. They asked me to comment on the report that | received from the

defence’s expert witness.”

487. My answer reflected what | understood the scope and purpose of my evidence
to be. Mr Tatford did not expand upon these introductory questions by taking
me through the duties to which experts are subject or confirming that |

understood these duties.

488. At page 27D-F of my examination-in-chief, | stated:

“There are a number of systems within the Post Office Ltd. that have —
that are — have an impact on the way that the accounting is done.
However, anything that comes from those external systems has to [be]
accepted by the user on the Horizon system and, therefore, the
behaviour of those systems | don’t believe to be relevant in that the fact
that the user has accepted these transactions onto the system, which
they have to do explicitly, means that it’s all done within the remit of
Horizon as to whether these are valid transactions or not and there’s two
examples that are quoted for that.”

489. | then went on to discuss this by reference to transaction corrections. | was
asked, later, at page 30D, the following question, after | had given an
explanation of the process of transaction corrections:

Page 168 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“Q: So the accounts at the sub — at the post office are only changed by
correction if a member of staff has accepted the correction? A. That is

correct. Q: It cannot be done in secret? A. Correct.”

490. These answers were about transaction corrections and specifically the fact
that transaction corrections could not be done secretly. My answers arose
from questions about that part of Professor McLachlan’s evidence concerning
transaction corrections being a potential source of discrepancies (in paragraph
1.2.3 of his report dated 7 October 2010). | was not addressing (and did not

have in my mind) the issue of remote access by Fujitsu.

491. At pages 48G-H and 49A, there was the following exchange with Mr Tatford
about the Callendar Square bug:

“Q. Is it actually particularly surprising for a problem like this to emerge
over the years when one is dealing with a complicated computer
system? A. No, you'd expect there to be various problems occurring but
the important thing is that they can found and identified and there was a
very visible trace in the logs for the Callendar Square problem of a whole
host of system events saying that there was a problem on one of the

counters concerned.”

492. My answer acknowledged that Horizon could be affected by “various
problems” and reflected my experience that such problems were identifiable

through analysis of the NT events and other audit data for the branch.

493. At page 49H, again in relation to the Callendar Square bug, | said that, “/—-/
don’t know what the underlying — what the underlying problem was.” | did not
know what the specific underlying cause of the Callendar Square bug was. As
| set out in paragraph 56 of my second witness statement to the Inquiry
[WITN00460200], the time outs were a symptom of an underlying cause.
When | had been involved in responding to some time out waiting for lock

Page 169 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

issues in 2000-2003, Fujitsu had been reliant upon Escher to ascertain what
the cause was. As | understood it, the specific Callendar Square problem in
2005 had been referred to Escher, who had ascertained the cause and they
had provided a fix for it.

494. | confirmed that | had considered the system events for the West Byfleet
branch between 30 June 2005 and 31 December 2009 [at page 51A]. | noted

that the system events for Callendar Square had revealed that [at page 51F]:

‘[...] there was a host of time out waiting for lock events in the NT event
log with them coming — and there would be tens or hundreds or
thousands of them all occurring in fairly close proximity.”

495. That explanation of the event storms seen at Callendar Square led to the

following exchange at page 52F:

“Q. And was that present in any way at all in the West Byfleet events?
A. Not with many events, no. There was — as | say, there were one or
two isolated events but — of that type — but there weren't floods of them
as had happened in Callendar Square.”

496. In other words, although Anne and | had examined the NT event logs for West
Byfleet for the whole of the indictment period and spotted one or two events
(which | would expect to spot in any branch), we had not seen the floods or
storms of events that had been seen in Callendar Square. As a result, | felt
able to exclude the Callendar Square bug as a possible explanation for the
losses at West Byfleet.

497. | was also asked, at some length, about the PEAK related to Callendar Square
(as noted above, | had provided this PEAK to Professor McLachlan on the first

day of the trial). | confirmed points in relation to what the PEAK recorded,

Page 170 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

including the length of time taken for the Callendar Square bug to be fixed. |
also confirmed the point | had made to Professor McLachlan earlier in the
year, which was that the recorded faults on the Horizon system ran into the
thousands (although pointed out that the majority of these PEAKs would have

come from test systems not from the live service).

498. At page 58D-E, | did not accept the point put to me by Mr Tatford that | could
completely discount or say that | had not seen any symptom of a computer

fault:

“Q.: And have you - in your analysis of these just under half a million
transactions, have you seen any sign, even the slightest symptom of any
computer fault? A. No, but then I've been doing very sort of high level
rough analysis on the stuff. But to find - to do any detailed investigation
you need to have some sort of idea about a fault happened at that
particular time.”

499. By this, | wanted to make very clear that | could not completely exclude, as Mr
Tatford had suggested, the “slightest symptom of any computer fault”. | could
not say that there was no possibility whatsoever of any computer fault.
However, | was satisfied that my work on the audit data did not show evidence
of a system fault at Mrs Misra’s branch or support for any of Professor
McLachlan’s hypotheses. In referring to doing a “very sort of high level rough
analysis”, | may have understated the work that | had actually done, which
was set out in detail in my witness statements (for example the detailed work
to analyse the question of failed Debit Card payments). But | thought | needed
to emphasise to the court that | could not go as far as Mr Tatford was inviting.

500. | was asked questions by Mr Hadrill about the lack of access that the defence
had been given by POL to Horizon and other materials. | agreed during these
questions that | had access to materials which Professor McLachlan did not.
At page 61D, it was suggested to me that | had access to “the lot, he has a
little.” | was asked about his only being given the NT event logs that week. |

mentioned that | had referred to checking them in an email to him some

Page 171 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

months before [page 68B]. This was a specific reference to the email | had
sent him on 8 March 2010 [POL00054345]. | had also referred to them in my
witness statement dated 9 March 2010. | had not held them back; | just didn’t
know (because nobody told me) that | should have provided documents such
as the NT event logs and Callendar Square PEAK to him. All in all, | think that
this reflected that | did not know that there should be a more formal approach
to providing the material | had examined and relied upon in order to come to

my conclusions.

501. | don’t think that there was any other data which would have assisted
Professor McLachlan in identifying a problem with Horizon which may have
caused the discrepancies in Mrs Misra’s branch. Again, if | had come across
anything which could have supported his hypotheses, | would have brought it

to the attention of POL’s lawyers immediately.

502. Mr Hadrill also asked me about the fact that | did not know about Callendar
Square at the time. At pages 90G-91A of my cross-examination, | accepted

that there could be problems in the system that | was not aware of:

“Q: Presumably, although you were fairly senior and high up in the
Fujitsu system for the purposes of Horizon, you knew nothing about this
problem with Callendar Square, did you? A: Not at the time, no. Q: And
so we have a system in operation at Fujitsu that there can be computer
errors which one set of personnel do not know about in carrying out
corrections in operation. You knew nothing about it and you are an
important person within the Fujitsu system on Horizon? A: | wouldn't
know about every call that’s been raised, no.”

503. In other words, | accepted that Horizon had suffered from a bug | had only

found out about several years later.

Page 172 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

504. Shortly afterwards, | accepted that the Callendar Square bug was evidence of

a system problem in Horizon [page 91B]:

“Q: It is a computer — it is your computer. It is a failing by your computer.
A: Yes. Q: It is not external? A: Yes. Q: It is not incompetence by the
desk clerk or a postmistress, it is a failing by your computer system which
has no human impact whatsoever. A: Yes.”

505. Mr Hadrill then suggested to me that SPMs were trained on the basis that
Horizon was infallible but Mr Tatford intervened to say: “nobody has said
infallible” [page 92F].

506. Mr Haadrill then asked me if | agreed that the evidence showed the financial
mismanagement of the branch and | said that | certainly agreed with this
[pages 114H-115B].

507. At page 124E, during my re-examination by Mr Tatford, | was asked whether
| had any view as to the main issue in the trial, namely whether the money had
been stolen. | was clear that | had seen no evidence of theft and could not say

that any money was actually missing:

“I’ve no way of knowing whether the money loss was due to theft. | don’t

even know that money was lost.”

508. Again, | wanted to make clear (as | had done to Mr Tatford in responding to
his comments on the draft of my final witness statement) that | could not
express any view about whether the money had been stolen. | was saying to
the court that | had seen no evidence of theft and that my evidence did not
prove that there was even a loss.

509. At the end of my giving evidence, the Judge referred to the fact that | had said
that it was very much part of Fujitsu's reputation that the Horizon system

Page 173 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

should be sound and asked me if | was “a Fujitsu man”. He asked me whether
there was any question of my evidence having been influenced by the fact that
| was a Fujitsu man, to which | answered no. | had answered the questions
straightforwardly and truthfully and in ways that | understood might not be
helpful to POL.

Broader Fujitsu concerns about Mrs Misra’s case

510. The Inquiry has asked me to consider the email from David Jones to Roger
Williams and David Roberts dated 5 February 2010 [FUJ00122723]. | was not
copied into this email (which | have referred to above). | have been asked
whether | was aware at the time | was involved in Mrs Misra’s case that Fujitsu
had concerns about the impact that “key issues about [Fujitsu’s] systems”
might have on “relations with POL if mishandled”. | have been asked if this
had any impact upon the evidence which | gave in Mrs Misra’s case.

511. | do not recall knowing that there were emails at this level in relation to Mrs
Misra’s case. | was aware of Penny’s concerns about the manner in which
POL were conducting the case and that she communicated with David Jones
about this. | believe that these concerns were linked to a sensitivity within
Fujitsu at this time arising from the complaints raised by the SPM community
in 2009 about Horizon. | was also aware that it was a sensitive period given
some of the problems being experienced in the roll out of Horizon Online.
However, from my perspective, none of this background affected the evidence
| gave. | think it only affected me in that Fujitsu expected me to get on with it
and deal with whatever demands POL made in terms of responding to
Professor McLachlan’s reports (as well as all of the other matters | have set
out above). But it didn’t affect what | said. | insisted that POL obtain the data
for Mrs Misra’s branch so that | (and Professor McLachlan) could analyse it
for evidence of whether any system problems had caused the discrepancies
at Mrs Misra’s branch. | was willing to consider his hypotheses; to suggest
how they could be tested; to point to other areas which could be examined to

explain the losses; and having mentioned the 200,000 faults, | set in train the

Page 174 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

work to see what Fujitsu could do to draw system changes together. | was not
willing to say that | thought the evidence showed Mrs Misra had stolen money.

| was not willing to say that my work even showed there had been a loss.

Events after the Trial

512. After Mrs Misra was convicted, | was one of the recipients of an email from Mr
Singh [POL00055602], in which he said:

“After a lengthy trial at Guildford Crown Court the above named was
found Guilty of theft. This case turned from a relatively straightforward
general deficiency case to an unprecedented attack on the Horizon
system. We were beset with unparallel-degree (sic) of disclosure
requests by the Defence. Through the hard work of everyone and
through the considerable expertise of Gareth Jenkins of Fujitsu we were
able to destroy to the criminal standard of proof (beyond all reasonable
doubt) every single suggestion made by the Defence.”

513. | don’t recall receiving this email and so | am unsure what | thought about it at
the time. | did not reply to it. It appears to reflect the importance which POL
attached to the outcome of this case and in language that seems over the top.

Looking at it now, it also seems inappropriate.

514. | am aware that my involvement in Mrs Misra’s case has attracted a great deal
of attention and appears to be the principal reason why | have been placed
under criminal investigation. | have read the letter from Mr Justice Fraser to
the DPP dated 14 January 2020 in which he said that he had seen no evidence
that | disclosed my knowledge of the Callendar Square bug to the court at Mrs
Misra’s trial. | assume that Mr Justice Fraser wrote this without knowing that it
was referred to in my witness statements nor having seen the transcript of my
oral evidence. Mr Justice Fraser's letter also says that it was “obvious” that |

should have disclosed the Receipts and Payments Mismatch bug to the court

Page 175 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

at Mrs Misra’s trial. As explained above, this was not obvious to me. Aside that
| did not understand that | might have had to as part of the duties of disclosure
of an expert, | did not think it was relevant to Mrs Misra’s case given that it
was an issue in Horizon Online only, not Legacy Horizon. Even if | had known
that | had personal duties of disclosure, | think that | probably would have had
to ask POL if it was something | should refer to in my statement given that it
wouldn't have appeared at all relevant to me. POL knew about the Receipts
and Payments bug and no one suggested to me that it was relevant to or
should be disclosed in Mrs Misra’s case. | am now aware that members of the

Criminal Law Team in POL knew about it. Mr Singh did not ask me about it.

515. There is another point that | would like to make. | was not in court to listen to
Mrs Misra give evidence in October 2010. | only came to know of the evidence
she gave many years later when | was provided with transcripts from the trial
as part of the criminal investigation about my conduct. Mrs Misra’s oral
evidence to Guildford Crown Court shows that she did not receive anything
like the right guidance from the support desks. | can see the scope that existed
for lack of training and support leading to SPMs in her situation becoming
overwhelmed and then fearful of what would happen if they approached POL

about losses.

516. | have read Mrs Misra’s witness statement to this Inquiry [WITN00650100] and
| have watched the video of her oral evidence to this Inquiry. | am truly sorry
that she was wrongly convicted.

517. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me whether | had any concerns
about the proceedings against Mrs Misra at the time. Looking back at my
emails and other documentary evidence, | can see that there were concerns
on my part and that of Fujitsu about what | was being asked to do and the
approach that POL was asking me to take. The emails show that, at the time,
| had concerns about whether POL was effectively asking Fujitsu to take on
its role (by simply sending me Professor McLachlan’s reports to ‘comment on’
and not really investigating what Mrs Misra might be saying but rather asking

me to analyse the data to see if | could exclude any Horizon issue as a

Page 176 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

potential cause of any discrepancy). It appears, looking back, that | was doing
this without much by way of proper guidance or legal oversight. It also appears
that others in Fujitsu were aware that | was being approached in this way and
sought to introduce more formality into the process, although it seems this
never happened. It is also clear that | (and Fujitsu) had concerns that POL did

not understand the importance of the audit data.

518. | have referred above to the email which Penny sent in November 2010
[FUJ00154969] in which she set out her concerns to Fujitsu’s lawyers,
including that “...POL legal appear to operate in 11th hour panic mode,
permanently; and they have a total disregard for agreed service process, of
which they were reminded earlier in the year...”

519. Again, this confirms that there was concern within Fujitsu about how
prosecutions were being conducted and specifically in relation to my role in
them. | agree with Penny’s view that prosecutions did seem to be conducted
in panic mode. That said, | didn’t have anything to compare how POL
conducted its prosecutions with. | imagine that, at the time, | felt that | had no
choice but to do my best and get on with it. | can say with some certainty that
| would still have assumed that the lawyers around me were acting properly

and professionally and with the legal knowledge and insight that | did not have.

520. | did not lie in my written evidence nor in my oral evidence. | did not intend in
any way to be misleading. | thought | had been clear about the limits of my
evidence. The idea that | would lie about Horizon, knowing that an innocent
person could be convicted and imprisoned, is completely abhorrent to me. |
did not know that Mrs Misra was pregnant at the time of her conviction and
only learned of this many years later. This makes what has happened even
more tragic. | can only apologise, again, to Mrs Misra and her family for what
happened to her.

521. Finally, the Inquiry’s Rule 9 request has asked me two specific questions
about the impact of Mrs Misra’s conviction, so | will address them here.

Page 177 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

a. First, the Inquiry has asked me to consider an email from Penny to David
Jones dated 24 January 2011 and the email chain beneath
[FUJ00123422], and has asked me to explain the circumstances in
which a standard Fujitsu witness statement, for use by the Post Office in
litigation, was created following Mrs Misra’s case and the rationale
behind it, as well as setting out any involvement | had in its production.
If this is a reference to the standard witness statement that Penny
produced about extraction of ARQ data, | have explained this in detail
earlier in this statement. If this is a reference to the generic statement
that | produced in October 2012, | explain this in detail below.

b. Second, the Inquiry has asked whether, following Mrs Misra’s case, it
was common for POL to ask me to act as an expert witness in relation
to prosecutions brought in reliance on Horizon data. As far as | can
recall, | assisted POL with a few cases in the period 2010-2012, and on
some of those occasions, | gave a witness statement without any expert
declaration. Again, these statements would have consisted of a
combination of factual information and analysis of the underlying data. |

address the situation which arose in 2012/2013 separately below.

The creation and development of standard Horizon integrity reports

Rule 9(2) Request questions 146-151

522. The three remaining case studies that the Inquiry has asked me to address
took place in 2012 and 2013. In those two years, all of my witness statements
in POL’s prosecutions were based on a “generic” witness statement that |
signed on 5 October 2012.

523. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request asks me to explain the circumstances in
which this generic statement (and the exhibits to it) came into existence. It

Page 178 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

refers to 21 documents to assist my recollection of these matters, the vast
majority of which originate from Fujitsu, not POL. My lawyers have drawn my
attention to additional documents available on the Inquiry’s database to which

| refer below.

The generic witness statement dated 5 October 2012

524. | believe that the idea of a generic statement can be traced back to a note of
legal advice my lawyers have directed me to. It was written by Harry Bowyer
(who | understand was a lawyer at Cartwright King) and it is dated 12 July
2012 [POL00026567]. | did not see this advice at the time. It refers to POL’s
recent instruction of Second Sight:

“Lassume that we still contend that the system is fool proof in which case
we should defend it aggressively [...] [Second Sight] will give ammunition
to those attempting to discredit the Horizon system [...] we can expect
this to go viral in that any competent defence solicitor advising in a case
such as this will raise the integrity of the Horizon system and put us to
proof as to its integrity [...] the extra evidence which we will be obliged to
gather will be as nothing in comparison to the potential disclosure
problems that we may face. Until the Second Sight investigation is
concluded we will be in a limbo [...] | understand that the manufacturers
have not been helpful up until now. My understanding is that they will not
provide expert evidence without large fees being sought. This will not do.
If the integrity of the system is compromised this will be catastrophic for
all of us including them. The financial consequences of convictions and
confiscation orders being overturned and confidence in the Post Office
book keeping being restored for future prosecutions will be astronomical.
They should be made to understand that this is a firefighting situation
and its [sic] not just our house that would be burned down if the system
were compromised [...] an expert should be identified and instructed to

Page 179 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

prepare a generic statement which confirms the integrity of the system
and why the attacks so far have been unfounded."

525. As | have said, | did not read this note at the time, and reading it now causes
me concern. | don’t believe that, at the time, | would have appreciated that
POL's prosecutions were being seen by POL’s lawyers as a “firefighting
situation”. | assume that the reference to the “manufacturers” being “unhelpful”
is to Fujitsu. The idea that Fujitsu was being “unhelpful” to POL is not
something | recognise and from my experience, we tried (including in Mrs
Misra’s case in particular) to deal with all the challenges POL presented to us
at short notice and often under pressure. Whatever “large fees” were charged
in connection with any work | did would have been in line with whatever POL
and Fujitsu had agreed commercially. | had no control over that. | believe that
Mr Bowyer's request in his note for a “generic statement” may help to explain
how the statement | ultimately produced and signed on 5 October 2012 came
about.

526. | have now also been shown by my lawyers an email from Mr Bowyer of 6
August 2012 [POL00141416]. It relates to the work Helen Rose (who |
understood worked in POL’s Security department) was doing and to the
instruction of an expert. | set the email out here as it demonstrates the origins
of the four issues | was asked to address by Mr Singh later that year (although
| emphasise that | did not see this email at the time):

“Jarnail,

This appears to be what we want.

Hopefully Helen will confirm that the Horizon system has never been
successfully challenged. | have yet to see any sign of any experts briefed
on behalf of the defence.

When she has completed her exercise she should prepare a summary
of those cases where there is a proper attack on the system rather than
a gripe that the system is at fault (although she should record these

Page 180 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

cases so that we can say that they have been kept under review - they
will become more numerous as the band wagon picks up speed)

The expert will need to address the report to the following issues:

1) A description of the horizon system (In laymens' terms so that a jury
can understand what it is and what it does)
2) A declaration that it has yet to be attacked successfully.
3) A summary of the basic attacks made on the system concentrating on
any expert reports served in past cases.
If there are none then state that no expert has yet been found by any
defence team civil or criminal to attack the system. (at the moment there
seems to be little more than griping by defendants that the system must
be at fault without saying how)

4) Plainly, like all accounting systems, there is room for human error
(Keying in wrong amounts etc) but the expert should be able to state that
innocent human error is unlikley [sic] to produce the types of
dicrepencies [sic] of many thousands of pounds over many months.
A decent report along these lines will go a long way to putting this issue
to bed.”

527. My lawyers have also directed my attention to an exchange of emails between
Mr Bowyer and Mr Singh on 12 September 2012 [POL00020489]. Mr Singh
told Mr Bowyer that he is:

"Thinking about choice of expert in this case. In the past | have instructed
Gareth Jenkins of Fujitsu in the case of Misra [...] he provided expertise
in dealing with defences [sic] boundless enquiry into the whole Horizon
system. Perhaps we need to reconsider whether to instruct him as he
may be viewed too [sic] close to the system but instruct somebody
entirely independent?"

528. Mr Bowyer replied to Mr Singh as follows:

Page 181 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

"| would have preferred someone entirely independant (sic) but this is
such a specialist area that we would be hard pushed to get the report in
the timescale that we require - we might open our expert up to
allegations of partiality but his expertise will be unlikely to be challenged
[...] We need to get this report off the skids as soon as possible [...]"

529. Again, | did not see this email exchange at the time and | do not know if Mr
Singh and Mr Bowyer were discussing a particular prosecution or speaking
generally. However, | don’t remember that POL ever raised with me the idea
that | might be “too close” to Horizon or that | might face “allegations of
partiality” in relation to my providing such a report.

530. My lawyers have also directed me to an (incomplete) chain that started the
following day (13 September 2012) with an email from Mr Singh to Penny
[FUJ00156639], asking for someone in Fujitsu to prepare an expert report
addressing four points.

531. This request was forwarded through various people within POL and Fujitsu,
including Simon Baker, who noted that “/ don’t think Jarnail is looking for
something too detailed, maybe 2-3 pages” [FUJ00156639]. It seems that in
my absence, others decided that | would be the most suitable person to

prepare the report that Mr Singh had requested.

532. | believe | returned from annual leave on 1 October 2012 (which was a
Monday). At 12.15pm on that day, | received an email from Mr Singh with the
subject line “HORIZON FUJITSU REPORT VERY URGENT” [POL00096978].
| think it is important to set this email out in full:

“Dear Mr Jenkins

Welcome from your annual leave and your assistance advice (sic) in the
past prosecution cases and lunderstand you are assisting my
colleagues at present. | need your urgent assist (sic) judge has

Page 182 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

this morning ordered the prosecution to have the following report ready
to be served within Seven days.

On advise (sic) Post Office Limited have appointed one of their
investigators, Helen Rose as disclosure officer dealing with Horizon
challenges. She has prepared a document/ spread sheet detailing
all such cases, past and present, approximately 20 in total, although
none thus far successfully argued in court.

Post Office limited have been advised to obtain, an experts report from
Fujitsu UK, the Horizon system developers, confirming the system is
robust. Post Office Limited maintain the system is robust, but in light of
adverse publicity, from legal viewpoint is that defence should be
given opportunity to test the system, should they still wish to do so, on
consideration of our report.

You will need to consider the Disclosure officers document/ spread sheet
(see attachments) and need to address in your report the following
issues:

1) A description of the horizon system (In laymen's' terms so that a jury
can understand what it is and what it does)

2) A declaration that it has yet to be attacked successfully.

3) A summary of the basic attacks made on the system concentrating on
any expert reports served in past cases. If there are none then state that
no expert has yet been found by any defence team civil or criminal to
attack the system. (at the moment there seems to be little more than
griping by defendants that the system must be at fault without saying
how)

4) Plainly, like all accounting systems, there is room for human error
(Keying in wrong amounts etc) are you able to state that innocent human
error is unlikely to produce the types of discrepancies of many thousands

of pounds over many months.”

Page 183 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

533. [FUJ00156646] shows that this email from Mr Singh was passed through to

Ed Phillips and David Jones, who were both lawyers at Fujitsu.

534. Mr Singh’s email did not mention any specific prosecution, name any SPM
defendant or provide any information about any prosecution that my statement
was required for. | understood that what POL wanted was a generic statement
that did not go into the specifics of any case and that responded to the four

issues Mr Singh had set out in his email.

535. Mr Singh’s email to me described and attached two documents, and the
Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request states that these are [FUJ00155089] and
[FUJ00156648]. [FUJ00155089] was an Excel spreadsheet listing a number
of previous prosecutions. [FUJ00156648] was a Word document describing
five of those prosecutions. These five prosecutions included two which | knew
about (Rinkfield and West Byfleet). | didn’t know about the others at that time.

536. Although Mr Singh’s request for a generic report referred to a Judge having
ordered it that morning, | am now unclear (having seen the preceding emails
that | did not see at the time) how that could be the case. Mr Singh was thinking
about the preparation of the report on 13 September 2012 and Mr Bowyer had
referred to it some two months earlier. | believe | may be missing parts of the

picture that would explain these matters.

537. Whilst | understood that Mr Singh wanted a generic report that did not address
the specifics of any given case and that responded to the four issues he had
identified, | was concerned that | did not know exactly how to approach this
task. This is why, at 11.52am, | emailed Peter Thompson (Head of Customer
Services), Howard Pritchard (Head of Security) and lan Turner (Development
Manager and my boss), copying Pete Newsome and James Davidson, saying
‘help please” and seeking “urgent guidance” [FUJO00156645]. | also wanted
their guidance on how the drafting of this report should fit into my workload
(given it was my first day back from holiday and | had plenty of other things to
do). | noted:

Page 184 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“I've had a look through the attachments on Jarnail's email and it isn't at
all clear exactly what he wants. | suspect he wants a further report
explaining why Horizon Integrity is OK. | had hoped that somebody
would have sent him the report | produced on this for Dave Smith 3 years
ago (ARC/GEN/REP/0004) while | was on leave.”

538. At 3.10pm that day (1 October 2012), | replied to Mr Singh [POL00096983]. |
attached my two existing ‘sister’ reports on Horizon data integrity: the first was
my report about Legacy Horizon (which | believe is the same as the version
found at [FUJ00123917]); the second was my report about Horizon Online
(which | believe is the same as the version found at [FUJ00123918]: this is

described as a draft and | don’t know whether | ever produced a final version).

539. The Rule 9(2) Request has asked me to describe the circumstances in which
these two existing reports came into being, the input | had into these reports
and the input of other individuals at Fujitsu. | described these matters in my
second witness statement to the Inquiry at paragraphs 158 to 169
[WITN00460200]. Since | prepared that statement, the Inquiry has provided
me with additional documents relevant to the two reports, and my lawyers
have shown me a number of additional documents uploaded to the Inquiry’s
database. | have already addressed these additional documents in relation to
the Legacy Horizon report (see paragraphs 192-209 of this witness
statement).

540. In relation to the Horizon Online report, | explained at paragraph 164 of my
second witness statement to the Inquiry [WITN00460200] that my recollection
was that Fujitsu had asked me to prepare this in January 2011 in connection
with a proposed audit by KPMG. | noted in this second witness statement that
this audit was probably linked to press reports about Horizon at that time.
However, having now read some of the additional documents recently
uploaded to the Inquiry’s database about the audit, | am unsure whether that
is right, since | believe that work on the KPMG audit only seems to have
commenced in late 2011. | can’t be sure but | think what may have happened
is that in early 2011 Fujitsu asked me to prepare this Horizon Online data

Page 185 of 285
541.

542.

543.

544.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

integrity report given that Horizon Online had, by that stage, been rolled out to
the whole estate, and that my draft report was then repurposed in late 2011
for the proposed KPMG audit.

| provided my two data integrity reports to Mr Singh on 1 October 2012
because | thought they were a good starting point for the purposes of
describing Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online and the mechanics of their
respective audit trails. As | have explained in my second witness statement to
this Inquiry, these reports were not a survey of bugs or other issues which had
affected Horizon and had not been prepared for that purpose.

My covering email to Mr Singh noted that, "/'// try and produce a further short
report addressing your specific points in the next few days." By this, | meant
that | would prepare a draft report that addressed the four issues he had
identified and that referred to the material authored by Helen Rose that he had

supplied to me.

My draft report is at [FUJ00123914] and incorporates wording that was
ultimately included in my signed witness statement dated 5 October 2012, so
| will address this below in the context of that statement. For the time being,
however, | note that my draft took the form of a Fujitsu technical report,
including references to the people who | thought should authorise and review
it before it was finalised. This draft report stated that | could not comment on
21 of the cases which Helen Rose had referred to in her spreadsheet because
| was not familiar with them. | only knew of four cases that she had referred

to.

In terms of the report | was asked for and its focus on past cases, | understood
from the emails | received that it was part of a broader piece of work that POL
was doing of considering previous cases where challenges to Horizon had
been raised (most of which | was not familiar with). As | understood it, | was
being asked to provide a report that addressed these historic challenges.
Specifically, | thought that my report would do this by addressing the four
issues identified by Mr Singh. | thought that POL wanted to make the point

Page 186 of 285
545.

546.

547.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

that in these previous cases, the courts had not found that any of the

postulated faults explained the losses in those cases.

| understand that the question is being asked in this Inquiry of why | didn't, in
my draft report, refer to bugs, errors or defects which had affected Horizon.
Quite simply, | didn’t think that POL wanted a report which did anything apart
from addressing the four issues Mr Singh had asked me to address. In terms
of Mr Singh's general reference to wanting a report “confirming the system is
robust”, my draft report referred to the components of Horizon that ensured
that the writing and storage of data had integrity. My belief was that if and
when there were problems in the system, they would be detectable and leave
traces and we would pick those up in any specific case. My view (and | think
this was the common understanding in Fujitsu) was that there would be
problems (there always are) but they were spottable and there were
mechanisms to spot and fix them, and all of these components made the

overall system robust.

My lawyers have shown me an email exchange between Ed Philips and David
Jones (the lawyer at Fujitsu who had been involved in Mrs Misra’s case) a
couple of hours later on 2 October 2012 [FUJ00156650]. | was not copied into
this exchange. They were aware that | had sent Mr Singh my two existing
reports on Horizon data integrity and seemed to agree that this was the right
approach. Ed Philips referred to Mr Singh’s email seeking a report as “fairly
unintelligible”.

| have now also seen (from [FUJ00225310)) that | sent my draft report to Ed
Philips and James Davidson. | asked them to please confirm that from a “Legal
and Commercial” perspective | wasn’t saying anything | shouldn't. | also asked
them if | had the correct wording in the document headers and footers. | think
(although | don’t recall) | asked them whether | was fine to provide the content
of the report because | was unsure of myself (and knew that describing how
some parts of Horizon worked could possibly overlap with issues of intellectual
property and that sort of issue). They both indicated that the draft was fine to
be sent.

Page 187 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

548. It appears that there was legal oversight of the provision of my report at Fujitsu.
No one from POL or Fujitsu suggested that my report needed to detail any
bugs, errors or defects which had arisen in Legacy Horizon or Horizon Online.
David Jones had been involved in Mrs Misra’s case, in which he had passed
on to POL my raising the Craigpark issue (which lawyers in Fujitsu and POL
knew about anyway). The Callendar Square bug had featured in Mr
Castleton’s case and Mrs Misra’s case. Mr Singh was well aware that my
approach in Mrs Misra’s case was that the underlying data needed to be
considered for any evidence of a system issue at a particular branch. | now
know that POL’s Criminal Law Team were aware of the Receipts and
Payments Mismatch bug. Plainly, there was a far greater exchange of
information between Fujitsu and POL about the problems that arose from time
to time in Horizon than this. But even in terms of just those individuals dealing
with this request for a report, there was clearly knowledge within POL of a
number of Horizon-related problems. No one suggested that these should be

included in the report POL had asked me to produce.

549. At 8.58am on 2 October 2012, | emailed Mr Singh a copy of the report | had
drafted, noting that: "/f you think there are areas that need expanding /
changing then please let me know [...] I've marked the document as "legally
privileged". Is that OK?" [POLO0096986]. As far as | recall, | drafted the report
that morning having reflected overnight on Mr Singh’s email from the previous
day setting out the four issues he wanted me to address. My email was clear
that | was seeking guidance from Mr Singh as to what it was appropriate to

include or exclude in the statement.

550. Mr Singh replied to me at 9.32am but it appears that this email was intended
for “Martin” (| assume this to be Martin Smith, who | understood was a lawyer
at Cartwright King). In any case, | had copied Mr Smith into my original email,
and | see now that he forwarded it to Mr Bowyer later that day. Mr Bowyer
noted at 1.41pm that my draft was a "good base upon which our reports can
be based" [POL00096997] and said that he had edited the last paragraph of

Page 188 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

the report (although my lawyers are unable to find the attachment to this email

so | cannot comment on his edits).

551. Mr Bowyer then asked Mr Smith to draft a “section 9 witness statement”, noting
that he should "keep it simple - the secret here will be to respond to the
defence expert report rather than try to anticipate every rock to be thrown at
us." It appears from this email that POL’s lawyers may have intended that my
generic statement would be amended and expanded on a case by case basis
in order to respond to the particular issues raised in different cases. | never
saw this email at the time, and | am not sure that | would have attached any
significance to him referring to a “section 9 witness statement”. As | have

already said, all my witness statements were provided in the same format.

552. Although | did not see Mr Bowyer’s email at the time, it is consistent with what
| understood POL to want — a report that gave a foundation about the operation
of Horizon in general terms but which did not attempt to pre-empt specific

issues about how Horizon might have operated at a given branch.

553. Two days later (4 October 2012) at 10.03am, Mr Singh emailed me, thanking
me for my draft report and suggesting that it should be in "statement format"
[POL00096999]. He also asked me for my qualifications. | was unclear what |
was supposed to do, so | replied at 10.52am, checking that he would put my
report into a witness statement. | think this was because someone in Fujitsu
usually did this for me and | was not certain what needed to be included.

554. Instead of replying to this email, Mr Singh sent me another email at 12.44pm
on 4 October 2012 which attached a draft witness statement for me to
“consider amend and return" [POLO0097008]. | did as requested, and at
4.51pm, | replied to Mr Singh, attaching my revised statement, noting that |
preferred to keep the two Horizon data integrity reports as standalone
documents [POL00097008]. My lawyers tell me that they cannot find on the
Inquiry’s database the versions of the draft statement that Mr Singh and I sent
to each other on this day, so | cannot comment on how or why changes might

have been made to the text.

Page 189 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

555. The next day (5 October 2012) at 9.31am, Mr Smith emailed Mr Singh and
me, attaching my draft witness statement and noting he had deleted the first
paragraph of Section 3 because if it was served, as it was, the defence would
undoubtedly ask for copies of my two reports addressing data integrity in
Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online. | thought that this paragraph should be
included and these two reports provided because it would give anyone who
wanted it the additional technical information not in the witness statement
[POL00097008].

556. | note that Mr Smith then told me that he would ask Sharron Jennings (who |
now know was from POL Security) to insert my witness statement into a POL
section 9 statement and e-mail it to me [FUJ00123982]. Later that morning,

Ms Jennings emailed me a version of my witness statement for signing.

557. | emailed Mr Smith, Mr Singh and others with a signed copy of this witness
statement several hours later [FUJ00124012]. This signed copy appears at
[FUJ00124013]. Its two exhibits were the data integrity report on Legacy
Horizon marked GlJ/1 [FUJ00124014] and the data integrity report on Horizon
Online marked GlJ/2 [FUJ00124015].

558. The Inquiry has asked me to identify who made the edits visible in the version
of my draft report at [FUJ00123914] and why they were proposed. If by “edits”
the Inquiry is referring to the text in highlighted italics, e.g. the words “Do /
need to add some words of description to these diagrams?” at the bottom of
page 6, then | believe that | inserted these comments when | first drafted the

document.

559. Between my preparation of my draft report on 2 October 2012 and the witness
statement | signed on 5 October 2012, the text went through a number of small
revisions. Of those revisions, | note that someone inserted the words “/
understand that my role is to assist the court" in the opening paragraph of the
witness statement. These words were not in the draft report | prepared on 2

October 2012. As | have set out above, Mr Singh appears to have put the draft

Page 190 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

report into a witness statement format (and then it seems that it was put into
a POL witness statement format). | don’t know at what stage these words were
added or who added them. | do not think | would have added them of my own
initiative into a draft witness statement (| wouldn’t have known to). They had
not been in my previous witness statements. | would have read these words
and understood them to mean that my role was to assist the court by giving
truthful evidence about Horizon, and that my being employed by Fujitsu did
not matter to this (and nor did it matter to POL). | do not recall that anyone
explained to me that “assisting the court” went beyond this and it is not referred
to in the emails.

560. Another revision between my draft dated 2 October 2012 and the signed
version dated 5 October 2012 is that, in section 3, someone removed my
references to the two documents authored by Helen Rose and my comments
that | had no knowledge of most of the cases that she had referred to. Looking

through the emails, | do not know who removed this text or why.

561. Another revision was that my draft report of 2 October 2012 had originally
listed as one of the associated documents my witness statement of 8 October
2010 in the case of Mrs Misra. As explained above, this witness statement had
been my response to the specific points relied upon by Professor McLachlan
and included consideration of the Callendar Square bug. The underlying
emails make it clear that the decision was taken by POL’s lawyers that
reference to this witness statement should be removed [POL00161838]. | was

not copied into these emails.

562. When | signed my witness statement dated 5 October 2012, | did not know of
any specific case it was intended to be used for. As explained above, |
understood that what POL wanted was a report that set out the operation of
Horizon in general terms but which did not attempt to pre-empt any specific
criticisms or issues which might be raised in a given case. Had POL wanted
something different, such as a survey of the hardware and software issues
which had affected the operation of Horizon in relation to branch accounts

over the years, or an explanation of live faults or changes which had been

Page 191 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

made to Horizon as a result of any bug or any other issue, then POL could
have made such a request and | am quite sure that | (or Fujitsu) would have

provided it.

563. As | have noted above, in Mrs Misra’s case, work was undertaken by Fujitsu
(at POL’s request) to ascertain what might be involved in presenting all system
changes which were made to Horizon (as a result of bugs etc.).

564. My later email of 19 October 2012 [POL00097061] shows that, at the time |
signed my witness statement on 5 October 2012, | had not understood that
POL had intended to use it in a specific case (see paragraph 577 below). POL
had not given me the name of a specific defendant, nor had they given me
any details or documents relating to a specific prosecution. As a result, my
witness statement of 5 October 2012 did not refer to any case.

565. The Inquiry has asked who had input into my witness statement dated 5
October 2012 and to provide details of the sources of information | consulted
in compiling it. As | have explained, this witness statement was based upon
my initial draft report of 2 October 2012. The approval authority for that draft
report was James Davidson. Amit Apte (Chief Technology Officer for the Post
Office Account), Ed Philips and Tim Healy (who was a Commercial Manager)
were also named as reviewers. | haven't seen any material to suggest that
anyone apart from Ed Philips reviewed and then commented on my draft
report. The draft report was then put into witness statement form by POL. As

| have explained, Mr Singh and Mr Smith also had some input into it.

566. The Inquiry has asked whether | considered myself to be providing this witness
statement as an expert witness. As set out above, | understood that | was
someone who, by virtue of having spent very many years working on Horizon
and having been a senior designer on it, was an expert in it. | was providing
the statement based upon what | knew and my experience of Horizon over the
years. | did not understand that | was an expert witness in the legal sense of
someone who was subject to special duties to the court. Again, in 2012, |

received no formal instructions from POL seeking an expert report. The email

Page 192 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

from Mr Singh dated 1 October 2012 was the most detailed briefing | received
about the four issues my witness statement should cover. No one mentioned
that my witness statement should be in a specific format or have a particular
expert declaration. To the contrary, Mr Singh and Ms Jennings put my report
into the witness statement format it was presented in. | understood, before |
signed the witness statement, that it had been reviewed by one lawyer at POL
(Mr Singh), one lawyer at Cartwright King (Mr Smith) and one lawyer at Fujitsu
(Ed Philips). | now understand that a second lawyer at Cartwright King (Mr
Bowyer) also reviewed it. | assume that none of them raised or questioned its
format or asked why (if they considered | was an expert in the legal sense of
that term) it did not have what | now understand to be the correct form of expert

declaration.

Final text of signed generic witness statement dated 5 October 2012

567. The text of the generic witness statement | signed on 5 October 2012 was
largely based on the draft report | had prepared and sent to Mr Singh on 2
October 2010, which had responded to each of the four issues that he had
asked me to address. No one suggested that | should set out the four issues
that | had been asked to address.

568. Section 2 of my witness statement addressed the first issue (‘A description of
the Horizon system’). | attempted to explain at a high level how Legacy
Horizon and Horizon Online worked, concentrating on how the data was
audited, and included two diagrams (Figure 1 and Figure 2) illustrating the

data flows through both systems that | hoped would make it more digestible.

569. Section 3 of my witness statement addressed the second issue (‘A declaration
that it has yet to be attacked successfully’). | explained that | was not aware
of any case in which Horizon had been successfully challenged in Court. | was

not aware of any such case.

Page 193 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

570. Section 3 of my witness statement also addressed the third request (‘A
summary of the basic attacks made on the system’). | reflected that, in those
cases that | had been involved in, the defence reports relied on had presented
hypotheses and that | had found no data to support them.

571. The concluding paragraph of my witness statement addressed the fourth and
final issue. To recap, Mr Singh had asked me to confirm that innocent human
error was unlikely to produce large discrepancies over a number of months.

The wording | used in response was as follows:

“In summary | would conclude by saying that | fully believe that Horizon
will accurately record all data that is submitted to it and correctly account
for it. However it cannot compensate for any data that is incorrectly input
into it as a result of human error, lack of training or fraud (and nor can
any other system).”

572. | think that rather than agree that human error could not produce large
discrepancies (| don’t know how | could have said that), | was trying to say that
Horizon accurately recorded all data which was entered onto it and correctly
accounted for it including that which was entered incorrectly. | was trying to

say that innocent human error could cause discrepancies.

573. By this, | was not stating or implying that Horizon was infallible. | gave two
examples in the generic witness statement (on pages 9 and 10) of instances
where a bug in the code could cause problems with Horizon’s operation and
would return error codes or alerts. As far as | can recall, nobody asked me to

expand upon these examples.

574. Looking back on the witness statement | signed on 5 October 2012, | think that
it reflects my (and Fujitsu’s) understanding that POL was seeking something
(a) short (in the words of Simon Baker of POL, “! don’t think Jarnail is looking
for something too detailed, maybe 2-3 pages” [FUJ00156640)), (b) generic (in
the sense that it gave general information about Horizon without referring to

Page 194 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

any branch or case) and (c) limited (in the sense that it addressed only the
four issues Mr Singh asked me to address). This is why | thought of it as a

‘generic witness statement’.

575. Section 3 of the generic witness statement summarised what | described as
my “views” on the “overall integrity” of Horizon. By explaining why | thought
Horizon had integrity, | was not suggesting that it was infallible. No IT system
is infallible or perfect, and to me as a software engineer that was obvious.
From my experience in Mrs Misra’s case, Mr Singh understood this. Rather |
was providing information about the general operation of the system and its
integrity (in terms of how it operated to record transactions). As | explain
below, when it came to each of the three case studies from 2012/2013 the
Inquiry has asked me to consider, | raised the point with POL that | had not
seen the ARQ data for the branches in question and tried to set out the points

| understood the defendants to be making.

Subsequent use of my generic statement dated 5 October 2012

576. The Rule 9(2) Request has referred me to several documents which show how
my generic statement dated 5 October 2012 was used (namely in the case of
Ms Kim Wylie) but the Inquiry has not asked me any specific questions about
those documents. Nonetheless, | believe it may be helpful to say a few words
about this.

577. At 12.29pm on 19 October 2012, | received an email from Sharron Jennings

about a prosecution of an SPM called; GRO iat Peterborough Crown Court
[POL00097061]. | understand now that this is a reference to, GRO_

At the time, however, | knew nothing about this prosecution, so | replied to Ms
Jennings at 12.33pm, noting that | was not aware of any outstanding cases in
which | was involved. She replied at 12.41pm, informing me that, “this is the
one that you supplied the expert report and witness statement for the week

Page 195 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

before last” [POL00097061]. This was news to me, so at 12.49pm, | replied
and said [POL00097061]:

“| had not understood that that related to a specific case, | thought that
was a general statement. If | am required to go to court for that, | think |
need to have some more background on the specific case and exactly
what is being alleged. | appreciate that is not covered by my statement,
but if | need to be an expert witness, | need to understand what is
happening.”

578. Ms Jennings forwarded my reply to POL’s Security team, explaining that there
had been “some sort of confusion” [POL00097061].

579. As my emails indicate, | was surprised (and concerned) that the statement |
had prepared (and which | had understood from POL to be a generic
statement that did not need to name or go into the details of any specific
prosecution) was, in fact, for a specific prosecution which | knew nothing
about. | believed that the court would expect me to have some sort of
knowledge

+ GRO is specific case if | was going to give evidence. Again,
when | referred to needing “to understand what is happening” if | was to be an
“expert”, this was not because | thought | was subject to any special duties but

because | assumed (given Mrs Misra’s case) that the Court would expect me

to know about! GRO _!s case.

580. Having sent these emails, | waited for POL to send me information that would
explain what was happening with Mr Patel’s case and what they wanted me
to do.

581. It seems that nothing happened until, almost a month later, on 16 November

2012, | received an email, out of the blue, from Rachael Panter of POL’s
solicitors Cartwright King [POL00097137], which began:

Page 196 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“As you may already be aware, your expert report detailing the reliability
of the Horizon system has been served as evidence in a number of Post
Office cases that are at various stages of the court process, most of
which are listed for trial in the early part of next year.”

582. | do not think that | had had any communication with Ms Panter prior to her
email. | do not know, even now, which cases she was referring to when she
said that my report had been served in them.

583. Ms Panter then listed six cases in which she said she would like to serve my

witness statement, implying that POL had not yet served it in any of those six

cases. She listed the names of six SPMs, including, at number 4 ‘GRO

“GRO |I had seen the surnam

with Mr Jennings and | probably linked the two. However, | had never heard

: RO | reviously in the context of my emails
of the other five SPMs (apart from Mr Jamie Dixon, whom | had come across

when he had previously worked for Post Office, based at Fujitsu's offices as a

tester).

584. Ms Panter then said that my report had a/ready been served in the case of Mr

GRO

confusion.

This was contrary to the first part the email. This probably added to my

585. Ms Panter said that she was attaching a case summary of each of the other
five cases so that | could familiarise myself with the facts, and asked me to
send five signed and dated copies of my generic statement back to her. These
other five cases include the remaining three case studies that the Inquiry has
asked me to consider (Ms Angela Sefton & Ms Anne Nield, Mr Grant Allen and
Mr Khayyam Ishaq). This email therefore marks, | believe, the first point at
which it was indicated to me that my generic statement dated 5 October 2012

might be adapted and used in those three cases.

586. | note that, in Ms Panter’s email forwarding on my response to her colleagues,
she stated:

Page 197 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“Please see below. | half expected to receive such a response. | can
clarify with Gareth that it doesn't matter that specific cases are not
quoted in his report as not one of them has raised a specific issue with
the Horizon system itself, they have all been generic to date.”

587. | recall that | was concerned about what appeared to be a haphazard and
informal approach to obtaining evidence from me and the apparent
expectation that | would just be able to consider five cases almost at the drop
of a hat. Ms Panter did not appear to understand that | had a demanding job
wholly unrelated to providing evidence. This was why | emailed her to say that
she should really be addressing such requests through POL rather than
directly to me. It appears that Ms Panter knew that this sort of approach was
not how litigation support was to be provided but that she did so because POL
investigators would take a long time to respond. At the time, however, |
probably interpreted her email to me as evidence of disorganisation, rather
than anything unprofessional or improper. | would have believed and trusted

that she knew what she was doing.

588. Other than this, | do not believe that Ms Panter or anyone else sent me any
instructions or further correspondence about serving my witness statement
dated 5 October 2012 in these six other cases. | don’t recall that anyone
suggested to me that by providing this witness statement | might be subject to
the duties of an expert witness. | do not believe that this happened in relation
to this witness statement at all.

589. Although in the following paragraphs, | have dealt with each of the three
2012/2013 case studies the Inquiry has asked me to address separately, this
was not the reality at the time. Rather Ms Panter dealt with all of these cases
(and a number of others occurring at the same time) together or in an
overlapping way. This means that there is some repetition in relation to each
case study as they are dealt with below. It also risks making events look more
orderly than they were. As | will explain, | felt that | had to chase her to check

Page 198 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

what was happening with these cases, whether she needed anything else
from me and was then suddenly provided with detailed material to examine

with no instructions and short deadlines.

R v Grant Allen

Rule 9(2) Request questions 152 to 166

590. | understand that Mr Grant Allen (who | shall refer to as Mr Allen) was the SPM
at Winsford branch and that he was prosecuted by POL after he experienced
shortfalls using Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online between 2010 and 2012.

591. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request refers to 26 documents to assist my
recollection of this prosecution. Most of them originate from Fujitsu, not POL.
My lawyers have drawn my attention to a number of additional documents on
the Inquiry’s database to which | refer below. Again, | am dependent upon the
documentary record in order to reconstruct my involvement in this case.

592. The Inquiry has asked me how I came to be involved in this case. Based on
the emails | have seen, | believe that the first | knew about Mr Allen’s
prosecution was at 11.30am on 16 November 2012, when Ms Panter emailed
me about the six cases, requesting that | re-sign my generic statement dated
5 October 2012 for Mr Allen’s case [POL00097 138]. | am told that this post-
dated by several months POL’s investigation of Mr Allen and their decision to

charge him.

593. As | mentioned before, | was unsure exactly what Ms Panter wanted me to do,
so | replied to her later that morning at 11.42am, copying James Davidson. |
said that the request should come through POL [POL00097 138]. | was also

unclear why | had to sign any further statement.

Page 199 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

594. James replied to Ms Panter, noting that he was concerned about the
“engagement approach” since all requests should come through the “correct
change process” [POL00097138]. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the
concern being raised by James in this email. | believe that he was concerned
that | was being contacted directly, and contrary to the correct processes, by
an external solicitor at Cartwright King (| was the only recipient of Ms Panter’s
email). These sort of requests for litigation support in criminal cases should
have been made by POL and routed through Prosecution Support. They also
needed to be properly registered on the system and appropriate arrangements
made for billing by Fujitsu. | note that Ms Owen from POL expressed her
concern to Penny that it wasclearly unacceptable that | was being
"ambushed" in this way [FUJ00153986].

595. Ms Panter replied to Mr Davidson and me at 1.04pm [POL00089374], noting
that:

"I do intend to use the report that you have already provided. It doesn't
matter that you have not mentioned a specific case in your report,
as there has not been any specific criticisms raised by any of the
defendants provided in my list of cases. It would be a different
scenario if there had been specific criticisms made, as your report
would have to respond to that particular issue. Although | intend to
use the same report that you have provided, it would not be appropriate
or right of me to serve your report without consulting you and seeking
your permission first. Furthermore, your signature is required for each
copy of the report that is served in each case [...] What | propose to do
is serve your statement on each defence solicitor so that the issue of
Horizon is addressed. That will then place the onus on the Defence
to specify what if anything, they say, is wrong with the Horizon
system. | do not think they will be able to do this, but they still have
the opportunity if they want a trial, to call you to give evidence. This
is why it is important for you to consider the case summaries that | have
provided so that you are familiar with each case. If you are happy to
serve your statement, please could you email me a signed and dated

Page 200 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

(with preferably today's date) identical copy of your report so that | can
serve it on each defence solicitor."

596. From Ms Panter’s email (and in particular the parts highlighted bold in the
extract above), | understood that in these cases, including Mr Allen's, the
defence had not raised any “specific issue” with Horizon, and that therefore it
was unnecessary for my generic witness statement to go into any further
detail. If, however, a defendant raised a specific issue with Horizon, |
understood that POL would ask me for an additional witness statement or
information which addressed this issue (and | expected this might involve
some analysis of the audit data for the particular branch).

597. | can see that Ms Panter chased me for a signed version of my generic witness
statement for Mr Allen’s case at 3.42pm on 30 November 2012
[FUJ00156677]. Her email noted that, “the most urgent case that we would
need a report for is the Grant Allen case that is listed for the 10°" December at
Chester Crown Court”. Her email went on to say that she would forward to me
a copy of the “summary of facts, DCS and charges for the Grant Allen case
shortly”.

598. Again, | think it is important to say (although it is clear from the face of the
email) that Ms Panter did not set out any of the issues in Mr Allen’s case or in
any way suggest any specific points that were in dispute or anything like that.
She simply asked me to sign the generic witness statement and sent me these

materials.

599. At 4.30pm on 30 November 2012, | was copied into an email from Andrew
Bolc (who | understood was a lawyer at Cartwright King) to Ms Panter, which
attached what he described as “outlines” of the cases relating to Mr Allen and
Ms Sefton/Ms Nield, noting that the latter was more urgent, and that | should
“concentrate” on that one first [FUJ00124105]. This seemed to contradict what
Ms Panter had just told me, which was that Mr Allen’s case was the more

urgent of the two. In any case, | had no idea what Mr Bolc wanted me to do

Page 201 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

with these outlines, so on 3 December 2012 (the next working day following a
weekend), | replied to him, seeking clarification: “! thought | should try and
clarify exactly what you want from me.” | set out my understanding that what
was required was a re-signed version of my generic witness statement dated
5 October 2012 but | noted: “However having read through the info you've
given me, perhaps you want me to cover some further things...”

600. | think my email reflects the lack of clarity about what these lawyers wanted
me to do, and my discomfort with their approach, which departed significantly
from what | had done before. They were providing me with documents about
Mr Allen and Ms Sefton/Ms Nield’s cases but without any instructions
explaining what they wanted me to do with the documents or what issues in
the documents they wanted me to consider. It seemed inconsistent with what
they had assured me previously, which was that the defence in these cases
were not raising any specific issues with Horizon and that my generic witness
statement would be sufficient. They had also previously said that | did not need
to be familiar with the details of the cases or conduct any analysis specific to
the particular branches where the defendants had worked. Two weeks later,
however, they were sending me “outlines” of two particular cases as if they
might have some (unexplained) relevance to my generic witness statement.

601. That is why | thought | should suggest specific points that | could consider if
they thought this might be helpful. | also made it clear that | had not examined
any audit data from Mr Allen’s branch.

602. Looking back (and understanding what | do now), | can see that the position
was very unsatisfactory, but at the time, | trusted that the lawyers were
approaching these cases and using my generic witness statement in a way

that was appropriate.

603. On 4 December 2012, | received a specific request in an email from Mr Bolc,
which stated that it attached an extract from Mr Allen’s interview with POL’s
investigators [FUJ00153881]. My lawyers tell me that they cannot find this
attachment on the Inquiry’s database. Mr Bolc asked me whether | was able

Page 202 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

“to comment on this scenario at all” (the “scenario” being, as | understand it,
Mr Allen’s account in his interview that he had suffered an initial loss of £3,000
in March/April 2010 and whether it could be attributable to data lost as a result

of Horizon installation problems). Mr Bolc stated:

"Ultimately we would need to discredit this as an explanation that holds
any water. He denies stealing the subsequent losses and therefore by
implication may be seeking to blame the system for these losses as

well."

604. As is clear, Mr Bolc’s request focused only on the initial loss of £3,000, which
had occurred in a period when Mr Allen was using Legacy Horizon at his
branch (i.e. March/April 2010), prior to its migration to Horizon Online in
August 2010 (my lawyers have shown me [FUJ00081942], which indicates
that the branch migrated on 23 August 2010).

605. | responded to Mr Bolc the following day (5 December 2012), saying that |
thought it was worth investigating further to establish what was happening at
the branch at the time of the £3,000 loss [FUJ00153881]. In general, in Legacy
Horizon, data ought not to have been lost as it was stored locally for at least
35 days and then transmitted when any communications issue had been
resolved. As there were contractual requirements that data be provided within
10 days, remedial action ought to have been taken to resolve any
communications outage which was preventing the uploading of data from the
branch to the central servers. However, in order to make more than a general

statement to this effect, | put to Mr Bolc:

"| think it might be helpful to have a dig as to exactly what went on in the
branch at the time of the initial loss [...] ls it worth asking Post Office Ltd
to request such data for me to examine before putting together a specific
statement for this, or is a simple generic one sufficient?"

Page 203 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

606. By “data”, | was referring to a formal request for ARQ data, which would
include the automated checks of the NT events. | also suggested asking for
Powerhelp calls, which would have picked up calls regarding communications
issues. This, again, would have been consistent with my approach in previous

cases such as Mrs Misra’s.

607. Later that day, Mr Bolc replied to say that | should add to my generic witness
statement my “general comments at this stage regarding the safeguards in
place for comms problems” [FUJ00153881]. He also noted that he would
revert to me if POL wanted to request the ARQ data to enable me to consider

the explanation put forward by Mr Allen.

608. On 12 December 2012 at 12.54pm, | emailed Mr Bolc, attaching an unsigned
draft of the generic witness statement which included an additional proposed
paragraph containing my general comments on “comms problems”, as he had
requested [FUJ00124150]. My email asked whether this draft witness
statement was sufficient “for you at this stage” or whether it needed to cover
anything else. The draft witness statement attached to the email is at
[POL00089381]. It stated that it contained some “general information”
regarding the integrity of Horizon. The text of this draft statement is identical
to the final signed version, so | will address the additional paragraph | drafted

in the context of the final signed version.

609. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request refers to an email sent later that day (12
December 2012) from Mr Bolc to Steve Bradshaw in POL’s Security
department. This email appears at [POLO0089380] but is missing the time
stamp. In this email, Mr Bolc forwarded to Mr Bradshaw my email from earlier

in the day and attached my draft witness statement, noting that:

"| had asked him to look at the non-polling issue raised in Mr Allen's
interview and | believe that he had dealt with it adequately for our
purposes. Gareth tells me that it is in fact possible for him to retrieve the
actual data from this time to see what actually occurred at this branch

Page 204 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

and that the retrieval of the data is free to POL. However he estimates
that it will take 2 1/2 days for him to look at it and analyse what it means
and this would be chargeable to POL at £2500 approx. | have told him
that at present we do not wish to pursue this option unless it becomes
unavoidable. Can you let me know your thoughts before | get him to sign
it off."

610. | did not see this email at the time, but it reflects an internal discussion within
POL about whether to ask me to undertake this analysis having regard to the
costs involved. Ultimately, | understand that POL resolved not to order any
ARQ data for Mr Allen’s case.

611. Then, at 3.29pm the same day (12 December 2012), | received an email from
Mr Bolc, confirming that POL’s investigator was happy with my report and that
| should proceed as before [FUJ00153884]. From this email, | understood that
POL did not want me to examine any ARQ data or address any other matters

in my witness statement.

612. On 14 December 2012, | sent an email internally within Fujitsu about Mr Allen's
case [FUJ00124171]. It was addressed to Tim Healy and Ed Philips, copying
James Davidson and Penny. It attached my draft statement, its exhibits, some
diagrams about how Horizon worked and a spreadsheet | had prepared

outlining the current prosecutions | was assisting with. | said that:

"In the case of GA that we discussed POL have not yet asked us to
retrieve any evidence. In those cases where POL has retrieved
evidence, it has not been made available to me, and the solicitors seem
reluctant for me to spend much time in analysing detailed evidence [...]

I'll delay sending out my statement until Monday. If you advise me not to

send it due to not having examined any evidence, then | can explain that
then.”

Page 205 of 285
613.

614.

615.

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

| sent this email to check that they agreed that | could sign my witness
statement without having examined the ARQ data for Mr Allen’s branch. | can’t
remember much about who Tim Healy was (except that he was a commercial
manager) but as | have said above, Ed Philips was a lawyer. Again, | was

seeking their guidance about how best to proceed.

| cannot recall what the response was to my email but | assume that the result
was that they agreed that my witness statement could be signed and sent to
POL, since | did send it. | simply wouldn't have proceeded to sign the witness

statement without their approval.

The additional paragraph | inserted into my generic witness statement in Mr

Allen's case read as follows:

"| note that in the summary of facts, it is stated that during the period of
relocation in March 2010, that Mr Allen believed that a £3,000
discrepancy was due to Horizon not sending out data (non-polling). |
have been shown extracts from the Horizon non-polled reports from 8 to
17 March which shows that the Winsford branch was included in this
report for the 12 days up to and including 17 March. This in itself is
unusual as if a branch appears on a non-polled report for more than a
few days, an attempt is made to retrieve the data by other means before
day 10. (I have no knowledge as to whether this occurred in this case or
not). This confirms the fact that there were indeed communications
issues between Horizon and the Data Centre at this time. However it
should have had no impact on data recorded locally within the branch
provided all operational processes were followed correctly. Also, once
communications were restored, all historical data should have been sent
from the branch back to the data centre as normal. (Data is held at the
counter for a period of at least 35 days, so provide a comms outage is
less than 35 days and operational processes regarding replacement
hardware are followed correctly, then no data should be lost). | have not
had an opportunity to examine the detailed logs from this period to see

Page 206 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

whether there were any issues, and any justification in the claim that this
resulted in apparent system losses of £3,000 as claimed."

616. As this paragraph says, following my contact with Mr Bolc, | reviewed the
Horizon non-polled reports which included Mr Allen’s branch for the period
stated. | noted in the paragraph that there had been communication issues
between Horizon and the Data Centre at Mr Allen’s branch in March 2010. It
explained the usual processes which would follow but | was also clear that |
had not had the chance to review the detailed logs (i.e. ARQ data) for the
branch for the relevant period to check whether there were any problems that
could explain the £3,000 loss. | did not dismiss (or “discredit”, the word
originally used by Mr Bolc) Mr Allen’s explanation but rather made clear that |
had not been able to examine this data to ascertain whether there was a

specific issue at the branch.

617. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked me whether | was aware of the
outcome of Mr Allen’s case, my reaction to this outcome and any concerns |
had about the proceedings against him. On 31 January 2013, Ms Panter
emailed me about a number of cases, and told me that Mr Allen’s case “has
concluded now so you will not need to attend” [POL00059597]. | asked what
the conclusion of Mr Allen’s case was and noted that we were quite concerned
that it might set a precedent [POL00059597]. | wanted to check with Ms Panter
whether there had been a ruling or a decision that communications issues had
caused discrepancies in his case. If there had been a judgment to that effect,
then that would have been important.

618. Beyond this, | do not recall my reaction to learning that Mr Allen’s case had
“concluded”. From my perspective, | had not had much to do with it given that
POL had not taken up my suggestion of looking more closely at what may
have gone on at his branch by reference to the audit data. | don’t think that |

was ever told exactly how his case had concluded.

Page 207 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

619. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked whether | considered that | was
providing evidence as an expert witness in Mr Allen’s case and whether any
explanation was given to me by anyone from Cartwright King or POL about
the role of an expert and the existence and nature of the duties owed by an
expert to the court. Again, in this case, like Mrs Misra’s, | understood that
because of my background and experience in working on Horizon, | was an
expert in it. As set out above, | was originally asked by Ms Panter to re-sign
the generic witness statement | had signed on 5 October 2012 so that this
could be served in Mr Allen’s case on the basis that nothing more specific was
required. | reviewed the non-polling reports and this led to an additional
paragraph being inserted into the generic witness statement to address this
issue. | asked whether the witness statement should address anything else
but was told it should not. | do not recall that anyone explained that by virtue
of the evidence | was giving that | was an expert in a legal sense and subject
to specific duties because of that. | do not recall receiving any instruction letter
from POL (or anyone else) as an expert. My witness statement did not contain
an expert declaration. Various lawyers within POL, Cartwright King and Fujitsu
reviewed my witness statement before | signed it. No one suggested it should

have an expert declaration.

620. The Inquiry has asked me to detail the data | examined relating to the case,
any consideration | gave to whether any known BEDs might be relevant to the
case, and to detail my written evidence to the court about known and unknown
BEDs in Horizon. | believe that the only data | examined before signing my
witness statement were the extracts from the non-polling reports (to which |
referred in my statement). As explained above, | expressly suggested
examining the ARQ data but | understand from the material that | have seen
that POL decided against this on grounds of cost. My witness statement made

clear | had not examined this data.

621. In relation to known and unknown BEDs in Horizon, | don’t believe that my
witness statement gave any details either way, beyond the two references to
possible bugs in the code that were part of the generic statement dated 5

October 2012. | repeat that | had offered to examine the underlying data in Mr

Page 208 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Allen’s case but POL had told me that they did not want me to undertake this
work. | had no understanding that my witness statement should cover this

ground; it was not mentioned in any of the requests | received.

622. My lawyers and | have looked through the Inquiry’s website but have been
unable to find any witness statements from Mr Allen, although | understand
that he is represented in the Inquiry. Factually, therefore, | know less about
what happened in his trial and subsequently compared to, for example, Mr
Thomas or Mrs Misra. Nonetheless, | am deeply sorry that he was wrongly
convicted.

R v Khayyam Ishaq

Rule 9(2) Request questions 167-180

623. | understand that Mr Khayyam Ishaq (who | shall refer to as Mr Ishaq) was the
SPM at Birkenshaw branch and that he was prosecuted by POL after shortfalls
arose in his branch between 2010 and 2011. | prepared two witness
statements in relation to Mr Ishaq’s case and, as | explain in detail below,
responded to a report prepared by Ms Beverley Ibbotson, an accountancy
expert instructed by the defence.

624. The Inquiry has referred me to 46 documents to assist with refreshing my
memory of this prosecution. These documents originate mainly from Fujitsu
but some are from Post Office. My lawyers have directed my attention to
additional documents they have found on the Inquiry’s website to which | refer
below. Again, | am dependent upon the documentary record in order to
reconstruct my involvement in this case.

My witness statement dated 15 January 2013

Page 209 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

625. The Inquiry has asked me how | came to be involved in this case. My lawyers
have drawn my attention to an email from Martin Smith (Cartwright King) to
Stephen Bradshaw (POL Security) on 13 November 2012, which notes that
because Mr Ishaq shows "no sign of pleading it is sensible that we consider
the ways in which the prosecution case can be bolstered" [POL00059338].
This email referred to some legal advice from Ms Panter and attached a
document written by me, which | assume is my generic witness statement
dated 5 October 2012. | did not see this email at the time, but | think it may

mark the beginning of my involvement in Mr Ishaq’s case.

626. As explained above, the first | knew of Mr Ishaq’s prosecution was three days
later on 16 November 2012, when Ms Panter emailed me requesting that |
sign my generic witness statement dated 5 October 2012 in relation to his
case (and the five others she referred to) [POL00097 138]. | am told that this
post-dated by many months POL’s investigation of Mr Ishaq and the decision

to charge him.

627. As | have set out in the paragraphs above, this prompted me to tell Ms Panter
that there were channels through which these sorts of requests should be
made [POL00097138]. James Davidson then became involved stating his
concern to her about the “engagement approach” [POL0097 138].

628. It is important that | repeat that Mr Ishaq’s case was therefore one of those
cases | understood Ms Panter to say did not raise any specific Horizon issue.

629. At 3.42pm on 30 November 2012, Rachael Panter emailed me about a
number of cases, including that of Mr Ishaq [FUJ00156677]. Her email
attached documents in respect of four separate cases. In Mr Ishaq’s case this
included an indictment and case summary. The email said as regards all four
cases: “please could you consider the attached and provide a signed and

dated report which deals with each individual case.”

Page 210 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

630. On 7 January 2013, | emailed Rachael Panter about these cases. | wasn’t
sure what (if anything) was still expected of me [POL00089405]. | noted that |
was still not receiving instructions from POL but was addressing this
separately. This email seems to have prompted Ms Panter to reply to me later
that day, attaching further documents. This included the defence case

statement in Mr Ishaq’s case. Ms Panter’s email noted that:

"[...] essentially the defence are saying that Ishaq was not dishonest,
and that he had to make reversals in order to balance, as there had been
a ‘malfunction’ with the Horizon system. This is fairly urgent as the trial
date is the end of Feb."

631. | think that these were all of the instructions that | received from POL’s lawyers
about what they wanted me to do in Mr Ishaq’s case. | note that it was my
email that appears to have prompted Ms Panter’s request for my witness
statement even though the trial was imminent. Although | cannot be
completely sure, | think that the defence case statement that Ms Panter sent
me in Mr Ishaq’s case might be the version dated 29 August 2012 that appears
at [POL00058244]. If it was, it stated that Mr Ishaq had not appropriated
monies and that Horizon had malfunctioned many times, causing difficulties in
reconciling sales, receipts and stock figures. It referred to Mr Ishaq carrying

out reversals in order to reconcile the position.

632. | understood that Ms Panter had already indicated that there was no specific
criticism or issue about Horizon raised by Mr Ishaq that POL wanted me
specifically to respond to. On 8 January 2013, | emailed Ms Panter to this
effect [POL00059481]. On 15 January 2013, she replied to me
[POL00059481], confirming that, "There is nothing you need to add, it covers
everything. Please could you send signed, hard copies through with the
corresponding exhibits.” This is what | did. On 15 January 2013, | re-signed a
copy of my generic witness statement of 5 October 2012 for the purposes of
Mr Ishaq’s case, without making additions to it, having been assured by POL

that it covered everything.

Page 211 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Further Defence Statement

633. On 31 January 2013, | received an email from Ms Panter, which noted that Mr
Ishaq’s lawyers had queried my report (i.e. my witness statement dated 15
January 2013) and asking me for my “initial thoughts” on the defence
statement [POL00089427]:

“Having served your report, the defence have queried it and are claiming
that Ishaq had to make false entries in order for the figures to reconcile,
as the Horizon system kept malfunctioning. [...] our barrister has asked
whether you can read the defence statement attached and make a list
of your initial thoughts on the assertions that he is making. We may need
you to add a few of those comments into your report so that each issue
is addressed."

634. Ms Panter attached Mr Ishaq’s defence statement to the email. | replied to her
the next day (1 February 2013), noting that the defence statement was dated
29 August 2012 and asking whether there was another more recent version
which post-dated my witness statement dated 15 January 2013
[POL00089427].

635. My lawyers have drawn to my attention an email which Martin Smith sent on
3 September 2012. He described the defence case statement as a “red
herring” and a “fishing expedition” [POL00119430]. | did not see this email and
was not given any instructions about the defence case statement save that |

should give my “thoughts” on it.
636. On 1 February 2013, | sent an email to a number of people including Mr Singh,

which attached a document setting out my comments on Mr Ishaq’s defence
statement [POL00059602]. | noted at the outset of my comments document

Page 212 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

that much of it related to requiring further data for analysis, and past

experience indicated that help might be required in understanding it.

637. It is difficult for me to remember the precise sequence of events, but as had
happened in Mr Allen’s case, it appears that despite POL having initially said
that Mr Ishaq was making no specific criticism of Horizon and that my generic
witness statement was sufficient, | was now being asked for “initial thoughts

on the assertions” made in Mr Ishaq’s defence statement.

638. In relation to the suggestion at paragraph 7 of the defence statement that
Horizon had malfunctioned, causing difficulties in reconciling sales, receipt
and stock figures, | said | would be happy to investigate any examples which
the defence had of this. | said that it was my view that the system would not
malfunction without leaving some trail to indicate what had happened but that
without examining the logs it was hard to be more specific. | also indicated my
belief that there was no evidence of a fault in Horizon. By this | meant no
systemic fault that would have caused reconciliation errors for weeks or
months on end during the period of the allegations against Mr Ishaq, as had
been suggested in the defence statement. | was not aware of any bug that
could impact on the accounting which arose in the pilot of Horizon Online and
which had not been fixed before the start of the period of allegations against

Mr Ishaq.

639. The defence statement went on to make disclosure requests. As is apparent,

it seems that | thought that Ms Panter wanted me to give my “initial thoughts”
on these requests as well. At paragraph 10, | noted against the disclosure
request “No Comment required” and “Would it be helpful for me to look at such
material as well?” | thought that this was material which POL might have and
which it could give me to look at if the lawyers wanted me to. Although my
note was sent to four lawyers (Ms Panter, Mr Singh, Mr Bolc and Mr Smith), |
don't believe that any of them, having read this note, suggested that | had any
duty to disclose this material or corrected my misunderstanding that this was
about material POL could give me. | tried to make clear that | had not seen the

ARQ data for Mr Ishaq’s branch but would be happy to examine it.

Page 213 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

640. Later the same day (1 February 2013), Mr Singh emailed Ms Panter and me,
referring to my comments on Mr Ishaq's defence statement. He stated
[POL00095417]:

“I have read Gareth's comment on the defence statement. It may be
useful at this stage to invite comment from Gareth on the following;
Para 6 provide Gareth with information on which Prosecution relies to
prove the figure of £21,168.64.

Para 7(1) Defence should be asked to provide examples then these be
referred to Gareth for comment.

Para7 (iv) Gareth to provide assistance and analysis.

Para (VII) Are we in position to provide Horizon data to Gareth and seek
his input.”

641. | assumed that Mr Singh’s reference to providing me with Horizon data was to
providing me with the ARQ data for Mr Ishaq’s branch. At that stage, |
understood POL to have provided this data to the defence but not to me.
Looking back, | am surprised that nobody in POL seems to have followed up
on Mr Singh’s suggestion or my offers of assistance and provided me with the
ARQ data. | obtained it myself just before the trial.

642. On 14 February 2013, | received an email from Ms Panter asking me to attend
court on 25 February 2013, which was the first day of Mr Ishaq’s trial, in order
to meet the defence expert and “narrow any issues we may have with the
defence” [POL00059808]. | believe that this was the first indication | had about
the existence of a defence expert. | had not seen any reports prepared by this
expert and | did not know their identity. | understood this to mean that there
would be an opportunity to discuss the case further with the defence expert
and for me to understand if there were any more specific issues that | could

consider.

Page 214 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

643. Looking back on all of this, | can see that my involvement in Mr Ishaq’s case
until this point had evolved in quite a piecemeal way. That there was a defence
expert who | was being asked to meet on the first day of the trial seemed in
keeping with the muddled way POL and its lawyers approached the cases in
which | was involved. It was also in keeping with POL not giving me much
information in these cases. | didn’t question this. | just thought | had best get
on with it. | was frustrated though at not receiving information in a timely way

and feeling as though | had to chase to find out what was going on.

644. | have seen an exchange on “communicator” (an instant message application)
which has been copied into an email between Penny and me on 18 February
2013 [FUJ00153977]. In this exchange | asked for the ARQ data for Mr Ishaq’s
branch and said that at least | would have it even if | didn’t time to examine it
before the trial. POL had still not asked me to look at it despite suggesting that
| go to Court to meet the defence expert. | don’t believe that | did have the
chance to look at it in any detail until | came to examine the defence expert's

report.

645. At 11.16am on 22 February 2013, Ms Panter emailed me again, attaching a
supplemental defence statement from Mr Ishaq and asking me to “address as
many of the points as you can”, so that my comments could be forwarded to
POL’s Counsel [FUJ00153990]. She marked this as “URGENT”.

646. There was no instruction to me above and beyond that. Ms Panter did not set
out the issues which were now being raised, identify particular points she
wanted me to focus on or provide any specific guidance. This was the Friday
before the trial was due to start on the Monday. The supplemental defence
statement is at [FUJ00153991].

647. This supplemental defence statement listed some help desk calls that Mr
Ishaq had made. This was the first time | had seen any such list. Although
POL had not asked me to, | contacted Penny at 12.39pm (again using the

communicator platform), asking her whether she had a record of POL

Page 215 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

requesting them (this was to help with my review of the supplemental defence
statement) [FUJ00153995].

648. This seems to have led to my reply to Ms Panter later that day at 1.10pm,
noting that “/ have now had confirmation that Fujitsu have not supplied details
of any Help Desk calls to Post Office Ltd regarding this Branch. Therefore
there is nothing | can easily do to address any specifics” [FUJ00153997]. My
email attached a Word document that set out my comments on the
supplemental defence statement, which is at [POLO0059874]. At the
beginning of my comments, | noted that:

“It is good that they are now being more specific. However | don’t have
anything to examine that enables me to comment on [sic] detail on any
of these more specific points.”

649. At paragraph 2 (page 1) of my comments, in response to the suggestion that
Horizon would often crash and freeze and would give inaccurate total figures

at the end of trading and/or balance periods, | said:

“lam aware that there were some issues in the early days of Horizon
Online. However | don’t believe that these impacted the overall
accounting at the end of the periods provided Recovery was carried out
correctly. The migration date (10 July 2010) for the Birkenshaw Branch
was well into the full rollout and the Branch was not operating Horizon

Online during the pilot between January and June.”

650. This reflected the technical problems which had arisen during the Horizon
Online pilot. As set out, however, Birkenshaw branch migrated to Horizon
Online in July 2010, after the pilot period had ended (and before the beginning
of the indictment period in Mr Ishaq’s case, which | understand was 14
September 2010).

Page 216 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

651. The supplemental defence statement then listed a number of reference
numbers for calls made by Mr Ishaq to the Horizon Help Desks. In order to
analyse whether these calls related to a specific issue with the operation of
Horizon, | said that | needed to be able to consider the calls and the underlying
data which related to the same time frame. | also made the point that some of
these calls were before and then after the branch migrated to Horizon Online
and that they did not all relate to the period for which data had been obtained.
| think it is worth setting out here what | said:

“I have no easy visibility of these reports. It is possible to retrieve them
from the system and examine them, but | am not aware of them having
been provided in evidence. | have certainly not been asked to examine
them but am happy to do so.

If the details of the reports have not yet been provided then there is a
process to ask for them to be provided by Fujitsu.

| am checking to see if these reports have been retrieved and submitted
as evidence. If so I'll try and get hold of them. However as the period
of the calls outlined above has little overlap with the period for which
detailed transaction logs have been obtained, it is likely that there is not
much that can be done to tie them together without getting more
information.”

652. | had only been asked to comment on the supplemental defence statement —
not to try and retrieve the details of the calls myself. Nonetheless | tried to do
so. | tried to explain the work that was needed in order to try and understand

what the call reports might correlate to (in terms of the transaction logs).

653. | do not know what happened in response to my setting this out but | have not
seen any response from POL’s lawyers in the material given to me in the
Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request.

Page 217 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

654. | arrived in Bradford, as previously instructed by Ms Panter, late on Sunday
24 February 2013. | met POL’s Counsel, Mark Ford, the next morning. At
9.37am Martin Smith of Cartwright King emailed me a copy of Ms Ibbotson’s
defence expert report dated 22 February 2013 (but without any of its
appendices) [FUJ00156747].

655. This email was blank and did not contain any instructions about what | should
do with the report. | had not seen this report previously. | worked with Ms
Ibbotson that day to identify and narrow any areas of dispute (which is what

Ms Panter had previously asked me to do once | met Ms Ibbotson at court).

656. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request asks me to explain the process by which Ms
Ibbotson and | discussed the case and how those discussions informed what
is described as a “joint statement” to the court and my evidence more broadly.
As | say, | only became aware of the existence of a defence expert just over a
week before the trial commenced. | only received Ms Ibbotson’s report on the

morning of the trial and | spoke to her for the first time at court.

657. Ms Ibbotson was an accountant, and her report stated that it was an expert
accountancy report. The accounting issues which she raised nonetheless
required analysis of the ARQ data for Mr Ishaq’s branch to determine how the
loss figure had been arrived at. This was something that | could do having
regard to the ARQ data which | had obtained myself from Penny (but which |
don’t think | had had a chance to look at before then). Looking back, | can see
there is an issue as to whether | was the best person to respond to Ms
Ibbotson’s report given that | was not a qualified accountant. My accounting
knowledge came from my experience of working with accountants at POL and
Fujitsu as part of the development of Horizon. | was also the Treasurer to two
small charities so had practical experience of reconciliation. | was probably
mainly concerned, having arrived at court on the first day of trial, to get on with
what | was being asked to do in the limited time | had and to do my best in

responding to her report.

Page 218 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

658. At 2.09pm Ms Ibbotson sent me the appendices to her report [FUJ00154006]
and | think | sent them to Cartwright King. At 9.41pm that night (25 February
2013), | emailed Ms Ibbotson my comments on her report [FUJ00124338]. |
was in my room at the Bradford Holiday Inn when | sent this email. | had spent
most of the evening going through her report to make the comments and
comparing it to the ARQ data | had. The same email also attached a
spreadsheet with some of my calculations. | suggested to her that we could
meet the next day at court at 10am. This process of commenting on the report
by the defence expert was the same approach | had taken before to the reports
in Mrs Misra’s case.

659. Several minutes later, | forwarded this email, together with the attachments,
to Ms Panter, Mr Ford and Mr Smith [FUJ00124338]. | noted that | had referred
to being able to show Ms Ibbotson, in the logs, what had actually happened

and that there was no issue with the system.

660. | can see that | prepared my comments on Ms Ibbotson’s report in a Word
document that is at [FUJ00124337]. | noted at the outset that | was short of
time, in order to explain why my comments were a bit messy and poorly
formatted. | was aware that Ms Ibbotson would not have much time to consider
my comments and needed it as soon as | could get it to her. | also note that |
was receiving new information from POL that night (for example the audit
report produced on the day of the audit) and passing it to Ms Ibbotson
[FUJ00154064]. | do not know whether POL were also sharing this information

formally with the defence.

661. The process of responding to Ms Ibbotson’s report had been fairly tortuous. |
received it as a single non-readable PDF document. | was unable to make
comments on it in this format, so | had to scan each page of this document in
turn using OCR software, which converted each page into a Word document
onto which | could then add my comments. | then had to combine the Word
documents (one for each page) in order to create my response document. |
did all of this on a single laptop as that was all | had with me in Bradford (had

| been doing this at Fujitsu’s offices in Bracknell | would have had multiple

Page 219 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

computers and could have worked far more quickly). All comments of any

significance were transferred into the joint document the following morning.

662. The next morning (26 February 2023), | exchanged a number of emails with
Ms Ibbotson in which we agreed the wording of a joint document. By lunchtime
we had agreed the text and at 1.22pm | sent the final draft, together with its
numerous exhibits, to Ms Panter and Mr Ford [POL00059942]. The report is
at [POL00059927]. | do not recall signing the report or printing a hard copy of
it (| had no printer accessible to me).

663. Whilst the Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request refers to this document as a joint
statement and | have referred to it as a joint report, the document Ms Ibbotson
and | produced is more accurately Ms Ibbotson’s report with some comments
from me inserted in bold italics throughout. The main conclusion we agreed
was that, of the reversals made by Mr Ishaq, they did not correspond to any
amounts of cash. Most of my comments were simply observations on what

she had written rather than an expression of disagreement with her.

664. | do not know what if anything formal was done with the joint report. | do not
believe that Ms Ibbotson ever gave oral evidence. | recall that, shortly after
agreeing this report with Ms Ibbotson, the trial was adjourned due to one of
the barristers falling ill, and it was then re-listed to re-commence on 6 March
2013.

665. My interaction with Ms Ibbotson was very short and extremely last minute.
There were only 24 hours between seeing her report for the first time, doing
the complex analysis of the underlying figures to show how the loss figure had
been arrived at, going through this with her and commenting on her report. |
felt under considerable time pressure as the trial had already started. | worked
at speed with less than ideal technology and reviewed a large amount of data
in order to assist. Whilst | was confident that my work was correct, | have to

say that | found this whole process quite demanding.

Page 220 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

666. | do not recall that at any stage during this period anyone from POL provided
me with formal instructions or any guidance about how to interact with a
defence expert, or how to prepare a joint experts’ report. As noted above, my
comments appeared in the body of Ms Ibbotson’s report. | am fairly certain
that | did not sign it. | approached the matter in a way that seemed to make
sense to me, without formal instructions and doing my best (under very difficult
circumstances) to analyse the underlying data to ascertain how the loss had

been accounted for.

My witness statement dated 6 March 2013

667. | have seen a second witness statement with my name relating to Mr Ishaq’s
case dated 6 March 2013 [POL00060113]. | recall that this statement was
written during the second trial, because (again) of last-minute issues. My
memory is that POL investigators came into the meeting room at court having
found some further paperwork at Mr Ishaq’s branch (I cannot remember what
exactly). As a result, | was asked to do some further analysis of cash
movements in the audit data that | already had and produce a second witness
statement. The signed version is at [POLO00601 13].

668. Overall, and standing back from Mr Ishaq’s case, | can see that, from my
perspective, a number of circumstances combined which made my
involvement in it difficult and unsatisfactory. | say this not to cast blame or to
make any excuses for my own work. As | have mentioned before, there is a
risk in the way | have tried to deal with the three 2012/2013 case studies that
it sounds more orderly than it was. It was not like that at all and | have tried to
bring this together in relation to Mr Ishaq’s case. The following factors come
to mind:

a. Notunderstanding from the outset that my generic witness statement was

going to be used in a series of cases including Mr Ishaq’s.

Page 221 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

. Not being provided with the case papers or any instructions about the
issues in Mr Ishaq’s case prior to Ms Panter informing me that she

intended to use my generic witness statement in it.

. The initial understanding that | had from Ms Panter that my generic
witness statement was to be used in these cases because there was a
general, non-specific reliance upon Horizon by the defence.

. Being asked further down the line (on 31 January 2013) to give “initial
thoughts” on Mr Ishaq’s defence statement (but without any indication

about any specific issues | should address).

. That POL (despite Mr Singh becoming involved and suggesting that | be
provided with the ARQ data) does not appear to have responded to my
suggestion, made then, that | consider the ARQ data for Mr Ishaq’s

branch.

That | got the ARQ data myself from Fujitsu but was unable to consider it

before trial.

. That | then received the supplemental defence statement the Friday
before the trial started (but without clear instructions about what POL

wanted me to do with it).

. That | indicated to POL on the Friday before the trial that | had no ability
to examine any material which would assist with the specific issues raised
in the supplemental defence case statement (that is, the calls which were
made by Mr Ishaq).

That | did not know that there was a defence expert until just before trial.

That | received the defence expert report on the Monday the trial started

(again without any instructions about it).

Page 222 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

k. That | also saw for the first time on this Monday the material relied upon
by POL having been provided it by Ms Ibbotson (as the appendices to her
report).

|. That | had to, at extremely short notice and overnight, carry out complex

accounting analyses to see how the figures had been arrived at.

669. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked whether | considered that | was
providing evidence as an expert witness in Mr Ishaq’s case and whether any
explanation was given to me by anyone from Cartwright King or POL about
the role of an expert and the existence and nature of the duty owed by an
expert to the court. | repeat the points which | have made above. | understood
myself to be an expert in the workings of Horizon. | understood that | could
provide evidence about Horizon based upon my experience of working with it
and having designed parts of it. | could analyse the underlying data to explain
the basis upon which a loss figure had been arrived at. However, | have no
recollection that, in this case, | was told | owed specific duties to the Court as
an expert or that | owed duties of disclosure (or what that might entail here). |
did not receive instructions as an expert. Neither of my witness statements
contained an expert declaration. | did not receive any instructions as an expert
to prepare a joint report with Ms Ibbotson. | think that my comments on the
defence statement in Mr Ishaq’s case show that | had no understanding of
how disclosure worked. | make the point again that Mr Singh, who was
involved in this case and who considered both my generic witness statement
of 5 October 2012 and my comments on Mr Ishaq’s defence statement, was
aware (for example) of the Callendar Square bug and the Receipts and
Payments Mismatch bug. He didn’t suggest to me that | should include these
in any of my witness statements. | did my best, at times under very difficult
circumstances, to respond to everything that was asked of me in Mr Ishaq’s
case. | did not have much by way of guidance but | got on with it as best as |
could.

670. In relation to known and unknown BEDs in Horizon, | don’t believe that my
witness statements gave any details either way, beyond the two references to

Page 223 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

possible bugs in the code that were part of the generic witness statement
dated 5 October 2012. POL did not ask me to address known or unknown
BEDs, and | asked them on a number of occasions whether there were any
other matters they wanted me to address. In my comments on the
supplemental defence case statement | mentioned the issues that had arisen
in the early days of Horizon Online but | don’t recall that | was asked to set

these out in my witness statements.

671. The Inquiry has asked me what my reaction was to the outcome of the case
and whether | had any concerns about the prosecution of Mr Ishaq at the time.
| have already set out what I think were the issues of concern throughout this
section of my statement. | don’t recall that | had a particularly strong reaction
one way or another to Mr Ishaq pleading guilty. | may have felt relieved that |
would not have to give evidence. | simply emailed my colleagues at Fujitsu to
tell them | was on my way home [FUJ001551 16].

672. | have read the witness statement that Mr Ishaq has given to the Inquiry
[WITNO1700100]. | was struck by the references to the prosecutor asking him
to consider a guilty plea and the fact that the Judge told him that Horizon could
not be raised as a defence issue. He explains events at his trial that | was not
aware of. | have tried in this statement to explain my involvement in his case
from my perspective but in doing so | wish in no way to take away from what

happened to him. | apologise to him for all of the things that he has suffered.

R v Angela Sefton and Anne Nield

Rule 9 questions 181-193

673. | understand that Ms Angela Sefton and Ms Anne Nield (who | shall refer to as
Ms Sefton and Ms Nield) were assistants to the SPM at Fazakerley branch

and that they were prosecuted after shortfalls were found in Legacy Horizon

Page 224 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

in 2006. | note that their indictment period spans six years from January 2006,
covering the operation of both Legacy Horizon and Horizon Online, but as |
understand it, the shortfalls arose only in relation to Legacy Horizon in 2006

and were effectively rolled forwards each year.

674. The Inquiry has referred me to 20 documents to assist with refreshing my
memory of this prosecution. These originate more or less equally from the
POL and Fujitsu. My lawyers have directed my attention to additional
documents they have found on the Inquiry’s website to which | refer below.
Again, | am dependent on the documentary record to reconstruct my
involvement in this case.

675. The Inquiry has asked me how | came to be involved in this case. Based on
the emails | have seen, | believe that the first | knew about Ms Sefton and Ms
Nield’s prosecution was at 11.30am on 16 November 2012, when Ms Panter
emailed me, requesting that | sign my generic witness statement dated 5
October 2012 in relation to their case (and the five other cases)
[POL00097138]. | am told that this post-dates by several months or even years
POL’s investigation of Ms Sefton and Ms Nield and the decision to charge
them.

676. As | have set out above, Mr Panter’s email prompted James Davidson to note
his concern about this “engagement approach” [POL0097 138]. And again, this
was one of the cases that Ms Panter identified as not raising any specific
criticism about Horizon (and which | understood to mean that POL regarded

my generic witness statement as sufficient).

677. At 3.42pm on 30 November 2012, Ms Panter emailed me about a number of
cases [FUJ00156677] and attached a number of documents. In relation to Ms
Sefton and Ms Nield’s case, Ms Panter’s email attached two documents: a
case summary and indictment. My lawyers tell me that they are unable to find

these attachments on the Inquiry’s database.

Page 225 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

678. At 4.30pm on 30 November 2012, Mr Bolc emailed me, copying Ms Panter,
attaching what he described as “outlines” of two cases. This included the case
of Ms Sefton and Ms Nield [FUJ00124105]. He told me to “concentrate” on
this outline first.

679. | did not know what Mr Bolc wanted me to do with these outlines, so on 3
December 2012, | replied to him, setting out that | had been told that all that
was required was a re-signed version of my generic witness statement but
seeking clarification and asking “... perhaps you want me to cover some
further things.”

680. | then set out some of the issues | could consider further and repeated that |
had not been given any audit data from Fazakerley branch to examine in their
case. My email said that | had “no information regarding complaints or
investigations”. This is quite a specific form of words and it may have been a
response to words used by the defence in the “outline” Mr Bolc had sent me.
It may have referred to complaints made to, or investigations being carried on
by POL at this time (like the Second Sight investigation). | think my email was
setting out the limitations of what | could provide: | didn’t hold information about
complaints or investigations; | couldn’t examine the pre-2010 system; and |

hadn't been presented with any audit data.

681. As the email demonstrates, | was not clear as to exactly what POL’s lawyers
wanted from me. Ms Panter had informed me previously that the defence in
these cases were not raising any specific issues, and that therefore POL
would rely upon my generic witness statement. | had also been told previously
that | did not need to be familiar with the details of these cases or conduct any
analysis specific to a particular branch. Two weeks later, however, lawyers
were sending me “outlines” of particular cases (including Ms Sefton and Ms
Nield’s) as though there might be some (unexplained) relevance to my generic
witness statement.

682. Looking back (and understanding what | do now), | can see that the position

in this case was, again, very unsatisfactory. But at the time, | trusted that the

Page 226 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

lawyers were approaching these cases and using my generic witness
statement in a way that was appropriate. | felt that the best way forward was
to suggest to POL’s lawyers that despite the fact that they had told me that my
generic witness statement was sufficient, there were specific points | could

consider if that would be helpful.

683. | noted that Ms Sefton and Ms Nield were saying that the losses had started
in 2005 and that this was linked to the installation of Horizon. | noted that, as
| had set out in my generic witness statement, Legacy Horizon was rolled out
between 1999 and 2002, so 2005 didn’t seem to tie in with Horizon being
installed. | pointed out that migration was to Horizon Online in 2010 and that
this was relied on by Mr Allen but not by Ms Nield or Ms Sefton. | repeat that |
said in this email that | had not been provided with any audit data to examine
for Ms Sefton and Ms Nield’s branch.

684. Mr Bole responded to my email at 2.20pm on 3 December 2012
[POL00089394], seeking clarification about the removal of the cash account.
He also asked me to “discount” it as a possible explanation for the losses

beginning to occur at that time.

685. | replied at 8.31am on 5 December 2012 to say that | had amended my generic
witness statement to address the matters he had asked me to
[POL00089394]. | asked Mr Bolc whether it provided sufficient detail. My email
attached my draft witness statement which is at [POL00089395]. It adopted
all of the language of the generic witness statement of 5 October 2012, with
an additional paragraph which noted the significant change to Horizon brought
about by the removal of the weekly Cash Account report and the move to the
monthly Branch Trading Report. | noted that this had not impacted upon the
integrity of the system as | outlined in my statement. | was not aware that any
changes in 2005 had caused a system issue that produced ongoing losses

like those | understood to have occurred in this case.

Page 227 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

686. | assume that Mr Bolc must have reviewed and approved this statement, since
| signed it later on the same day. The signed version dated 5 December 2012
is at [POL00059424].

687. On 7 January 2013, Ms Panter notified me that the original trial date of 21
January 2013 had been vacated to allow the defence to procure an expert
report and that the case had been re-listed for 15 April 2013 [POL00059481].
| never received any defence expert report and POL sought no further
assistance from me. On 17 April 2013, Ms Panter emailed me to say that Ms
Sefton and Ms Nield would be sentenced on 3 May 2013 [FUJ00156849]. |
did not attend court in their case and had no understanding of what had led to

their convictions.

688. In relation to my involvement in their cases, my email to Mr Bole had made
clear that | had not been provided with any audit data for their branch to
examine. | was not provided with any specific evidence to address (indeed |
don't think | was provided with any evidence in their case). | was informed that
the “outline” was enough. | was told there might be but was never provided

with any expert report commissioned by the defence.

689. The Inquiry’s Rule 9(2) Request has asked whether | considered that | was
providing evidence as an expert witness in Ms Sefton and Ms Nield’s case and
whether any explanation was given to me by anyone from Cartwright King or
POL about the role of an expert and the existence and nature of the duty owed
by an expert to the court. | can only repeat again that | understood through my
work that | was an expert in Horizon. | do not recall being told during this case
that | was an expert in the legal sense of that word and subject to the duties
of an expert. | have no recollection that in this case anyone explained | had
duties of disclosure and what that might mean here. My witness statement did
not contain an expert declaration. Various lawyers reviewed my witness

statement before | signed it.

690. The Inquiry has asked me to detail the data | examined relating to the case,

any consideration | gave to whether any known BEDs might be relevant to the

Page 228 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

case, and to detail my written evidence to the court about known and unknown
BEDs in Horizon. As set out above, | was asked only to deal generally with the
issue of the introduction of the cash account in 2005 and was not provided
with any audit data for their branch which | could have analysed.

691. My lawyers and | have looked through the Inquiry’s website but have been
unable to find any witness statements from Ms Sefton or Ms Nield, although |
understand that they are represented in the Inquiry. | know less about what
happened at their trial and to them. Nonetheless, | am incredibly sorry for
everything that they went through.

The end of my involvement in providing litigation support

Rule 9(2) Request questions 194-196

692. The Inquiry has asked me when | ceased to provide litigation support to POL
and my understanding of the reasons. It has referred me to the email chain at
[FUJ00156889]. My lawyers have shown me subsequent emails in the same
chain, and correspondence arising from the same issues, namely
[FUJ00156893], [FUJ00156908], [FUJ00156909] and [FUJO0156923].

693. | believe that | ceased to provide litigation support to POL in the early summer
of 2013. There had been a small flurry of prosecutions in early 2013 but one

by one they fell away and | was not asked to assist with any new cases.

694. In terms of why | stopped providing this support, | don’t recall anyone from

POL or Fujitsu explaining the reasons to me.
695. | can see from the email at [FUJ00156889] that, in October 2013, lawyers from

POL were contemplating appointing an external expert to prepare a report on
the integrity of Horizon Online, and sought Fujitsu’s assistance with this

Page 229 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

process. This email referred to the possibility that POL might share with Fujitsu
‘the advice we have received on the evidence that Gareth Jenkins has

previously provided in support of Post Office Ltd prosecutions.”

696. | don’t recall seeing any written advice or having it explained to me. | assume
(based on everything that | have learned subsequently) that this is a reference
to the Simon Clarke advice dated 15 July 2013. If that is right, | first became
aware of the criticisms made of me in Mr Clarke’s advice during the appeals

against conviction in the Court of Appeal in 2020.

697. | can see that, on 24 October 2013, David Jones expressed some concerns
about what POL was doing and said that he “wanted to understand what the
perceived issue is with Gareth Jenkins” [FUJ00156893]. Michael Harvey
responded as follows:

“This was raised by POL’s external lawyers. They feel that Gareth is
‘tainted’ because he did not raise the issue of ‘bugs’ in his expert
testimony. | disputed this in the meeting but the account is considering
how to manage this view without accepting that Gareth has done
anything wrong (which he hasn’t).”

698. | was not copied into these emails. | did not know at the time that lawyers from
POL and Fujitsu were discussing my evidence in these terms or that POL’s
lawyers considered me to be “tainted”. It seems that these discussions were
ongoing (but not known about by me) whilst | drafted a written note responding
to a briefing document POL had prepared for the expert they intended to
instruct. My note is at [FUJ00156908]. This note stated that the integrity of the
data in the audit trail was a “reasonable and achievable scope for review”,
suggested lines of enquiry that the expert might wish to follow and referred to
my two existing Horizon data integrity reports as material the expert should

review.

699. My lawyers have shown me an email exchange dated 3 December 2013 at

[FUJ00156923]. | can see that | was one of a large number of people copied

Page 230 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

into an internal Fujitsu email sent by James Davidson, which among other

matters, said that:

“In essence, the problem that Post Office have is that they are being
given legal advice that the ‘rules of evidence’ mean that submissions
which in the past have sufficed to support prosecutions (namely the input
of Gareth Jenkins), cannot be used in future prosecutions. They are
therefore seeking the view of an external expert who can warrant that

the data they are basing prosecutions upon has integrity.”

700. | don’t recall reading this email, but if | did, | would probably have assumed
that it meant that there had been some legal development which meant that
whilst POL could previously rely on my evidence, they now needed to go to
an external expert instead. Reading it now, this email does not convey the
impression (at least not to me) that POL’s lawyers had raised serious concerns

about deficiencies in my evidence or that | was tainted as a witness.

Reflections

701. It would be difficult for me to be in the position | am in and not have a number
of reflections about what happened in the case studies described above. As |
have explained, it is now clear that there should have been formality in the
process of obtaining evidence from Fujitsu when it went beyond the production
of audit data. There needed, as Anne foresaw, to be standard and formal

processes which were followed in those types of cases.

702. | was very concerned when | heard the evidence of Paul Patterson that, in his
view, Fujitsu should not have been providing the litigation support service at
all. | don’t think that anyone in Prosecution Support would have understood at
the time that they were providing a service which Fujitsu should not have even

contemplated. | certainly didn’t realise that. It makes me all the more

Page 231 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

concerned that | (and other people) became involved in giving witness

statements in the sort of haphazard way | have described.

703. | think this goes back to the point | made at the start about Fujitsu’s prosecution
support manuals, which is that | think at the beginning of the period the Inquiry
is considering, Fujitsu thought the provision of the ARQ data (and the standard
witness statement producing this data) was almost a mechanical process and
was the limit of what POL wanted in terms of assistance with its legal cases.
This changed over time but without a clear moment where it was realised that
the processes needed to be more formal and rigorous. Anne’s note should
have been that point. | knew nothing about this note at the time, but looking at
it now, | would agree that it was a missed opportunity within Fujitsu to update
its prosecution support processes and make them consistent with the type of
detailed assistance POL was now requesting and what the criminal law
required. Whilst some Fujitsu lawyers were involved in reviewing my witness
statements in some of the case studies explained in this witness statement,
what strikes me now is that none of them picked up the fact that | was being
treated as an expert witness and that particular duties might apply to me.
Reflecting on this, | question whether Fujitsu should have asked a criminal
lawyer who understood the nature of expert evidence to provide assistance to

Prosecution Support.

704. For me, it was inherent in a system as large as Horizon that it would have
occasional bugs, errors and defects. Nonetheless, | considered it to have
worked well. It dealt with a massive number of transactions every day. As far
as | was aware at the time, the vast majority of users in the vast majority of
branches did not experience discrepancies in their branches. | was not aware
of any systemic bug which affected all branches across the entire estate, or
which operated on an ongoing basis so as to cause losses on the scale of
those usually seen in prosecutions. To my knowledge, at the time, where it
appeared that Horizon may have caused a discrepancy in branch accounts,

Fujitsu was swift to ascertain its impact and the branches affected.

Page 232 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

705. There was a fundamental issue about the best approach to take in a legal
case in which there was a discrepancy. To me, as a computer engineer, the
best approach was to try to understand what the SPM was saying might have
gone wrong (or when they noticed it, or what they noticed), and then to analyse
the data for the branch for evidence of a system error (and if so, what kind of
system error) that may have caused it. This was the approach that my
colleagues and | took when asked to investigate the cause of a discrepancy
in our routine workload. When it came to prosecutions, | can see now that
there may have been a lack of common ground or understanding about this
approach and how it related to broader legal issues like disclosure.

706. | can also see that there may have been misunderstanding or, again, lack of
common ground as to what terms like integrity, reliability or robustness may
have meant in certain contexts and what they may have meant to lawyers. To
my mind, as a software engineer, terms like integrity, reliability and robustness
did not mean infallibility, since it was obvious to me that no IT system could
be infallible. | can now see that the lack of formality and the sort of ad hoc way
in which | became involved in POL’s legal cases increased the risks that POL’s
investigators and lawyers did not proceed on the same basis as me. In
particular, looking back on the 2012/2013 cases, | am deeply concerned about
the way that they developed. Looking at it now, there should have been (at the
start of October 2012) a structured meeting between Fujitsu and POL
(including lawyers from both) in order to have a full discussion about POL’s
purpose in obtaining a generic report/witness statement, how POL intended
to use it in subsequent cases and what would happen if Fujitsu considered
that examination of the audit data would assist in a given case. At the time,
however, | trusted that POL’s lawyers were approaching these cases and

making decisions in a way that was legally appropriate.

707. Clearly this also reflects a lack of understanding on my part that the evidence
| gave might make me subject to duties of disclosure and what that might mean
in a specific case. | did not know | might have had a duty to disclose the
existence of issues or problems in Horizon, even if they appeared to me not

to have any connection to explaining what might have caused the

Page 233 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

discrepancies in a particular defendant's branch. | do not believe that anyone
from POL or Fujitsu ever explained to me that | might be subject to any special

duties as an expert in any of the cases in which | gave written or oral evidence.

708. | want to be very clear that my opinion that Horizon generally worked well is
not to detract from what the SPMs have said about their experiences of being
investigated and prosecuted, or about the wrongfulness of their convictions.
The sheer numbers of SPMs who have now come forward causes me great
concern about the problems they experienced and my lack of knowledge and
understanding about that at the time.

709. From all that | have seen in the Inquiry, | don’t think that SPMs and their staff
got anything like the right training and support in how to use Horizon. | believe
that this led to misunderstandings and innocent human error, which were
compounded by the lack of effective support received from the helpdesks. |
now have a much clearer understanding that there were SPMs who feared
reporting losses in case they lost their business and/or POL took legal action
against them. This was a terrible position to be placed in and it should never

have happened.

710. | would like to make clear that | feel deeply affected by the cases | played a
part in. | have wanted to explain my part in them. | have apologised to those
individuals who were wrongly convicted in the case studies | have addressed
and | repeat again how sorry | am.

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Signed:

Dated: 218 March 2024

Page 234 of 285
Index

WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

No.

URN

Document description

Control number

WITNO00460200

WITNO00460200 - Second
Witness Statement of

Gareth Jenkins

WITNO00460200

FUJ00152616

Email from Diane Matthews
to Gareth Jenkins re:
Gaerwen - Trial Date for
Hughie Noel Thomas

POINQ0158811F

FUJ00122134

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Penny Thomas, Neneh
Lowthe Re: CS Witness
Statement with witness

statements attached

POINQ0128348F

WITN04520100

First witness statement of
Brian Arthur Pinder

WITN04520100

WITNO9710100

First Witness Statement of

Peter Sewell

WITNO9710100

FUJ00152212

Management of the
Litigation Support Service -
Fujitsu v1.0

POINQ0158406F

FUJ00152220

Management of the
Litigation Support Service,
Fujitsu v1.1

POINQ0158414F

FUJ00152225

Management of the
Litigation Support Service -
v2.0

POINQ0158419F

Page 235 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

FUJ00152235

Management of the
Litigation Support Service
v2.0

POINQ0158429F

10

FUJ00152209

Network Banking
Management of
Prosecution Support v2.0
dated 29 February 2005

(sic)

POINQ0158403F

11

FUJ00122099

Penelope Anne Thomas'

Witness Statement

POINQ0128313F

12

FUJ00002033

Fujitsu Services Security
Management Service:
Service Description.

Version 1.0

POINQ0008204F

13

FUJ00080107

Fujitsu's Guidance on
Security management
service: Service
Description (v.2)

POINQ0086278F

14

FUJ00002264

Fujitsu and Post Office
Document re: Security
Management Service:
Service Description v3

POINQ0008435F

15

FUJ00088868

Fujitsu/Post
Office®Security
Management Service:
Service Description (v3.5)

POINQ0095039F

16

FUJ00002555

Fujitsu Security
Management Service:
Service Description, HNG-
X and HNG-X Application
Roll Out Transitional
Period, Version 4.0.

POINQ0008726F

Page 236 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

17

POL00002572

Fujitsu Security
Management Service:
Service Description v 5.0

VIS00003586

18

POL00002666

Fujitsu/Post Office ®Fujitsu
Services Security
management service:

service description

VIS00003680

19

POL00115340

Fujitsu Services - System
Design Specification for

Network Banking End-to-
End Service (Version 1.3)

POL-0114446

20

FUJ00152137

ICL Pathway - Fraud Risk
Management Service
Design - version 3.0 - Ref:
RS/SPE/0001

POINQ0158331F

21

FUJ00152138

ICL Pathway - Security
Objectives & Principles -
Version 1.0 - Ref:
RS/REQ/010

POINQ0158332F

22

FUJ00152140

ICL Pathway Evidential
Information - Production
Certification and Retention
(PACE)

POINQ0158334F

23

FUJ00152142

ICL Pathway Evidential
information, production
certification and retention -
PACE. Version 0.4.

POINQ0158336F

24

FUJ00152145

ICL Pathway - Fraud Case
Management System:

Architecture Specification

POINQ0158339F

25

FUJ00152176

Conducting Audit Data
Extractions at Live - ICL
Pathway Ltd - v2.0

POINQ0158370F

Page 237 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

26

FUJ00152218

Audit Data Extraction
Process, Fujitsu v1.0

POINQ0158412F

27

FUJ00152221

Audit Data Extraction

Process - v1.1

POINQ0158415F

28

FUJ00152228

Audit Data Extraction

Process - v3.0

POINQ0158422F

29

POL00029169

ICL Pathway Conducting
Audit Data Extractions at
CSR Process (v1)

POL-0025651

30

WITNO6650300

Third Corporate Statement
of William Paul Patterson
on behalf Fujitsu Services
Limited

WITNO6650300

31

POL00099397

Email from Parker Steve to
Andrew Winn, Louise S
Wilkins. Re: Gilmerton
148824

POL-0098980

32

FUJ00152171

ICL Pathway - Production
of System Information for
Evidential Purposes -
Version 0.1 - Ref:
RS/PRO/042

POINQ0158365F

33

FUJ00154729

Change proposal for
Analysis of Transaction
Logs. ®Provides the
changes proposed on
POLs request for further
analysis on PO Transaction
Logs.

POINQ0160924F

34

FUJ00154969

Email from Penny Thomas
to Peter Thompson, Jean-
Phillippe Prenovost, cc:
others RE FW MR

POINQ0161164F

Page 238 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Humphrey - POL
Prosecution support

35

FUJ00156629

Email from Andrew Bolc to
Gareth Jenkins RE Post

Office v Bramwell

POINQ0162823F

36

FUJ00156530

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Thomas Penny RE RM v
Bramwell

POINQ0162724F

37

POL00104153

Email chain from Andy
Cash to Jarnail Singh re:
FW: R V Bramwell Urgent

POL-0103736

38

FUJ00122130

Email to Gareth GI Jenkins
and Neneh Lowther from
Penny Thomas®Re: CS
Witness Statement
Amendment ®with
attachments R v Teja WS

POINQ0128344F

39

FUJ00122139

Witness Statement of
Penelope Anne Thomas
with comments

POINQ0128353F

40

FUJ00122163

Email to Peter Sewell,
Bill Membery and others
from Brian Pinder®Re:
Witness Statement Mark-
up with attachments -
Penny's template -
Marked1

POINQ0128377F

a

FUJ00155743

Email thread from Penny
Thomas to Gareth Jenkins
re: Witness Statement
Update - Transaction Logs

POINQ0161937F

Page 239 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

22

FUJ00122948

Email from Penny Thomas
to Gareth Jenkins and Alan
Holmes re: HNGX Witness

Statement

POINQ0129162F

43

FUJ00122949

Draft witness statement for

Penelope Anne Thomas

POINQ0129163F

44

FUJ00123365

Email from Thomas
Penny to David Jones;
re: Standard Witness
Statement - HNG X

POINQ0129579F

a5

FUJ00123410

Email from Thomas Penny
to Gareth Jenkins, re:

Witness Statement Review

POINQ0129624F

46

FUJ00122102

Email to Thomas Penny
from Gareth GI Jenkins
®Re: R v Teja - Can you
help?®with attachments -
Penny_OBCS

POINQ0128316F

47

FUJ00122103

R vs Teja - notes for Penny

by Gareth | Jenkins

POINQ0128317F

48

FUJ00122127

Witness Statement of
Gareth Idris
Jenkins®Version 3.0
11/02®CS011A

POINQ0128341F

49

FUJ00155699

Email from Brian Pinder to
Gareth Jenkins CC Gill
Jackson Re: WS for Rvs
Teja

POINQ0161893F

50

FUJ00122128

Email from Neneh Lowther
to Gareth GI Jenkins Re:
CS Witness Statement

Issues

POINQ0128342F

Page 240 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

51

FUJ00122141

Email to Neneh Lowther
from Gareth GI Jenkins
®Re: CS Witness
Statement issues ®with
attachments - Penny's

template - marked

POINQ0128355F

52

FUJ00155534

Email from Brian Orzel to
John Pope, David
Hollingsworth, cc lan
Morrison and others re
Draft Response V3 -

Transaction referencing

POINQ0161728F

53

FUJ00156868

Fujitsu - Enhancing and
Prolonging the HNG-X
Audit Facility by Pete
Newsome Version 1.1

POINQ0163062F

54

WITNO09870100

WITNO09870100 - First
Witness Statement of

Gerald Barnes

WITNO09870100

55

FUJ00154684

Peak Incident
Management System Log
PC0152376 - FAD
005948 BM Stock unit
was rolled over it was
forced to clear the local

suspense account

POINQ0160879F

56

FUJ00155252

Email thread from Mike
Stewart to Gareth Jenkins
Re: Response to Action
AP0108003 from
POL/Fujitsu P&BA
Workshop 1 August 2008

POINQ0161446F

Page 241 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

57

FUJ00155231

Email chain between
Penny Thomas, Alan
Holmes, Peter Sewell and
others Re: Branch 141832
Craigpark

POINQ0161425F

58

FUJ00155227

Email from Anne
Chambers to Gareth
Jenkins Re: More on
BE/0158102

POINQ0161421F

59

FUJ00155230

POL/Fujitsu P&BA
Workshop 01/08/2008 -
Action Points.

POINQ0161424F

60

FUJ00155238

Email chain between Roy
Birkinshaw, Gareth
Jenkins, Mike Stewart and
others RE: Branch 141832
Craigpark - R&P mismatch

POINQ0161432F

61

FUJ00154683

PEAK Incident
Management System
Report. Call Ref.
PC0158102 - RE: FAD
141832 Query from POL
BTS for periods 9 and 10
2007.

POINQ0160878F

62

FUJ00155229

Email from Gill Matthews to
Rod Ismay, Jane Smith,
Andrew Winn and others
Re: Workshop Actions

POINQ0161423F

63

FUJ00155247

Email from Anne
Chambers to Gareth
Jenkins Re: Response to
Action AP0108003 from
POL/Fujitsu P&BA

POINQ0161441F

Page 242 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Workshop 1 August 2008
(part of chain)

64

FUJ00155258

Email from Gerald Barnes
to Dave Seddon, Steve
Evans, Gareth Jenkins and
others RE: Peak 152376:
CAPS Process Locking the
messagestore PC0164429
(part of chain)

POINQ0161452F

65

FUJ00122588

HNGx CP - Strengthen the
HNGx Audit Solution, and
enable analysis of Counter

Event messages - v.0.1

POINQ0128802F

66

FUJ00154824

Record of meeting -
Discussion on issue of
errors produced by
riposte in relation to the
validity and integrity of
data given to POL.

POINQ0161019F

67

FUJ00155874

Email from Penny Thomas
to Gareth Jenkins, Alan
Holmes, cc'ing Peter
Sewell re: FW: ARQ
Events to check

POINQ0162068F

68

FUJ00083709

Email chain between
Gareth Jenkins, Steven

Meek and Penny Thomas

POINQ0089880F

69

FUJ00083710

Email chain between
Penny Thomas, Gareth
Jenkins and Anne
Chambers on ARQs, with
reference to Callender

Square.

POINQ0089881F

Page 243 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

70

FUJ00083712

Email chain between Anne
Chambers, Gareth Jenkins
and Penny Thomas on
Callender Square bug

POINQ0089883F

71

FUJ00227975

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Steven Meek, Penny
Thomas, Andy Dunks RE:
ARQ Checks

POINQ0234129F

72:

FUJ00224921

Email chain from Anne O
Chambers to Penny
Thomas and CC'ing
Gareth Jenkins re: ARQs
464-472 - LPD 18 Dec 08

POINQ0231036F

73

FUJ00155239

Email from Roy Birkinshaw
to David Johns and Gareth
Jenkins Re: Potential Audit
Issue.doc

POINQ0161433F

74

FUJ00155240

Potential Audit Issue —

Horizon

POINQ0161434F

75

FUJ00155241

Email chain between
Gareth Jenkins, Roy
Birkinshaw and David
Johns RE: Potential Audit
Issue.doc

POINQ0161435F

76

FUJ00155242

Potential Audit Issue —

Horizon

POINQ0161436F

ree

FUJ00155245

Email chain between Mike
Stewart, Gareth Jenkins,
Anne Chambers and others
Re: Branch 141832
Craigpark and receipts and
payments mismatch.

POINQ0161439F

Page 244 of 285
WITNO00460300

WITNO00460300

78

FUJ00155257

Email from Roy Birkinshaw
to Penny Thomas, Peter
Sewell, Alan Holmes and
others Re: Recent Exercise

to review Audit in Horizon

POINQ0161451F

79

FUJ00155397

Email thread between
Graham Allen, Steve
Evans, Peter Sewell, Alan
Holmes, Penny Thomas,
Gareth Jenkins setting out
summary of Riposte issue
raised by error log
PC0152376

POINQ0161591F

80

FUJ00155421

Email from Thomas Penny
to Denham Steve, Sewell
Peter Re: FW: Security
Incident

POINQ0161615F

81

FUJ00155268

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Sewell Peter and Penny
Thomas Re: Checking
ARQ Events

POINQ0161462F

82

FUJ00152770

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Steven Meek re ARQ
events.

POINQ0158965F

83

FUJ00155380

Email from Peter Sewell to
David Hinde RE: Audit
Strengthening - potential
CP (chain)

POINQ0161574F

84

FUJ00224808

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Alan Holmes, Peter
Sewell and Roy Birkinshaw
re: Counter Audit CP

POINQ0161468F_0003

Page 245 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

85

FUJ00154828

HNG-X Change Proposal -
Enable analysis of Counter
event messages within the
HNG-X Audit solution

POINQ0161023F

86

FUJ00155275

Meeting invite to Penny
Thomas, Gareth Jenkins,
Alan Holmes and others re:
Audit CP update

POINQ0161469F

87

FUJ00155278

Meeting invite: Updated:
Audit CP - Words

POINQ0161472F

88

FUJ00155371

HNGx CP - Strengthen the
HNGx Audit Solution, and
enable analysis of Counter
Event messages®Witness
Statement of Fujitsu
employee

POINQ0161565F

89

FUJ00155206

Draft Witness Statement
for Fujitsu's IT Security
Analyst with tracked
changes comments

POINQ0161400F

90

FUJ00155420

Email with attachment from
Penny Thomas re:
standard Fujitsu witness
statement

POINQ0161614F

91

FUJ00155998

ISMF Security Meeting
Minutes (Jan 09)

POINQ0162192F

92

FUJ00122600

Email from Penny Thomas
to Gareth Jenkins re:
Witness Statement Review
- Standard Fujitsu WS V9
Feb 2009.

POINQ0128814F

93

FUJ00156064

Email thread from Ann

Sinclair to Gavin Bounds

POINQ0162258F

Page 246 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

and Suzie Kirkham RE:
Data Integrity issue
between sub postmasters
and POL

94

FUJ00124247

Report on Horizon Data
Integrity by Gareth Jenkins
Ver 1.0

POINQ0130461F

95

FUJ00155493

Email from Anne O
Chambers to Gareth GI
Jenkins®Re: Draft paper
on Horizon integrity

POINQ0161687F

96

FUJ00226297

Email chain from Gareth
Jenkins to Anne Chambers
re: Draft paper on Horizon
Data Integrity

POINQ0232414F

97

FUJ00226302

Email from Jeremy Worrell
to Gareth Jenkins RE:
Horizon data integrity with
comments.

POINQ0232419F

98

FUJ00226299

Email from Jeremy Worrell
to Amanda Crail, Latoya
Smite, Gareth Jenkins and
others RE: Draft paper on
Horizon Data Integrity

POINQ0232416F

99

FUJ000226307

Email chain from Gareth
Jenkins to Anne
Chambers RE: Draft
paper on Horizon Data

integrity

POINQ0232424F

100

FUJ00226304

Email from Jeremey
Worrell to Amanda Craib cc
Latoya Smith, Gareth

Jenkins and others re Draft

POINQ0232421F

Page 247 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

paper on Horizon data

integrity

101

FUJ00226310

Email chain from Jeremy
Worrell to Gareth Jenkins
RE: data integrity
document

POINQ0232427F

102

FUJ00156112

Email chain from Geoff
Butts, Gareth Jenkins,
Suzie Kirkham, Jason
Clark and others - Re:
Track 2 Data Solution

POINQ0162306F

103

FUJ00156113

Email from Jean-Philippe
Prenovost to David Gray
and Suzie Kirkham, RE:
removal of track II date
from historical audit logs
and impact on prosecution
where data used as

evidence.

POINQ0162307F

104

FUJ00156114

Fujitsu - Audit Trail
Sanitisation for PCI -
Removal of Track 2 and
Sanitisation of PAN

POINQ0162308F

105

FUJ00156115

POL Request for Work
Package. Eliminating Track
Il from historical Audit log.
Project HNG. Request
Number
PSO_FSL_01762_FS

POINQ0162309F

106

FUJ00156111

Email from David Jones to
David Roberts, Re: Royal
Mail

POINQ0162305F

Page 248 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

107

FUJ00156112

Email chain from Geoff
Butts, Gareth Jenkins,
Suzie Kirkham, Jason
Clark and others - Re:
Track 2 Data Solution

POINQ0162306F

108

FUJ00171949

Fujitsu Services - High
Level Design of Common
Agents V4.0

POINQ0178130F

109

FUJ00097058

Report called "Duplication
of transaction Records
contained in ARQ returns -
22 June 2010 by Penny
Thomas

POINQ0103229F

110

FUJ00097037

Email chain between Guy
Wilkerson , Thomas Penny,
Gareth Jenkins and others
RE: Duplication of
Transaction Records on
ARQ Returns

POINQ0103208F

111

FUJ00122903

Email from Penny Thomas
to Tom Lillywhite, Gareth
Jenkins and Guy Wilkerson
re: FW: Duplication of
Transaction Records in
ARQ Returns.

POINQ0129117F

112

POL00167367

Email from Jane Owens to
Adrian Morris, Christopher
Knight, Colin Price and
others at POL re: Fujitsu -
Duplication of Transaction
Records®

POL-0164208

113

FUJ00097070

Email chain between
Gareth Jenkins, Geoff

POINQ0103241F

Page 249 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Butts, David Cooke and
others, RE: ARQs

114

FUJ00154902

Seema Misra case study:
Email trail from Thomas
Penny to Lillywhite Tom,
Thompson Pater, Welsh
Graham and Munro Donna
re: FW: Action Points -

Duplicated Records

POINQ0161097F

115

FUJ00154905

Seema Misra case study:
Email trail from Thomas
Penny to Prenovost Jean-
Philippe, and Lillywhite
Tom cc: Welsh Graham,
Jenkins Gareth, Munro
Donna et al re: FW:
Duplication of Transaction
Records in ARQ Retums

POINQ0161100F

116

FUJ00122912

Email from Penny Thomas
to Gareth Jenkins re:
Duplicated records - WS

POINQ0129126F

117

FUJ00122906

Witness statement of
Gareth Idris Jenkins; Re:

Seema Misra

POINQ0129120F

118

FUJ00154926

Email from Prenovost
Jean-Philippe to Tom
Lillywhite, Guy Wilkerson
and Gareth Jenkins cc:
Penny Thomas re
ARQ194/2011 Matter in
relation to Derby Post
Office (005207)

POINQ0161121F

Page 250 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

119

FUJ00155516

Email to Penny Thomas
from Tom Lillywhite cc
Prenovost Jean-Philippe re
Matter arising from ARQ
194/1011- Request for
transaction records in
relation to Derby Post
Office

POINQ0161710F

120

FUJ00152573

Letter from Brian Pinder to
Graham Ward re: Letter
from Bond Pearce
Solicitors Dated
18/11/2005 Post Office v
Lee Castleton ®Document
Bundle of letters, emails
and investigation reports
relating to Lee Castleton -
Marine Drive 213337 -

requires splitting

POINQ0158768F

121

FUJ00154713

Lee Castleton Civil Case
Study: Email from Brian
Pinder to Gareth Jenkins
re: Marine Drive - Security

Confidential

POINQ0160908F

122

FUJ00152601

Civil Case Study of Lee
Castleton: Email chain from
Brian Pinder to Gareth
Jenkins, Peter Sewell,
Andy Dunks and others
RE: Post Office-
Subpostmaster Disputes

POINQ0158796F

123

FUJ00152602

Civil Case Study of Lee
Castleton: Extract from Lee

POINQ0158797F

Page 251 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Castleton’s Part 18 Reply
setting out allegations
against Horizon

124

POL00071427

Personal attendance note
by Adrian Bratt, Client:
Royal Mail Group PLC Sub
Postmaster Litigation,
Matter: Mr Lee Castleton,
Matter no: 348035.135

POL-0067990

125

POL00071138

Email from Stephen Dilley
to Richard Morgan
regarding Post
Office/Castleton claim.

POL-0067701

126

FUJ00122279

Email from Brian Pinder to
Gareth Jenkins and Peter
Sewell in re to First draft
statement of Gareth
Jenkins (PO V Lee

Castleton)

POINQ0128493F

127

FUJ00122280

Draft witness statement of
Gareth Jenkins - Post
Office Limited v Castleton -
High Court

POINQ0128494F

128

FUJ00122284

Draft witness statement of
Gareth Jenkins

POINQ0128498F

129

FUJ00122283

Email from Jenkins Gareth
Gl to Pinder Brian and
Sewell Peter in re to First
statement of Gareth
Jenkins (PO V Lee

Castleton).

POINQ0128497F

130

POL00071438

Telephone attendance note
by Stephen Dilley, Client:

POL-0068001

Page 252 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Royal Mail Group PLC Sub
Postmaster Litigation,
Matter: Mr Lee Castleton,
Matter no: 348035.134

131

FUJ00152620

Email from Anne
Chambers to Brian Pinder
and Peter Sewell re:
Marine Drive (Post Office
Limited v Lee Castleton) -

Witness statements

POINQ0158815F

132

WITN04660100

WITN04660100 - First
Witness Statement of

Stephen John Dilley

WITN04660100

133

FUJ00154733

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Brian Pinder Re:
Evidence Marine Drive

POINQ0160928F

134

FUJ00154727

Civil Case Study of Lee
Castleton: Email from
Jenkins Gareth to Pinder
Brian Re: PO V Castelton:
Transaction logs.

POINQ0160922F

135

FUJ00152290

Mr Lee Castleton Case
Study: Email from Anne
Chambers to Peter Sewell
re. P.O v Castleton:

Transaction Logs.

POINQ0158593F

136

FUJ00152292

Mr Lee Castleton Case
Study: Email from Anne
Chambers to Gareth

Jenkins re. Marine Drive.

POINQ0158595F

137

FUJ00154731

Lee Castleton case study;
Email from Anne

Chambers Anne to Gareth

POINQ0160926F

Page 253 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Jenkins Re: Marine Drive
CA - Clarification - figures
used

138

POL00081490_035

Analysis of Marine Drive
Transaction week 42 by
Gareth Jenkins and Ann

Chambers.

POL-0078053_035

139

FUJ00152633

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Brian Pinder, CCing
Peter Sewell and Anne
Chambers. Re: PO request
- audit analysis for cash
accounts and missing
transaction

POINQ0158828F

140

POL00081490_010

Analysis of Marine Drive
Transactions for Cash
Account week 42 by
Gareth Jenkins and Ann

Chambers

POL-0078053_010

141

WITNO0170200

Second witness statement
of Anne Chambers -
WITNO0170200

WITNO0170200

142

FUJ00152643

Lee Castleton- Civil Case
Study: Email from Brian
Pinder to Gareth Jenkins
and Peter Sewell re Post
Office Limited v Lee
Castleton

POINQ0158838F

143

POL00069730

Lee Castleton Case Study:
Cash Declaration info re

Marine Drive

POL-0066293

144

FUJ00152652

Civil case study of Lee

Castleton: Email chain from

POINQ0158847F

Page 254 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Gareth Jenkins to Brian
Pinder and Peter Sewell re:
Further data requested for

Marine Drive Investigation

145

POLO0098862

Email from Stephen Dilley
to Brian Pinder, Andy
Dunks, Anne Chambers
and Others re: Judgment:
Post Office -v- Lee

Castleton

POL-0098445

146

FUJ00152299

L Castleton case study :
Afterthoughts on the
Castleton case

POINQ0158602F

147

FUJ00152582

Email from Brian Pinder to
Gareth Jenkins re: Fujitsu
Statements - Gaerwen -
ARQs explaining
transaction issues

POINQ0158777F

148

FUJ00122203

Email to Neneh Lowther
and Brian Pinder from
Gareth GI Jenkins ®Re:
Gaerwen with
attachments®

POINQ0128417F

149

FUJ00122204

Witness statement of

Gareth Idris Jenkins

POINQ0128418F

150

FUJ00122201

Witness Statement of
Gareth Idris
Jenkins®Version 3.0
11/02®CS011A (Side A)

POINQ0128415F

151

FUJ00152587

Email from Graham C
Ward to Brian Pinder re:
Gaerwen Statement

POINQ0158782F

Page 255 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

152

FUJ00122211

Draft Witness Statement of
Gareth Jenkins

POINQ0128425F

153

FUJ00122216

(Unsigned) Witness
Statement of Gareth Idris
Jenkins®Version 3.0
11/02®CS011A (Side A)

POINQ0128430F

154

FUJ00155719

Email from Penny Thomas
to Brian Pinder, Gareth
Jenkins and Neneh

Lowther re Gaerwen

POINQ0161913F

155

FUJ00152591

Email from Brian Pinder to
Gareth Jenkins re:
Gaerwen Post Office -
Witness statements -
Postmaster allegation that
Nil transactions were
responsible for loss of
funds (Hughie Thomas

case study)

POINQ0158786F

156

FUJ00122230

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Brian Pinder Re:
Gaerwen ®

POINQ0128444F

157

FUJ00122229

Analysis of Zero Value
Transactions Document 32

POINQ0128443F

158

FUJ00122231

Zero Value Report

POINQ0128445F

159

FUJ00122232

Zero Value Report

POINQ0128446F

160

FUJ00122233

Zero Value Report -
Gaerwen PO®

POINQ0128447F

161

FUJ00122237

Gareth Idris Jenkins’

witness statement

POINQ0128451F

162

FUJ00155721

Email from Brian Pinder to

Penny Thomas, Neneh

POINQ0161915F

Page 256 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Lowther, Andy Dunks and
others RE: Investigations

163

FUJ00152592

Email address from Diane
Matthews to Gareth
Jenkins re: Post Office

Investigation for Gaerwen

POINQ0158787F

164

FUJ00152641

Noel Thomas Case Study:
Email chain from Diane
Matthews to Thomas

Penny. Re: Gaerwen

POINQ0158836F

165

FUJ00122218

Witness statement of

Gareth Idris Jenkins

POINQ0128432F

166

WITNO1620100

WITNO1620100 - Hughie
Noel Thomas

WITNO1620100

167

FUJ00152866

Email from Dave Jennings
to Gareth Jenkins, RE:
defence expert report (R v.
Seema Misra).

POINQ0159061F

168

FUJ00152863

Email chain from David
Hinde to Gareth Jenkins,
CC Dave Jennings and
Thomas Penny re West
Byfleet PO - Case of
Seema Misra -
POLtd0708/0249 - Trial
15th March 2009 Guildford
Crown Court

POINQ0159058F

169

FUJ00152872

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Penny Thomas re
Seema Misra West Byfleet
PO. Includes Expert Report
by Charles McLachlan
dated 19.11.09 with

POINQ0159067F

Page 257 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

comments by Gareth

Jenkins.

170

FUJ00152988

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Jarnail Singh re REGINA
v SEEMA MISRA
GUILDFORD CROWN
COURT TRIAL - 15TH
MARCH 2010

POINQ0159183F

171

FUJ00152870

Seema Misra Criminal case
study, ®Email thread from
Penny Thomas to Gareth
Jenkins RE: Misra-West
Byfleet PO

POINQ0159065F

172

FUJ00152858

Seema Misra Case Study:
Email from Thomas Penny
to Andy Dunks re Misra -
West Byfleet PO -
Investigator requesting
further information from

Fujitsu

POINQ0159053F

173

POLOO065560

2nd Interim Technical
expert's report to the Court
prepared by Charles
Alastair McLachlan, a
Director of Amsphere
Consulting Ltd in relation to

the Seema Misra case

POL-0062039

174

FUJ00152874

Email from Penny Thomas
to Gareth Jenkins re
Seema Misra West Byfleet
PO.

POINQ0159069F

175

FUJ00152887

Email from John Longman

to Thomas Penny re West

POINQ0159082F

Page 258 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Byfleet PO - Case of
Seema Misra -
POLtd0708/0249 - Trial
15th March 2009 Guildford

Crown Court

176

FUJ00152891

Email from Thomas Penny
to Gareth Jenkins re West
Byfleet PO - Case of
Seema Misra -
POLtd0708/0249 - Trial
15th March 2009 Guildford

Crown Court

POINQ0159086F

177

POL00053723

Email from Jarnail Singh to
Warwick Tatford incl em
chain from Mark Dinsdale
to Rob Wilson re: advice
requested on disclosure
request in MIRSA case

POL-0050202

178

POL00044557

Advice on requests for
disclosure in Seema Misra
case

POL-0041036

179

FUJ00122670

Seema Misra's case -
Email chain from Penny
Thomas to Gareth Jenkins
re: West Byfleet PO
(POLTD/0708/0249) - Trial
15th March 2009 Guildford
Crown Court.

POINQ0128884F

180

FUJ00122669

Witness Statement of
Gareth Idris Jenkins re:
comments on 2nd Interim

Technical expert's report to

POINQ0128883F

Page 259 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

the Court prepared by
Alastair McLauchlan.

181

POL00175710

Email from Jason G Collins
To: John Longman Re:
URGENT - Defence

Request

POL-0170986

182

POL00167137

Seema Misra Criminal
Case Study: 2nd Interim
Technical expert's report to
the Court prepared by
Charles Alastair
McLachlan, a Director of
Amsphere Consulting Ltd -
for R v Seema Misra

POL-0162581

183

POL00167136

(Seema Misra Case Study)
Email chain from John
Longman to Warwick
Tatford, Jarnail A Singh
RE: West Byfleet

POL-0162580

184

UKGI00014903

Seema Misra case study:
Court Attendance Note
from Jarnail Singh re
Seema Misra for Mention
dated 01/02/10, updated
03/02/2010

UKGI025696-001

185

UKGI00014895

Seema Misra case study:
Email from Issy Hogg
Coombe Rich Solicitors to
Jarnail Singh re: Seema
Misra Guildford Crown
Court mention 1st February
2010

UKGI025688-001

Page 260 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

186

FUJ00152902

Seema Misra Case Study -
Email chain from Gareth
Jenkins to Penny Thomas
and Tom Lillywhite re:
West Byfleet - JUDGE
ORDER - URGENT,
URGENT

POINQ0159097F

187

FUJ00122713

Email from David M Jones
to Jarnail Singh re West
Byfleet Issues- Seema

misra

POINQ0128927F

188

FUJ00154877

Seema Misra criminal case
study. ®Email from Jenkins
Gareth to David Keeling,
Graham Allen Re: Gareth
Jenkins

POINQ0161072F

189

POL00029369

Email chain between
Jarnall A.Singh and Jones
David M ®Re: West
BYFLEET ISSUES-SEMA
MISRA

POL-0025851

190

FUJ00122729

Email from Marilyn
Benjamin (signed off as
Jarnail Singh) to David M
Jones re West Byfleet

Issues- Seema Misra

POINQ0128943F

191

FUJ00152930

Email from David M Jones
to Jarnail Singh, Gareth
Jenkins and Thomas
Penny re WEST BYFLEET
ISSUES- SEEMA MISRA-
Legally Privileged

POINQ0159125F

Page 261 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

192

FUJ00152941

Seema Misra: Email from
Gareth Jenkins to Anne
Chambers re WEST
BYFLEET ISSUES -
SEEMA MISRA - Legally
Privileged

POINQ0159136F

193

FUJ00122731

Email from Marilyn
Benjamin (on behalf of
Jarnail Singh) to David
Jones re: Regina v Seema
Misra Guildford Crown
Court Trial - 15th March
2010

POINQ0128945F

194

FUJ00122733

Email chain from David
Jones to Gareth Jenkins re:
Regina v Seema Misra
Guildford Crown Court Trial
- 15th March 2010

POINQ0128947F

195

FUJ00122735

Email from David Jones to
Jarnail Singh re: Regina v
Seema Misra Guildford
Crown Court Trial 15th
March 2010

POINQ0128949F

196

FUJ00122808

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Jarnail Singh; re: R v
Seema Misra Guildford
Crown Court Trial- 15th
March 2010

POINQ0129022F

197

FUJ00152962

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Jarnail Singh re REGINA
v SEEMA MISRA
GUILDFORD CROWN

POINQ0159157F

Page 262 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

COURT TRIAL - 15TH
MARCH 2010®

198

FUJ00152957

Email chain between David
M Jones and Jarnail Singh
re: FW: Regina v Seema
Misra Guildford Crown
Court Trial - 15th March
2010

POINQ0159152F

199

FUJ00083721

Email from Anne
Chambers to Gareth
Jenkins re: Callendar
Square bug

POINQ0089892F

200

POL00001569

Witness statement of
Gareth Idris Jenkins

VIS00002583

201

POL00054056

Email from Jarnail Singh to
Warwick Tatford and John
Longman re: REGINA v
SEMA MISRA
GUILDFORD CRON
COURT TRIAL - 15TH
MARCH 2010

POL-0050535

202

FUJ00083722

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Anne Chambers re:
Callendar Square bug

POINQ0089893F

203

POL00054095

Email from Jarnail Singh to
Issy Hogg RE: R v Seema
Misra Guildford Crown
Court Trial- 15th March
2010

POL-0050574

204

FUJ00156108

Seema Misra Criminal case
study. ®Email thread from
Gareth Jenkins, David

Jones, Penny Thomas CC

POINQ0162302F

Page 263 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Tom Lillywhite RE: Regina
v Seema Misra Guildford
Crown Court Trial - 15th
March 2010

205

POL00054126

4th Interim Technical
expert's report to the Court
re Seema Misra prepared
by Charles Alastair
McLachlan, a Director of

Amsphere Consulting Ltd.

POL-0050605

206

POL00054220

Email from Marilyn
Benjamin to Jamail Singh
re: REGINA v SEEMA
MISRA GUILDFORD
CROWN COURT TRIAL -
15TH MARCH 2010

POL-0050699

207

FUJ00152983

Criminal Case study of
Seema Misra: Email from
Gerald Barnes to Thomas
Penny, Anne Chambers,
Gareth Jenkins and others
re ARQ436-490 Witness
Statement Support for
West Byfleet, 126023

POINQ0159178F

208

FUJ00155509

Email from Anne O
Chambers to Gareth Gl
Jenkins Re: ARQ436-490
Witness Statement Support
for West Byfleet, 126023

POINQ0161703F

209

FUJ00155189

Audit Record Query of
West Byfleet (126033),

requesting a report of all

POINQ0161384F

Page 264 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

transactions and events for

the office

210

POL00093946

Regina v Seema Misra,
Skeleton Argument to Stay
for Abuse of Process.
Guildford Crown Court.
Indictment number
72009/0070.

POL-0094068

211

POL00054227

Email from Jarnail A Singh
to Gareth Jenkins re.
Regina v Seema Misra
Guildford Crown Court Trial
- 15 March 2010

POL-0050706

212

FUJ00152992

Seema Misra Case Study -
Email chain from Gareth
Jenkins to Jarnail Singh re:
REGINA v SEEMA MISRA
GUILDFORD CROWN
COURT TRIAL - 15TH
MARCH 2010

POINQ0159187F

213

FUJ00152996

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Tom Lillywhite, Allen
Graham, cc Penny Thomas
and others re Regina v
Seema Misra - Expert

analysis of various logs

POINQ0159191F

214

FUJ00152991

Email chain from Penny
Thomas to Jarnail Singh,
cc Suzie Kirkham, Tom
Lilywhite, David Gray and
others Re: FW: Regina v

Seema Misra - Guildford

POINQ0159186F

Page 265 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Crown Court Trial - 15th
March 2010

215

POL00054213

Email from Jarnail A Singh
to Gareth Jenkins re.
Regina v Seema Misra
Guildford Crown Court Trial
- 15th March 2010 -
enclosing court

documents/info

POL-0050692

216

POL00054237

Further Amended Defence
Case Statement Pursuant
to Section 5 of the Criminal
Procedure and
Investigations Act 1996 -
The Queen v Seema Misra
in the Guildford Crown
Court ( Indictment No.
72009/0070)

POL-0050716

217

POL00054252

Seema Misra case study:
Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Jarnail A Singh re.
Regina v Seema Misra
Guildford Crown Court Trial
- 15th March 2010

POL-0050731

218

POL00167181

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to John Longman, Warwick
Tatford cc: Penny Thomas.
RE: Transaction errors-
West Byfleet

POL-0162624

219

POL00058502

Email from Jarnail Singh to
the Post Office Security
regarding Regina v Seema
Misra trial 15 March

POL-0054981

Page 266 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

2010.®Email chain
includes a report and email
from Gareth Jenkins
offering analysis of Misra
case. Also Mclachlan

report.

220

POL00054267

Memo from Jarnail A Singh
to Gareth Jenkins re.
Regina v Seema Misra
Guildford Crown Court Trial
- 15th March 2010

POL-0050746

221

FUJ00153006

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Thomas Penny re Rv
Seema Misra - Witness
evidence and
investigations

POINQ0159201F

222

FUJ00153005

Criminal Case Study:
Seema Misra - Email from
John Longman to Penny
Thomas, Mark Dinsdale
and Jarnail A Singh re
West Byfleet - 126023

POINQ0159200F

223

POL00054346

Seema Misra Case Study:
Response to Defence
Abuse Skeleton by
Warwick Tatford — (R v

Seema Misra)

POL-0050825

224

FUJ00156128

Seema Misra case study:
Email from Gareth GI
Jenkins to Warwick Tatford
and Penny Thomas re:
REGINA v SEEMA MISRA
GUILDFORD CROWN

POINQ0162322F

Page 267 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

COURT TRIAL - 15TH
MARCH 2010®Contains
Technical Expert Report of

Charles Alastair McLachlan

225

FUJ00153027

Email from Penny Thomas
to Gareth Jenkins re R -v-
Seema Misra Trial - 15
March 2010 - witness

statement assistance

POINQ0159222F

226

FUJ00153029

Seema Misra Case Study -
Email chain from Penny
Thomas to John Longman
cc Jane M Owen re:
REGINA v SEEMA MISRA
GUILDFORD CROWN
COURT TRIAL - 15TH
MARCH 2010

POINQ0159224F

227

FUJ00154689

Seema Misra case study -
Handwritten note reading
"ARQs 436 - 448 West
Byfleet. 1 Dec 06 to 31 Dec
07. Gareth Jenkins
reviewed all txn data &
events when providing txn
analysis. ARQs 449 - 490
Help Desk Call Analysis"

POINQ0160884F

228

POL00054345

Emails on Callender
Square Falkirk Problem
between Gareth Jenkins

POL-0050824

229

POL00001643

Witness statement of

Gareth Jenkins

VIS00002657

230

FUJ00153035

Email from Gareth Jenkins

to Charles McLachlan and

POINQ0159230F

Page 268 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Thomas Penny re Horizon
Architecture Diagrams -
intended to provide a
summary for Prof Charles
McLachlan, expert witness

for R v Seema Misra

231

FUJ00153084

Seema Misra Criminal
Case Study: Email chain
from Charles McLachlan to
Gareth Jenkins re: Further
info for Regina v Seema
Misra Guildford Crown
Court

POINQ0159279F

232

POLO00055059

Email from Issy Hogg to
Jarnail Singh re Seema
Misra - request for
information on reproducible
errors, reconciliation and
transaction corrections,

known error logs etc.

POL-0051538

233

POL00044999

Email from Issy Hogg to
Jarnail Singh re: R v
Seema Misra - Guildford

Crown Court - Trial.

POL-0041478

234

POL00175978

Email from John Longman
to Steve Bradshaw re
REGINA v SEEMA MISRA
- GUILDFORD CROWN
COURT - TRIAL.

POL-0171252

235

FUJ00153159

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Penny Thomas re
requests following experts

meeting - R v Seema Misra

POINQ0159354F

Page 269 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

236

FUJ00153157

Seema Misra Criminal
Case Study: Email chain
from Penny Thomas to
John Longman re: Regina
v Seema Misra - Guildford

Crown Court Trial

POINQ0159352F

237

POL00175988

Email from John
Longman to Thomas
Penny re REGINA v
SEEMA MISRA -
GUILDFORD CROWN
COURT - TRIAL.

POL-0171262

238

FUJ00153170

Seema Misra Criminal
Case Study: Email chain
from Gareth Jenkins to
Penny Thomas re: Regina
v Seema Misra - Guildford
Crown Court - Trial -
Fujitsu System Changes

POINQ0159365F

239

POL00047329

Post Office Appointment
papers re: Mrs Seema
Misra

POL-0043808

240

POL00055100

Emails between John
Longman, Jarnail A Singh
and others, re. Regina V
Seema Misra - Guilford

Crown Court - Trial

POL-0051579

241

FUJ00156200

Email from Penny Thomas
to Sarah Payne, Gareth
Jenkins and John
Budworth re Regina V

Seema Misra - Guildford

POINQ0162394F

Page 270 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Crown Court - Trial -

Fujitsu System Changes

242

FUJ00156216

Seema Misra case study:
Email from Penny Thomas
to John Budworth, Sarah
Payne, Gareth GI Jenkins
and others re: RE: REGINA
v SEEMA MISRA -
GUILDFORD CROWN
COURT - TRIAL -
FUJITSU SYSTEM
CHANGES

POINQ0162410F

243

FUJ00081584

Receipts/Payments
Mismatch issue notes

POINQ0087755F

244

FUJ00154231

Correcting Accounts for
"lost" Discrepancies
Author: Gareth | Jenkins

POINQ0160426F

245

POL00169845

Email meeting invite from
Emma Langfield to lan
Trundell; Alan X Simpson;
Mark X Gibson and others
re Branch Discrepancies

POL-0164586

246

POL00169848

Email from Emma
Langfield to lan Trundell;
Alan X Simpson; Mark X
Gibson and others - re

Branch Discrepancies

POL-0164589

247

POL00169851

Meeting invite from Emma
Langfield to lan Trundell,
Alan Simpson, Mark
Gibson and others re
Branch Discrepancies -

catch up call.

POL-0164592

Page 271 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

248

POL00055410

Email from Rob G Wilson
to Juliet McFarlane and
Jarnail A Singh Re FW:

Branch discrepancy issues

POL-0051889

249

FUJ00156248

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Jarnail Singh, cc Penny
Thomas, Jean-Philippe
Prenovost and others re:
FW: Draft of Final Report

re: Misra

POINQ0162442F

250

POL00055408

Technical expert's report to
the Court prepared by
Charles Alastair
McLachlan, a Director of
Amsphere Consulting Ltd
(draft with comments)

POL-0051887

251

FUJ00122999

Email from Penny Thomas,
Warwick Tatford, Jarnail A
Singh and John Longman
re: Draft Witness
Statement Ver 3.0

POINQ0129213F

252

FUJ00123013

Mrs Seema Misra case
study: Witness Statement
of Gareth Idris Jenkins

POINQ0129227F

253

FUJ00123042

Email from Warwick
Tatford to Grareth Jenkins,
Jarnail A Singh and John
Longman re. 2nd draft
statement with comments

POINQ0129256F

254

FUJ00153366

Seema Misra Criminal
Case Study: Email from
Charles McLachlan to

POINQ0159561F

Page 272 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Gareth Jenkins re: Final

Report re: Misra

255

FUJ00123050

Email from Gareth Idris
Jenkins to Jarnail A Singh,
Warwick Tatford, John
Longman and others re.

Witness statement V0.3

POINQ0129264F

256

FUJ00083737

Witness Statement of
Gareth Idris Jenkins V 5.0

POINQ0089908F

257

FUJ00156267

Email from Gareth GI
Jenkins to Charles
Mclachlan, Warwick
Tatford, Jarnail A Singh
and others re: Further info
re Calendar Square

POINQ0162461F

258

FUJ00083663

Peak Incident Management
System®Call Reference:
PC0126376

POINQ0089834F

259

POL00030298

Addendum to Technical
expert's report to the Court
prepared by Charles
Alastair McLachlan,
Director of Amsphere
Consulting Ltd.

POL-0026780

260

POL00001882

Joint statement to the
Court prepared by Gareth
Jenkins of Fujitsu Ltd and
Charles McLachlan, a
Director of Amsphere
Consulting Ltd.

VIS00002896

261

FUJ00154966

Seema Misra case study:
Email from Penny Thomas

POINQ0161161F

Page 273 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

to Gareth Gl Jenkins re:
West Byfleet Case

262

POL00029406

Tape transcript of R v
Seema Misra Trial in
Guildford Crown Court, 14
October 2010 - Evidence of
Gareth Jenkins

POL-0025888

263

FUJ00122723

Email from David M Jones
to Roger Williams and
David Roberts re West
Byfleet Issues- Seema
Misra

POINQ0128937F

264

POLO00055602

Email from Marilyn
Benjamin to Jones David
M, Re: Regina v Seema
Misra-Guildford Crown
Court-Trial

POL-0052081

265

WITNO0650100

WITNO0650100 - Seema

Misra

WITNO0650100

266

FUJ00123422

Email chain from Penny
Thomas to David Jones re:
Standard Witness
Statement - HNG-X

POINQ0129636F

267

POL00026567

Advice on Evidence ®by
H.M.M Bowyer

POL-0023046

268

POL00141416

Email from Jarnail A Singh
to Andy Cash re Horizon
integrity project

POL-0142801

269

POL00020489

Email chain between Harry
Bowyer, Jarnail Singh,
Andy Cash and Helen
Rose re Helen Rose

disclosures report (defence

POL-0013681

Page 274 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

expert reports & disclosure

requests)

270

FUJ00156639

Email chain from Jarnail A
Singh to Simon baker and
Pete Newsome RE Urgent
Expert Report on horizon

system.

POINQ0162833F

271

POL00096978

Email from Jarnail Signh to
Gareth Jenkins re Horizon
Fujitsu Report VERY
URGENT.

POL-0096561

272

FUJ00156646

Email from Edward Phillips
to David M Jones re: FW:
HORIZON FUJITSU
REPORT VERY URGENT

POINQ0162840F

273

FUJ00155089

Tracker of Horizon Integrity
Offices- re: progress of
litigation cases which
challenge Horizon's

integrity

POINQ0161284F

274

FUJ00156648

Seema Misra Case Study:
Horizon Integrity -
summary report prepared
by Helen Rose, Post Office
Security Team

POINQ0162842F

275

FUJ00156645

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Peter Thompson,
Howard Pritchard, lan T
Turner and cc others re
Horizon Fujitsu report

required for prosecution

POINQ0162839F

276

POLO00096983

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Penny Thomas, Hugh

POL-0096566

Page 275 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Flemington, Martin Smith
and others, re Horizon
Fujitsu Report Very Urgent.

277

FUJ00123917

Fujitsu/Post Office
®Horizon Data Integrity
report describing measures
that are built into Horizon to

ensure data integrity; V1.0

POINQ0130131F

278

FUJ00123918

Draft (v 0.1b) Report by
Gareth Jenkins, "describing
the measures that are built
into Horizon Online to

ensure data integrity"

POINQ0130132F

279

FUJ00123914

Fujitsu/Post
Office®Horizon Integrity
report about investigations
into the integrity of the
Horizon system; V0.1a

POINQ0130128F

280

FUJ00156650

Email from Edward Phillips
to David Jones RE:
Horizon Fujitsu Report
VERY URGENT - Legally
Privileged

POINQ0162844F

281

FUJ00225310

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to James Davidson,
Edward Phillips and cc
Penny Thomas, RE
Horizon Fujitsu Report
Very Urgent

POINQ0231427F

282

POLO0096986

Email from Jarnail Singh to
Gareth Jenkins, Penny

Thomas, Hugh Flemington

POL-0096569

Page 276 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

and others, re: Horizon

Fujitsu Report Very Urgent.

283

POLO0096997

Email chain from Sharron
Jennings to Helen Rose,
Helen Dickinson and Andy
Hayward RE: FW:
HORIZON FUJITSU
REPORT VERY URGENT

POL-0096580

284

POLO0096999

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Jarnail Singh and Martin
Smith, re Horizon Fujitsu
Report Very Urgent.

POL-0096582

285

POL00097008

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Martin Smith, Sharron
Jennings and Rachael
Panter, re Horizon Fujitsu
Report Very Urgent.

POL-0096591

286

FUJ00123982

Email from Sharron L
Jennings to Martin Smith,
Gareth Jenkins and Jarnail
Singh re Horizon Fujitsu
Report Very Urgent

POINQ0130196F

287

FUJ00124012

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Martin Smith, Jarnail
Singh and others re:
Horizon Fujitsu Report

Very Urgent

POINQ0130226F

288

FUJ00124013

Signed Witness Statement

of Gareth Jenkins

POINQ0130227F

289

FUJ00124014

Fujitsu Report: Horizon

Data Integrity v1.0

POINQ0130228F

290

FUJ00124015

Horizon Online Data
Integrity for Post Office Ltd

POINQ0130229F

Page 277 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

291

FUJ00123914

Fujitsu/Post
Office®Horizon Integrity
report about investigations
into the integrity of the

Horizon system; V0.1a

POINQ0130128F

292

POL00097138

Email chain involving
Martin Smith, James
Davidson, Gareth Jenkins
and others. Re: "POL

cases raising Horizon".

POL-0096721

293

POL00097061

Email from Sharron
Jennings to Post Office
Security, Thomas Penny,
Gareth Jenkins and others
re Patel -
POLTD/1112/0107.
Includes discussion of
Gareth Jenkins' witness

evidence in court cases.

POL-0096644

294

FUJ00156640

Email from Simon Baker to
Jarnail A Singh, Gareth
Jenkins and Pete
Newsome Re: URGENT
EXPERT REPORT ON
HORIZON SYSTEM

POINQ0162834F

295

POL00097137

Email chain involving Andy
Cash, Rachael Panter,
Gareth Jenkins and others.
Re: "POL cases raising
Horizon".

POL-0096720

296

FUJ00153986

Khayyam Ishaq, Angela
Sefton and Anne Nield and
Grant Allen Case Study:

POINQ0160181F

Page 278 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

Email chain from Thomas
Penny to Gareth Jenkins
Re: RE: POL cases raising

Horizon®

297

POL00089374

Email chain from Jarnail A
Singh to Rachael Panter,
Andy Cash, Martin Smith
RE: POL cases raising
Horizon

POL-0086349

298

FUJ00156677

Khayyam Ishaq, Ann Nield,
Angela Sefton, Grant Allen
case studies: Email from
Rachael Panter to Gareth
Jenkins, Andrew Bolc,
Andy Cash and others Re:
FW: POL cases raising
Horizon - also regarding
Kim Wylie and Jamie Dixon

POINQ0162871F

299

FUJ00124105

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Andrew Bolc Re:
Sefton&Nield and Grant
Allen

POINQ0130319F

300

FUJ00153881

Email from Gareth GI
Jenkins to Andrew Bolc
and cc: Penny Thomas re:
RE: Post Office Limited v
Grant Allen

POINQ0160076F

301

FUJ00081942

Undated spreadsheet of
PO branches and their
Horizon Migration

Timestamp

POINQ0088113F

302

FUJ00124150

Grant Allen Case Study -

Collection of emails

POINQ0130364F

Page 279 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

between Gareth Jenkins
and Andrew Bolc detailing
Post Office Limited v Grant
Allen

303

POL00089381

Witness Statement of

Gareth Jenkins

POL-0086356

304

POL00089380

Email chain from Gareth
Jenkins to Steve
Bradshaw, RE: FW: Post
Office Limited v Grant
Allen.

POL-0086355

305

FUJ00153884

Email from Andrew Bolc
(Cartwright King) to Gareth
Jenkins re POL v Grant
Allen - Investigator happy
with report

POINQ0160079F

306

FUJ00124171

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Tim Healy, Edward
Phillips, James Davidson
and others detailing the
indictments and summary
of facts for cases

POINQ0130385F

307

POL00059597

Email chain from Rachael
Panter to Gareth Jenkins

Re Horizon cases

POL-0056076

308

POL00059338

Email from Martin Smith to
Steve Bradshaw re
prosecution case -

Khayyan Ishaq

POL-0055817

309

POL00089405

Email from Rachael Panter
to Jarnail Singh, re:
Various POL cases related

to Horizon

POL-0086380

Page 280 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

310

POL00058244

Defence Case Statement in
the case of R v Khayyam
Ishaq

POL-0054723

311

POL00059481

Email to Martin Smith from
Rachael Panter
®Re:Various POL cases
related to Horizon

POL-0055960

312

POL00089427

Email chain from Jarnail
Singh to Gareth Jenkins,
Rachael Panter, Andy
Cash, and others re:

Horizon cases.

POL-0086402

313

POL00119430

Email from Martin Smith to
Sarah Porter and cc Steve
Bradshaw re: Post Office
Ltd - 24676 - Prosecution
of Ishaq

POL-0119349

314

POLO0059602

Comments on Ishaq Docs
by Gareth Jenkins

POL-0056081

315

POL00095417

Email from Jarnail A Singh
to Gareth Jenkins, Rachael
Panter, Andy Cash and
others re: Horizon Cases
(Ishaq and Grant Allen)

POL-0095000

316

POL00059808

Email chain between
Rachael Potter and Barry
James Robson®Re: Wylie
- further requests for

disclosure

POL-0056287

317

FUJ00153977

Khayyam Ishaq case study:
Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Thomas Penny pasting

internal chat function

POINQ0160172F

Page 281 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

between them re Ishaq

case and ARQs needed

318

FUJ00153990

Email chain between
Rachael Panter and Gareth
Jenkins re ISHAQ-
Addendum DCS.odf

POINQ0160185F

319

FUJ00153991

Regina v Khayyam Ishaq -
Addendum Defence Case

Statement

POINQ0160186F

320

FUJ00153995

Criminal case study of
Khayyam Ishaq: Email from
Gareth Jenkins to Penny
Thomas Re Conversation
with Thomas Penny,
Jenkins Gareth Gl

POINQ0160190F

321

FUJ00153997

Email chain from Gareth
Jenkins to Rachael Panter,
Cc Penny Thomas, Jarnail
Singh and Martin Smith, re
Horizon cases.

POINQ0160192F

322

POL00059874

Khayyam Ishaq case study:
Comments on Ishaq DCS
Addendum

POL-0056353

323

FUJ00156747

Khayyam Ishaq Case
study: Email from Martin
Smith to Gareth Jenkins
RE: Ishaq defence report
attached.

POINQ0162941F

324

FUJ00154006

Email from Beverley
Ibbotson (PKF (UK) LLP) to
Gareth Jenkins re
Khayyam Ishaq - Report

and appendices attached

POINQ0160201F

Page 282 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

325

FUJ00124338

Emails from Gareth
Jenkins to Rachael Panter,
Mark Ford and Martin
Smith RE FW: My

comments on your report

POINQ0130552F

326

FUJ00124337

Comments on Defence
Expert's Report by Gareth
Jenkins - R v Khayyam
Ishaq.

POINQ0130551F

327

FUJ00154064

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Beverley Ibbotson (PKF
(UK) LLP) re: P32.

POINQ0160259F

328

POL00059942

Email from Rachael Panter
to Jarnail A Singh, Re: R V
Khayyam Ishaq

POL-0056421

329

POL00059927

Expert Report of Beverley
Ibbotson & joint statement
of Beverley Ibbotson and
Gareth Jenkins re Rv

Ishaq

POL-0056406

330

POL00060113

Witness Statement re:
Gareth Idris JENKINS

POL-0056592

331

FUJ00155116

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Torstein Godeseth,

David Hinde, David Cooke
and others RE: Trial Over

POINQ0161311F

332

WITNO1700100

WITNO1700100 - Khayyam
Ishaq

WITNO1700100

333

POL00089394

Email from Gareth Jenkins
to Andrew Bolc, re: Sefton
& Nield

POL-0086369

334

POL00089395

Witness Statement of
Gareth Idris Jenkins

POL-0086370

Page 283 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

335

POL00059424

Witness Statement of

Gareth Idris Jenkins

POL-0055903

336

FUJ00156849

Khayyam Ishaq, Ann Nield
and Angela Sefton Case
studies: Email from
Rachael Panter to Gareth
Jenkins, cc'ing Martin
Smith, Jarnail A Singh and
others RE: Outstanding

Cases

POINQ0163043F

337

FUJ00156889

Email from Michael Harvey
to Davies Jones re expert

report on Horizon system.

POINQ0163083F

338

FUJ00156893

Email from Michael Harvey
to David Jones, Andrew
Hooles, David Roberts and
others re Expert on the
Horizon System - Subject
to Common Interest
Privilege - Legally
Privileged

POINQ0163087F

339

FUJ00156908

Fujitsu Note regarding
Terms of Reference for
Horizon Integrity Audit for

“Mediation process”

POINQ0163102F

340

FUJ00156909

Email chain from Michael
Harvey to Rodric Williams,
cc James Davidson, Pete
Newsome - Re: Expert on
the Horizon System -
Subject to Common

Interest Privilege

POINQ0163103F

Page 284 of 285
WITNO0460300
WITNO00460300

341

FUJ00156923

Email from Michael Harvey
to David Roberts and David
M Jones re Horizon
Integrity Challenges, Core
audit process, Second
Sight engagement, and the
mediation process

POINQ0163117F

Page 285 of 285
