WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

Witness Name: David McDonnell
Statement No.: WITNO062_01

Exhibits: WITN0062_01/1 to
WITNO062_01/5

Dated: 3 November 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF DAVID MCDONNELL

1, MR DAVID MCDONNELL, will say as follows:
INTRODUCTION

1. 1am a former sub-contractor of ICL Pathway and held the position of deputy
development manager and then development manager of the EPOS Counter
team.

2. This witness statement is made to assist the Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry
(the “Inquiry”) with the matters set out in the Rule 9 Request dated

24.10.2022 (the “Request”).

PROFESSIONAL BACKGROUND

3. | completed a BSc Hons in Computer Science at Sheffield Polytechnic in
1987. | then spent over 11 years working as a software engineer and then
development manager, starting with 3 years or so at ICL Bracknell.

4. | would characterise the IT industry at this time as expanding and maturing
rapidly, which caused the industry to move away from mathematicians,

Page 1 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

physicists and qualified computer science graduates. This was accelerated by
the proliferation of agencies who pushed into the middle and only cared about

the body count and not the quality of the hires.

RECRUITMENT BY ICL PATHWAY

5.

8.

| was hired by ICL Pathway on a contract basis around Easter time of 1998 by
Mr Chris Humphries (full time permanent employee of ICL Pathway) who was
development departmental manager and assigned as deputy development
manager under Steve Warwick (development manager - contractor). Chris
Humphries reported to Terry Austin (contractor) the program manager.
My recruitment interview was several hours long, 1-to-1 with Chris Humphries
during which he expressed several deep concerns over the quality of the
EPOS team and the code being produced. The interview took on more of a
nature of management discussion on how to fix such a problem. Upon my
recruitment, | was instructed to work on the EPOS Counter component of the
Horizon system.
The team comprised Steve Warwick as Project Manager, 8 or so developers
and 1 technical assistant, Brian Orzell. Initially after starting for ICL Pathway, |
reported to Steve Warwick daily and to Chris Humphries weekly, plus the
project meetings with Terry Austin. | worked at ICL Pathway for 2 years or so.
Within days of starting it became very obvious that:-

a. Steve Warwick had immense knowledge of how the post office worked

but was not technical and had no formal qualifications in software

development.

Page 2 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

b. There were no development standards or methodology, coding
practices, peer reviews, unit testing standards, design specifications in
place. In fact this team was like the wild west.

c. Several of the development team were not capable of producing
professional code.

9. It was a company wide well known fact that there were several thousand
outstanding bugs in the EPOS system. The team was the joke of the building.
This was known up to the highest level including Fujitsu Japan because they

sent over 3 coders to perform an audit.

THE HORIZON IT SYSTEM

10.At the point | was recruited to join ICL Pathway, | understood that it was a
Government PFI, the Labour government flagship. It had been through some
turbulent times and was in trouble. When | joined, the Horizon project was in
final development and still under testing.

11.1 set out the concerns | had with the development of the Horizon system in the
report | co-authored, ‘Report on the EPOSS PinlCL Task Force (Ref:
IA/REP/008) (WITNO062_01/1: FUJO0080690). These concerns were based
on personal professional observations and the opinions of most of the rest of
the building, some 200+ people.

12.1 understood the underlying cause of concerns to be that the bid had been
won using a prototype which had then been further developed upon instead of
starting afresh properly. Additionally, there had been a lack of formalised,

signed-off designs, a lack of discipline, a lack of professional qualifications in

Page 3 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

key positions, a total disengagement of the chief architect Gareth Jenkins,
poor coding standards, no methodology in place and no unit testing. The
issues were critical, making the product unstable and were known to everyone

in the building.

INITIAL ASSESSMENT

13. The impression | formed of the management of the project and the
professionalism of those working on the project in the very early stages of my
employment at ICL Pathway was that some were good and cared, and were
trying to remedy concerns, and some were only there to align politically and fill
their pockets.

14.1 spent several weeks auditing the code, working with team members to
understand their views and concerns if any, listened to as many people on the
project as possible in order to ascertain where the problem lay. Once | had an
understanding | tried to engage the management and chief architect and get
them to understand the gravity of the situation in emails, verbal conversations
and telephone calls.

15. The cause of the concerns about the Horizon system are set out in the report |
co-authored, (WITN0062_01/1; FUJ00080690) which was produced as a
result of the task force initiative.

16.1 also requested access to a copy of the design specification and all existing
documentation for the EPOS system. | did this because it's the starting point
of all engineering — it sets out what you are trying to build. It is also important

in managing and meeting the client's expectations and demands. Some of this

Page 4 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

documentation was located and | was given access to that, but it was totally
out of date.

17.1 was able to glean that ICL Pathway had secured the award of the contract
prior to my involvement through use of a rapid prototype demo. Upon securing
the award of the contract, | would have expected ICL Pathway to produce a
signed-off design, define a methodology and set of processes for every step
of the design, development and acceptance process, ensure these were
adhered to, put in place qualified persons at all levels and ensure they are all
following the agreed processes. | was not around at the time of the
procurement or early design stage and so am unable to comment on how this
was done. | can only say that | heard they took the prototype and built on top
of it. Looking at the code | would say that this is evident.

18.So far as | was aware, ICL Pathway had in fact dived in and progressed the
prototype into development with no structures or process around it. This
approach is fatal in a large project with several integrations. The client was
allowed to scope creep and retroactively add to and change the requirements
which was accommodated by Steve Warwick. The developers had no agreed
path, plan or process to follow and so everyone did it their own way. There is
a methodology called “Rapid prototyping” which used to be used to establish
requirements and design, but building out a full build project on top of a
skeleton prototype, which does not have the design and engineering
foundations in place, is always going to lead to a confused outcome.
Prototypes are built to learn what works and what doesn’t, what is required
and what isn’t, what the client wants and what he doesn't. It is not usually

intended that the basic prototype framework is ever used as the basis for the

Page 5 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

main build out. There has since been the evolution of the “Rapid prototyping”
methodology into something called “Agile”. Agile was not around in the UK in
1998 and was certainly not used on the Pathway project. Agile, despite its
name, has a strict set of rules and processes none of which were used and in
fact the most important word in Agile is discipline which was certainly not
present.

19.Upon completing my initial assessment of the system, | concluded that 70% of
it could be saved, fixed and tidied up, 20% needed a lot more work but could
be kept, but that the critical Cash Account module was beyond repair and
must be re-written. There was a layer of design missing from the EPOS
system which would ensure only validated messages could be written to the
message store. There should have been an Application Programming
Interface layer between the code and the message store which ensured that
only correct and validated messages could be written to the riposte message
store instead of the freestyle that was currently allowed. This freestyle was
like having a graffiti wall instead of a library with the Dewey system. Instead of
each module reading and writing messages to the message store in a
freestyle manner they should talk only to this Application Programming
Interface which would only accept and reply to strictly controlled, documented
and audited read/write requests and it itself would read and write the
messages to and from the message store. This way only messages that were
structured correctly and had valid content as set out in the data dictionary
specification could be written to the message store.

20. In fact the message store often contained hundreds of junk, debug or test

messages from different modules.

Page 6 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

21.It was also possible for anyone to read and write anything into a message and
post it to the message store outside of the EPOS modules. This was as
technique used on occasion by the support team to correct erroneous cash
balances.

22.1 reported my conclusions to the following people:

a. Steve Warwick, who ducked and dived and swerved the issue;

b. Chris Humphries, who agreed and tried to influence change but was
blocked by Terry Austin and higher levels;

c. Terry Austin, who blatantly refused to allow it to be re-written;

d. Gareth Jenkins, who denied the issues point-blank, ran off to hide in
Bracknell and avoided contact with the team.

23. After some weeks of raising my concerns to Steve Warwick and Chris
Humphries and trying to work with Steve Warwick and the team my views
came to a watershed moment when Steve Warwick left for a 3-week vacation.
During this time there were a number of category A serious defects that came
up regarding the Cash Account module which was renown for being flaky. |
finally had the opportunity to get Terry Austin to understand the gravity of the
situation. This conversation gave rise to the “Task Force’ initiative with myself
and Jan Holmes in charge and which led to the document (WITN0O062_01/1;
FUJ00080690) being produced.

24.1 managed to instigate the Task Force which repaired 70% of the system and
got another 20% under repair. During this time, | co-authored document
(WITNO062_01/1; FUJ00080690) - a report to all management detailing the
issues and concerns with recommendations. | built a test unit inside the dev

team staffed by a good test resource. | made the developers responsible for

Page 7 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

their code and resultant bugs and | brought in development rollout plans and
methodologies. | put change and release management software (Product
Change Management System, a branded software control system) in place to
track the releases and bug fixes, and insisted on documenting bug fixes and
including these in a formal release note for each software release we did. |
also fired some people and hired some people.

25. At the end of the Task Force (several weeks) we had fixed or aged out
maybe 70% of the bugs but having studied the code and the message store
beneath it | made 2 further recommendations:-

a. The design of the system was missing a layer. There should have been
an Application Programming Interface layer between the code and the
message store, which | explain in paragraph 19, above. | fought hard to
get Terry Austin and Gareth Jenkins (chief architect) to understand and
agree to this. Terry Austin refused to allow this on cost and time basis
and Gareth Jenkins refused to accept this for reasons that he never
made clear. From this point on we made several attempts to get Gareth
Jenkins to engage with the team and the problem and to lend his
support to improving the quality etc but he merely became more and
more evasive and unavailable. Without his backing | was unable to
convince Terry Austin.

b. At the very least the cash account module needed to be re-written

which was not a big job. | estimated 6 weeks to complete.

The difference between my initial findings and those after the Task Force,
was confirmation that the Cash Account needed to be re-written. | had

been able to use some of the task force time and resource to confirm this

Page 8 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

with professional and qualified opinion from independent developers from

another team.

26.1 argued for a re-write of the cash account with Chris Humphries, who agreed,
and also with Terry Austin, who refused. Instead he moved me out of the
EPOS team (see paragraph 39) replacing me with Phil Hemmingway, who put
the system live under Terry Austin’s instruction.

27.At the end of the Task Force period Terry Austin had decided on a company
reshuffle and | was called to his office where he asked me to formally take
over as development manager of the EPOS team. | said | would accept on the
one condition that we re-write the Cash Account module and assured him it
was a relatively straight forward task, no more than 6 weeks. He became
extremely irritated and the meeting came to a swift close.

28.The next thing | knew Terry Austin had appointed Phil Hemmingway as
development manager of the EPOS team. Phil Hemmingway was a contractor
and long-time associate of Terry Austin. Phil Hemmingway had worked for me
as a business analyst during the Task Force. To my knowledge Phil
Hemmingway had no formal qualifications in software engineering or design
and it became clear that his role was to get it rolled out of the door as is with
no questions asked. THIS IS THE MOMENT THAT THE DISASTER
BECAME UNNAVOIDABLE.

29.1 was moved off to manage a small self contained EPOS Logistics Feeder
Service project which was done with zero defects at point of going live.

30.At this point in time and as a result of the reshuffle, all of the project teams in
the building worked out that this was now a fait accompli, this was no longer a

serious project and there was little point in speaking out. The culture changed

Page 9 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

to “fill your pockets lads”, a smash and grab trolley dash before it came to an

end.

EPOS COUNTER SYSTEM

31. The EPOS Counter System is the Electronic Point of Sale; it’s the touch-
screen interface that the Post Office staff use to sell all the products through.
All EPOS modules read and wrote messages into the message store, allowing
them to be audited and picked up by other modules.

32.In terms of the establishment of the EPOSS PinlCL Task Force (the “Task
Force”), the PinICL system had always been in place and was administered
by another team in the same building. During the Task Force the PINICL
admin team assisted with managing and tracking the different stacks and
producing reports and statistics on demand. Anne Croft was a member of this
team.. They split the stacks into different categories so that we could manage
the thousands of bugs more easily. The purpose of the Task Force was a 6-
week blitz on the outstanding bugs. | was allowed to pick several team
members from other teams to help and was given priority on all resource. We
numbered maybe 20 in total with satellite help. Its purpose was to get the
EPOS code into a good enough state to be able to move on in a managed
way. At the outset of this, | was threatened with violence by an individual with
a reputation for violence and who was a long-time associate of Terry Austin
for taking his best 2 people into the Task Force.

33. Everybody on the Task Force was actually enthusiastic and happy to see that

finally something was getting done. Some on the periphery were sceptical, but

Page 10 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

mostly we were well supported. Everyone worked really hard for 6 weeks,
long hours and good commitment. | consider the Task Force was successful
in meeting its objectives, with the exception of the Cash Account.

34.In Autumn 1998, | considered that the EPOSS product, its code and design,
was better than it had been 6 months previously. The code quality being
released was better. The number of critical bugs being raised was way down
and manageable due to it now being tested before it left and expectations
being higher and processes in place. The release process was also now very
good but the Cash Account was still broken.

35.1 attributed the deficiencies in the EPOS product to poor and unqualified
middle and senior management, most of whom had little interest in following a
proper design and development lifecycle, fixing issues, had limited or no
technical skills that | saw and who only played the politics and pushed for a
deadline. There was a failure to implement proper development lifecycles
processes, such as development methodologies, coding standards and the
absence of design documents. By ‘middle and senior management, | refer to
Terry Austin, Mike Coombs, Gareth Jenkins — those in my direct line of
interest in the EPOS side. The other management on other lines were also
aware. These are the people who were responsible for hiring the right people
and putting all these quality assurance processes in place. If you’re a coder in
the trenches and you're told to do something, you get on and do it, it is very
difficult to change a whole culture from this level. The developers should be
there to code and be free to adhere to professional standards supported by

middle and senior management. The project and program managers should

Page 11 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

be the ones ensuring that those standards are in place, understood and
adhered to.

36.1 have been referred to the Report, document (WITN0062_01/1;
FUJ00080690), and specifically the “PinICL fixing culture”. In the absence of a
design, the joke was that PinICL no.1 was “There is no system.”, the fix being
“Build a system.” etc. Instead of a PinICL being raised which referred to a
signed-off design specification as the golden source, they often expressed
opinion, preference or even new features.

37.1 have also been referred to the term “code decay”, also in (WITNO062_01/1;
FUJ00080690). Code decay can occur and evolve in many ways. When a
piece of software is written against a specification, it should be clean and
clear and comply with the design, easy to read, with changes being well
documented and auditable. In many EPOS cases code was changed without
any audit trail, it would cause it to become unreadable and often contradictory
spaghetti. With no coding standards to comply to, no peer reviews and no
accountability, there was a total lack of discipline.

38.In Autumn 1998, | told Gareth Jenkins, Terry Austin, Chris Humphries, Phil
Hemmingway, Steve Warwick and many others several times that the Cash
Account must be rewritten. | also wrote the report referred to above and sent
several emails. This resulted in me being moved from the EPOS team for my
noise. In particular, | raised my concerns with the following people:

a. Chris Humphries, who agreed but was blocked;
b. Terry Austin, who got angry, removed me from the team and moved
me elsewhere;

c. Phil Hemmingway, who agreed in private but put it live anyway.

Page 12 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

39.As a result of the concerns | had raised and for insisting on a re-write | was
moved out of the way for not saying the right answer. Phil Hemmingway
replaced me.

40.ICL’s parent company, Fujitsu, sent an audit team of 2 or 3 developers from
Japan to audit the code. | showed them where it was and what | thought. They
worked for 2 days or so looking and then disappeared.

41.1 have observed several witness testimonies referring to the proposed “re-
write” as a big deal, a big job that could potentially introduce more problems
than it would fix. This was not necessarily true and indicates either a basic
misunderstanding of how the EPOSS system was built or even potentially
suggests an attempt to obfuscate the issue. The EPOSS system was modular
and what the other engineers and | were proposing as an immediate action
was a re-write of ONLY the cash account module. It would have been
possible to write a new, second version of this module alone leaving all of the
other code untouched. As this module was a batch job usually run out of
hours it did not interact with the other modules in the system and therefore
there would have been almost zero chance of it causing any regression to the
other parts of the system. It would even have been possible to have a second
“shadow” cash account run alongside the original on the counters in order to
prove it worked before jumping horses onto the new one. This would have
mitigated almost any risk of regression. This work we estimated could have
been done in maybe as little as 6 weeks or so. It could have been done as a
standalone piece of work without interfering with any of the other EPOSS
development. It would have then been possible to follow on by rewriting any

other modules we felt necessary 1 at a time if required. Had we been allowed

Page 13 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

to do this | am certain that we would not be here today. At no point was
anyone proposing we re-write the whole system from scratch in one go.
Having re-read the initial task force report (WITN0062_01/1; FUJO0080690) |
do not think that this was made clear in this initial document itself but it was
made very clear in the recommendations which followed as well as all of the
conversations we had when trying to convince management that this was the
only course of action.

42.1 would add that given EPOSS was primarily a financial accounting system
then the priority should have been given to ensuring that the cash account
was accurate and reliable. If the system was slow or occasionally blue
screened or suffered from other non critical defects then although the users
may have been inconvenienced at least they would not be getting prosecuted.

43.1 would like to state that there were no diagnostic tools provided by Escher or
built in house which enabled L1,2,3 support or even the developers to trace
and diagnose issues with the cash account balancing. This is evidenced by
Pinicl WITNO062_01/5; FUJ00067416 which clearly demonstrates the team’s
inability to trace any fault in the accounting. This was probably one of the
biggest deficiencies in the design in my view and | asked several times to be

allowed the time and resource to build something but was told no

REASSIGNMENT

44.1 did not remain assigned to the EPOS Counter System on completion of the
Task Force, | was moved out to lead the Logistics Feeder Service team then

AWS after Logistics Feeder Service went live with no issues. In each case |

Page 14 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

was moved by Terry Austin, to the LFS team and then AWS team after | put
the LFS system into final test and pre-release. | consider the reason for my
reassignment was that | refused to put the system live in the state it was.

45.Phil Hemmingway was responsible for ongoing development of the EPOS
Counter System after September 1998 under Terry Austin.

46.1 had a small team of 2 really good guys in the Logistics Feeder Service. We
had a great design document from Vin Patel. | did a small amount of
development work in C++ then mostly project management and release
management work. Then | was moved up to the AWS team.

47.1 did not have any concerns about the Logistics Feeder Service. | did have
concerns about the AWS. This was managed by Steve Doyle. It was mostly a
pretty good, well written system, but when I was ordered by Steve Doyle to
release a new version of the software that was not complete and had known
bugs, in order to meet a deadline, | refused. Shortly after this | was replaced
by a staffer from Bracknell called Nick Lawson (although I’m not sure of his

last name). Then | left the company.

CORE SYSTEMS RELEASE PLUS (CSR+)

48.1 have been referred to documents (WITN0062_01/2; FUJ00079782),
(WITNO0062_01/3; FUJ00079783) and (WITNO062_01/4; WITN04600104). |
did not have any involvement in the development audit of CSR+ and/or in the
production of the Report on EPOSS Solutions dated 21 September 1999.
They were all done by Jan Holmes who was my partner in the Task Force and

produced these as a result of everything we learned during the Task Force

Page 15 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

and after. | may have answered some questions for him or contributed
verbally.

49.1 was indirectly responsible for the recommendations made in this report to re-
design and re-write EPOSS (WITN0062_01/3; FUJ00079783). This
conclusion was drawn from the work Jan Holmes and | did in 1998. | was
consulted verbally and my recommendations hadn't changed. This was a year
later and by then | had moved to AWS. Jan Holmes authored this report and
made these recommendations in September 1999.

50.In respect of the decisions taken by the senior management within ICL
Pathway upon receipt of these recommendations, | did not witness this first
hand but was told by several who did that Peter Mandelson, the Trade and
Industry Secretary, had been in the building again and made it clear it had to
meet the deadlines or Blair would not be happy so Terry Austin and Mike

Coombs were pushing it out regardless.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POST OFFICE COUNTERS LIMITED, THE

GOVERNMENT AND ICL PATHWAY

51.1 witnessed the liaison between representatives of Post Office Counters
Limited and ICL Pathway during the design and development of the Horizon
system daily, between Steve Warwick and a POCL lady. The discourse and
interaction was always very good. Post Office Counters Limited had a
presence in the building and POCL and ICL Pathway met almost daily. |
attended some of these meetings. | understood that the POCL rep Barbara

Longley was in attendance and Steve Warwick mostly from ICL Pathway.

Page 16 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

52.POCL knew that there were problems with EPOSS and particularly around the
Cash Account but | think Pathway did a good job of screening it so they never
knew just how many bugs were outstanding. They did know the Cash Account
didn’t work as evidenced by the PinICL document shown to Terry Austin by
the Inquiry when he gave oral evidence on 27 October 2022. This is
document (WITN0062_01/5; FUJ00067416).

53.In terms of the extent to which POCL were involved in the testing of the
Horizon IT system, they did acceptance testing but it was more around the
look and feel and features rather than resilience testing or deep dive testing. |
understood the representatives of POCL from their oversight of testing were
generally happy with the look, feel and features. | don’t know if they ever
tested the Cash Account.

54. During my time at ICL Pathway, | saw Peter Mandelson twice in the building
but did not attend the meetings. | was told by someone who was there that he

said it has to go live and they told him what he wanted to hear.

TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT WITH ICL PATHWAY

55.Whilst working for Steve Doyle in the AWS team, | was instructed to release a
piece of software that was not complete, untested and had known bugs. |
refused and shortly after | was replaced by an ICL permanent member of staff
from Bracknell — Nick Lawson (I am not sure of the last name). After my time
with ICL Pathway, | moved to another job with CSC developing Thames
Water billing system followed by 2 years in Tokyo with Merryll Lynch on their

equities and derivative trading floor. In the years after leaving ICL Pathway, |

Page 17 of 19
WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

worked mostly in the banking industry on financial systems, trading floors,
equities and derivative trading/wealth management systems in Paris, London
and Switzerland for tier 1 institutions such as Santander, Credit Suisse,

Natixis and UBS.

THE UNFOLDING SCANDAL

56.1 became aware of the unfolding Horizon scandal the day | joined. Then after

it went live | was living abroad so first heard that the post office were

prosecuting peo

57.My actions during my time there are previously documented. Outside of my

time there and outside of the project,

advised a QC Barrister who was representing a client on a murder charge

where the main thrust of prosecution case was that he stole money from the

EPOS counter which was his main motive for the crime. i

RO

Statement of Truth

| believe the content of this statement to be true.

Dated: 3 November 2022

Page 18 of 19
Index to First Witness Statement of Mr David McDonnell

WITNO0620100
WITNO0620100

No.

Exhibit

Document

Control Number

URN

Number

Description

WITNO062_01/1

Report on the
EPOSS PinlCL
Task Force (Ref:
IA/REP/008)

POINQ0086861F

FUJ00080690

WITNO062_01/2

ICL Pathway CSR+
Development Audit
v1 dated 28/10/99
(Ref: IA/REP/015)

POINQ0085953F

FUJ00079782

WITNO062_01/3

ICL Pathway
Schedule of
Corrective Actions
re CSR+
Development Audit
dated 22/11/99
(Ref: IA/CAP/008)

POINQO0085954F

FUJ00079783

WITNO062_01/4

ICL Pathway
Schedule of
Corrective Actions:
CSR+ Development
Audit v2.0 dated
10/05/00 (Ref:
IA/CAP/008)

WITN04600104

WITNO062_01/5

Error Log
PC0045061

POINQ0075856F

FUJ00067416

Page 19 of 19
