WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

Witness Name: John Meagher
Statement No.:

Exhibits: WITN0415_01/1 -
Dated: 13 Sep 2022

POST OFFICE HORIZON IT INQUIRY

FIRST WITNESS STATEMENT OF JOHN MEAGHER

|, JOHN MEAGHER, will say as follows:

BACKGROUND

1. The Inquiry has asked me to set outa brief professional background and the
background to my involvementin the Horizon project. | started my working
career in the early 1970s in the upstream section of the oil and gas industry
where | was involved in logistics and planning services for the construction and
commissioning of off-shore platforms. Following a downtum in the en ergy
industry in the mid-eighties | moved into Project man agementconsulting and
worked on a variety of large transformational Projects such as the creation of
FirstDirect bank, the privatisation of the Central Electricity Generating Board
(CEGB) and the creation of National Gridas a separate company. | holda BSc

in Technology [Open] anda Diploma in System Practice.

2. | joined the Post Office circa 1990 as a contractor to provide project management

skills. | worked on a number of Projects most notably as project manager for the

Page 14 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

automation of the bill payments business before being invited to become a staff
member. | subsequently applied in 1994 to join the Horizon programme and was

accepted by the then senior Post Office person Bob King.

PROCUREMENT

3. The method of procurementwas predetermined as a private finance initiative
(PFI). This was novel to us Participants butthe project had engaged an outside
consultancy, Kermon, with expertise in procurementto provide guidance. This
team instructed us that the approach for PFI was for the contracting authority
(CA) to describe the service it requires and not attempt to describe a system.

The idea being that the CA should write output-based specifications and the
supplier should be allowed to use its innovation to deliver. In other words, the CA

should describe whatit wanted not howit should be delivered.

4. The Inquiry has asked how prepared were POL for the automation project at the
Procurementstage. At the onset of the project the Post Office (PO) strategy
group had envisioned a role for PO ina digital age. However, the existing PO
processes were arcane and to achieve the strategic vision would require
extensive business process reengineeri ng. The PO strategy team wanted to
contract for a service based on reengineered business Processes but given the
time that would be required to reengineer those processes and the fact that
Horizon was already up and running, this would never have been possible. PO
did not wantto give the Benefits Agency (BA) any reason for delay which might

have provided them an opportu nity to move its business away from PO as the

Page 2 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

channel for paying benefits. The need to move Horizon forward and the inability
of PO to make changes to its business Processes resulted in the complex legacy

Processes being encoded into the Horizon solution.

. The Inquiry asked whether there was discussion about PO's requirements and if!
was involved in them. PO drafted into the Project staff with sufficient business
knowledge and technical skills to write its requirements. This created some
inherent conflict between the PFI method and the requirements as PO's
requirements were in man y areas, particularly accountin g, unique and therefore

needed to be drafted in detail. | did not draft requirements.

. The Inquiry has asked, what technical risks were identified in ICL Pathway's
Proposed solution. As with the other bidders, risks against the technical solution
and the competency of Pathway were identified, | don’trecall specific risks
although Iremember that Escher — a Path way subcontractor — was identified as a
risk due to its small size. Following contract award, Pathway provided papers on
how these risks were being managed and these were allocated to owners within
the PDA to followup on. However, by this time events had already superseded
these risks and some had come to Pass as live issues and were being managed

as such.

. The Inquiry has asked what processes were followed in order to arrive at the
decision to select ICL Pathway, the outcome and my role. The process of

evaluation of the bids was both quantitative and qualitative, this process was
Page 3 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

developed by the procurement consultants. The quantitative was finan cial and
risk transfer and the qualitative reviewed the suitability and fit of the proposed
supplier and its solutions. | was part of the qualitative evaluation team. We
travelled to the bidder's offices and reference sites where they described their
Products, their processes and their experience and how they would manage the
Project. Following receipt of the formal proposals | was part of a team that
evaluated the proposals and marked them against criteria and weightings
designed by the consultants, My recollection is that Pathway did not score as
well as the other two under the qualitative markings but emerged the winner
because it was prepared to accept a greater portion of risk than its competitors in
the process. It’s worth noting here thata large proportion of the solution being
Proposed was to deliver the requirements of the BA. It's possible, although one

can't draw firm conclusions, thatif evaluated solely on PO's requirements the

outcome may have been different.

DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
SSL EVELOPMENT

8. The Inquiry has asked me a number of questions related to the PO’s Transaction
Information Processing (TIP) system. TIP was the interfacing system to receive
and validate the data feed from Horizon. Technical and application interface
specs therefore needed to be agreed between Fujitsu and PO. PO had
established an in-house Project team to develop TIP and our job in the PDA was

to facilitate agreement between the parties

Page 4 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

9. The Inquiry has asked to whatextent was the feedback obtained from sub-

Postmasters during the developmentof the IT system listened to and acted upon

for which Ihave no recollection.

10. The Inquiry has asked what caused changes to be made to the Operation of the
Logistics Feeder Service in 1999 and 2000. | have no clear recollection of
specific changes but | do remember that Pathway was concemed with the
amountof reference data that was being fed to their system much of which was
not relevant to Horizon and there may have been changes to alter that. The
Inquiry also asked if business needs and financial pressures affect negotiations
with Pathway. I'm unclear what relevan ce this question has in the context of the
preceding question butthe Logistic Feeder System was a relatively simple
system upon which both parties relied to ensure that Horizon used up-to-date

business data.

RE-PLANNING EXERCISE

11. The Inquiry has asked the reason(s) for the no-fault re-plan of the project in
February 1997 and whatunderstanding | had of technical issues in February
1997. There were repeated and extensive slippages by Pathway and | can’t
Separate this replan from others that occurred. | recall the independent review by
PA Consulting later in 1997 for which |was interviewed by PA Con sulting and!
welcomed the report's findings which made clear the problems that existed and
how these had come about but offered little in terms of improvements and noway

out of the increasing difficulties. As! will mention in other paris of this statement

Page 5 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

Pathway were opaque regarding their technical problems so | can’tcomment on

technical problems that existed in 1997,

PILOT AND TESTING

12. The Inquiry has asked about the Initial Go Live (“IGL”) Pilot and the associated
testing. In technical terms the software release in 1996 was inconsequential. It
was primarily a PR exercise and as such worked well. Butit only paid one
benefit type to a small number of recipients and utilised none of whatwould
become the operational systems. It distracted from the Primary objective and
wasted valuable time and resources. | don’t recall what the testing strategy was,

that question is better directed at the test team.

13. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the purpose of, and the processes to be
followed by, the PINICL Impact Assessment Team, how effective it was and what
role | played. The purpose of the PINICL Impact Assessment Team was to judge
ifit were possible (i.e., was the business impact acceptable?) for fixes to known
faults to be either deferred or temporarily managed through a ‘work-around’. The
reason for this was to allow Pathway flexibility in their workload so as to
concentrate on more serious challenges such that time scales could be met. The
Inquiry has additionally asked me questions regarding the Known Problem
Register (KPR). Issues that were submitted to the PINICL Impact Assessment
Team (see above) and accepted by that team as having sufficiently low business
impact as to be manageable through a work-around would be entered on the

KPR and form part of the release notes when the associated functionality was

Page 6 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

released to testing or live environments. By definition these known problems
were low impact and agreed as such by the CAs. They would have attracted little
attention, given the preponderance of significantissues and | have no recollection

of its subsequent use or outcome.

. The Inquiry has asked me to explain the problems faced by the Horizon project
between the spring and autumn of 1998, This is a very broad question. It was
difficult to gain any concrete understanding of the causes for Pathway’s
slippages. | don’trecall if Pathway owned upto the problems it was having
internally or with its subcontractors which we only discovered anecdotally.
Pathway tended to ‘shut up shop’ when enquiries were made about their
subcontractors. The PDA were given little insight of Pathway's technical issues.
This had been Pathway's default behaviour. The Inquiry has asked about the
role of the PO Assurance team. The report Final Evaluation and Selection: Final
Evaluation Team Report dated 28 Apr 1996 (See POL00028152, section 9.7)
Noted that “The group recognised that an award to Pathway would imply a need
for a proactive management stance by sponsors...". As such the Purpose of the
Assurance team was to provide the sponsors with confidence thatthe emerging
system was compliantwith the requirements and to assist Path way by answering
all questions they may have in interpreting and understanding requirements.
However, Pathway denied the Assurance team access to application design
documents (See POL00028587 [WITN0415_01/1]) which we requested citing our
need to provide PO with ongoing assurance and to provide Pathway with early
notification of any misunderstandings or misinterpretation by them of the

requirements. Pathway repeatedly blocked such requests citing inability to do so

Page 7 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

under PFI eventually claiming thatthe developmentwas a RAD (Rapid
Application Development) style developmentand as such no design documents
were created. Escalation within PO and Pathway produced no results. The
consequence of this was that acceptance had to rely on output from testing which

can never be totally adequate.

15. The Inquiry has asked how matters would be escalated within PO and Pathway.
During the initial partof the project when we were dealing with the Pathway’s
Service Architecture Design Document SADD (roughly equivalentto a high-level
functional specification) | dealt with Pathway through the document's author John
Dicks. | chaired workshops with PDA and Post Office staff to gain inputto this
documentand discussed the changes with John Dicks. | never had occasion to
escalate any issues at this stage John was constructive and cooperative. As we
Progressed into the development phase Proper, | dealt with Terry Austin (don’t
recall his title) of Pathway and it was Terry's refusal to share Pathway’s design
documents that | escalated to Peter Crahan within the PDA. Terry claimed that
Under other contractual circumstances he would support providing the visibility
we requested but, in this case, he was prevented contractually from so doing. |
believe that Peter Crahan (head of the PDA) and later Dave Miller attended
meetings within Post Office. On Peter's behalf attended at least one such
meeting and raised the concems that | mentioned. | believe the meeting was

sponsored by Paul Rich and managed by Dave Smith.

16. The Inquiry has asked when I was. first appointed as the Horizon Product

Assurance Manager, | can't recall the date but I believe it was soon after award of

Page 8 of 20
17,

WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

contract to Fujitsu. | don’trecall ever having a formal job description or
documented objectives but | understood the role was to verify that the emerging
solution being developed by Pathway complied with the contracted requirements.
To this end we worked with Pathway to provide as much assistance as needed to
clarify requirements and describe the working environment. The applications
assurance team included subject matter experts for EPOS, OBCS, APT (bill
Payments) and the other applications, it also included experts on accounting and
stock managementand cash account production. It included operational experts
to cover ways of working and documentation. Early in the project it was
suggested by Pathway that this team be based in Fujitsu's offices Feltham for
Proximity to Fujitsu and to facilitate direct and clear communication between the
teams. We agreed and moved staff. However as helpful as this was all round
this team did not perform any pro-active assurance for the reasons Previously
mentioned. There was also a technical assurance team led by Jeremy Folkes

that addressed the technical aspects of interfaces etc.

. The Inquiry has asked a number of questions regarding issues contained in

document POL00028587 which is a list of issues being managed in April 1998.
Having negotiated agreement with Pathway on the SADD we had hoped that in
addition to working with Pathway by providing understanding and clarifications to
be able to view how Pathway were interpreting the SADD during software
development. However (as mentioned elsewhere in this statement), this was not
forthcoming. We were th erefore jumping from a functional description (SADD) to
viewing the solution in testing. | don’t recollect how each issue listed in
POL00028587 was progressed but the list is a reflection of the overall situation

Page 9 of 20
18.

19.

WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

where the PDA were constantly pushing Pathway for fu rther visibility and action

on topics we viewed as being inadequately progressed.

The Inquiry has asked a number of questions regarding activities and problems
during 1998. | have no recollection of specific technical issues, although that
period was one of intense activity combining identification and rectification of
issues arising from the various type of testing and planning for acceptance,
migration and rollout. Regarding the Horizon Management Team, by 1999 the
BA had exited the programme and Dave Miller formed this team the stated
Purpose being “To ensure the Horizon Programme is fully scoped, planned and
managed to deliver in all areas. To monitor the delivery of Horizon within the
agreed programme timescales and ensure thatissues are resolved and risks are
managed.” As a member of this team, | mainly continued my work on

acceptance.

The Inquiry has asked me to confirm that | took the role of Horizon Acceptance
Manager In or around April 1998. My recollection is that it was probably around
that time. The Inquiry has asked about my role Horizon Acceptance Manager
between January to April 1999, | was tasked with coordinating and obtaining
agreement between all parties to the mechanism of acceptance. The Inquiry
asked what problems we had obtaining Pathway design documents, Early in the
project the assurance team attempted to gain access to Pathway’s application
design documents to a) provide POCL confidence thatthe developmentwas

Proceeding in accordance with the requirements and b) to assist Pathway with

Page 10 of 20
20.

21

WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

early identification of any misunderstanding or errors they were making in their
interpretations. Pathway did not Cooperate with this request and due to the PFI
nature of the contract we were unable to insist. This was a risk that was
recognised butwe were only capable of mitigating through the testing and
acceptance processes which is aless favou rable approach due to the increased
effort and risk of late-stage changes. The various tests condu cted during this
period identified multiple issues Notjust within Pathway butalso on the POCL
side. | would say that sentiment wavered between saying that the identification
and correction of issues was what one would expect at this stage so getting on

with that is positive butalso a feeling of being overwhelmed.

The Inquiry has asked me to describe and explain my role in the negotiation and
agreement of acceptance specifications, My recollection is that the format of the
acceptance specs was agreed at a contractual meeting. Pathway had proposed
solutions to our requirements and these had formed the basis of the specs.
Agreement to the acceptance specs had been a slow bumer facilitated by Mary

Read (Kermon) and I have no recollection of negotiating agreementon the

contentof the specs.

. The Inquiry has asked me to describe the con cern | expressed in document

POL00028586 re the viability of the acceptance plan. | don’t specifically recall
but up to the date of said document Pathway plans tended to be unrealistic in
terms of there being too much to achieve in the time available and this was

probably the case here.

Page 11 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

22. The Inquiry has asked whatwas my understanding of the reason(s) for the
Benefits Agency's decision to withdraw from the contract. The BA was always a
reluctanttraveller in the venture. | was frequently reminded by BA colleagues
that the cost of making a benefit Payment through the Post Office was multiple
times more than completing the same transaction via a bank account. It was also
understood on the ground, but! haveno evidence for this, that the BA’s
interfacing system CAPS was in difficu Ity so rather than being cited as the reason

for delaying the whole programme they exited.

ACCEPTANCE AND ROLL OUT

23. The Inquiry has asked a number of questions regarding acceptance and the
robustness of the Horizon system between June and September 1999. This was
a period of intense activity. Post Office continued to review the incidents that
were arising both in offices and at the back end. Acceptance incidents were
being raised and business severity classified. At the same time Pathway were
reviewing these incidents and attempting to understand root cause and if
necessary, make corrections. A complication here is that Post Office hada
weekly accounting cycle in its offices so incidents that arose resulting from in-
office weekly cash accounts could take a week to emerge, additional days to be
identified, further days to be analysed by Pathway, yet more time to make any
corrective code changes and then awaita software release. So much time could
elapse between an incidentbeing identified and being resolved. | managed

acceptance workshops which as | recall comprised representatives from the

Page 12 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

business owners in Post Office, Pathway and PDA reps. Pathway would invite
Post Office to accept that elements of an acceptance spec had passed or had
exclusions le. issues that were understood and did not presenta significant
business impact and could therefore be parked for later attention. There was
always disagreement on this impact assessment because Post Office always had
correctly reviewed the business and operational impact whereas Pathway, given
that acceptance was dependentof there being fewer Als than an agreed number,
tended toward lower classifications, These workshops were effective in giving
Post Office leverage to force Pathway to agree to make corrections. In asking
about the system being reliable and robust, | understand a system's robustness
is its ability to cope with and remain operational in the face of unexpected activity
and we had issues in that area where for instance unexpected user activity like
reboots (operators would reboot the system when it appeared to be hung)werea
major issue. Then, reliability being a system's ability or continually return
expected results and consistent behaviour there were multiple issues
experienced at the back end in accounting. | recall a colleague — Jeremy Folkes
- took ISO standard 9126 an international standard for the evaluation of software
which provided us with a model for reviewing the characteristics of Horizon and to
raise acceptance incidents for broader system behaviour such as reliability and

robustness.

24. The Inquiry has asked me to con sider technical issues that existed as of August
1999. Technical issues existed in all areas. There were issues associated with
integration between the interfacing systems of Pathway and PO such as
reference data. There were issues with the operational areas such as help desk.

Page 13 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

There were issues with accounting and these were considered very serious as
they could impact downstream client settlement etc. There was disagreement
between the PDA/Sponsor and Pathway as to the classified severity of
acceptance issues with Pathway tending to classify lower than the PDA/Sponsor.
However, by November issues were being corrected and driven down and the

acceptance process had momentumas we worked toward rollout.

25. The Inquiry has asked aboutthe help desk. My recollection is that the help desk

was swamped.

26. The Inquiry has asked about the basis on which the Horizon system was
accepted. POCL accepted the system on the basis of Pathway having achieved
the requirements laid down in the acceptance specs. As far as | recall, and there
was a contractual agreement, Pathway would be awarded acceptance once it
had completed the agreed tests anda threshold regarding the number of
acceptance incidents within severity classifications had notbeen breached. This
was achieved albeit with many acceptance issues remaining which Pathway
undertook to resolve. The Inquiry also asked: if | was satisfied that the Horizon
system was reliable and robust at the Pointat which itwas accepted by the Post
Office? The system appeared ready to move to the next level. This level was not
full rollout, in my view an incremental increase in the number of live offices as we
knew the solution had to be exposed to more rigorous usage which could only
come from live running. Running the same set of tests combined with a small

number of outlets would not provide the Payback necessary and the solution

Page 14 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

needed to be exposed to more user activity. The Inquiry asked a numberof
questions regarding the performance of the Horizon system following
acceptance. | resigned my employment with Post Office at the beginning of
January 2000 and played no further part in the project from the end of December
1999. | resigned because | had received an offer elsewhere but also because |
suspect that had | remained with the Post Office | would have continued to work
on Horizon and having spent4-5 years of frustration | needed a change. |

therefore have no understanding of how it performed or was supported during

rollout.

27. The Inquiry asked, looking back, do you consider that the Post Office effectively

28.

scrutinised the technical reliability and robustness of Horizon Prior to its
acceptance and roll out? My answeris — that Post Office scrutinised the
technical reliability and robustness of Horizon to the maximum extent possible,
given the constraints placed on the assurance process by the PFI contract and

Pathway’s reluctance to notwaive theirrights in that regard.

The Inquiry has asked me to describe and explain comments which I made in
documentPOL00028413. The docu ment appears to be a briefing note for input
to the CAPS project. | can'trecall the event although I fully recognise the
sentiments | expressed. There was a belief within the PDA and Post Office that
all problems would be solved by testing. This in my view was naive and my
frustration can be read between the lines. My assertion recorded here and in

other documents that having been denied access by Pathway to the design of the

Page 15 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

applications had resulted in no progressive assurance of application correctness
which would resultin problems later not all of which would be captured by testing.

A prophetic view that was confirmed later to be correct.

29. The Inquiry has asked, to what extent (if at all) were there external and/or political
Pressures on you in 1998 and 1999 to prevent cancellation of the project. | can
confirm that no external pressure was ever applied to me to prevent cancellation.
Indeed, | recall a meeting chaired by Dave Miller sometime in 1999 probably in
the early part of Dave's tenure where he canvassed views at his team meeting on
whether we should persist with Horizon or cancel and | voted to cancel as did my
other staff member colleagues: Jeremy Folkes and Jan Topham | recall there
were others but theirnames now escape me. Those who were contractors, all of
whose names now escape me, advised to continue. Whilst! can't recall the
specific names, the outcome of the vote has persisted in my memory because of
the clear distinction between staff and contractor views. | was not su rprised by
this vote, by definition contractors and consultants are employed to get a job
done and completing the project was the job whereas staff members took a
broader business perspective in terms of the future impact for the Post Office on
working with Fujitsu and Horizon. | based my view not just on what I had
witnessed over the preceding 4 years buton what! had been unable to gain
visibility of. | understood this was Dave gaining an understanding of the views of

his team to assist himin any discussions he was having with the Post Office.

Page 16 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

30. The Inquiry has asked whether on reflection, do you consider that known faults in

3

the Horizon system were appropriately discussed and communicated both within
the Post Office and to the end users of the Horizon system? In this case |
understand “end users” to be a) those who worked in retail post offices
throughout the country and b) users of the Horizon data that was uploaded from
the Horizon system to the Post Office systems via the interfacing system TIP in
the post office central Processing facility in Chesterfield. In the case of the
former, | do not recall any direct involvementwith outlet end users butthe
majority of the assurance team had all worked in post office outlets and brou ght
that knowledge and perspective with them together with relation ships they
retained with colleagues who remained in those end user positions. For the
latter, a senior post office employee from Chesterfield - Ruth Holleran -had
become deeply involved with PDA colleagues and brought the end user
perspective. Furthermore, as Acceptance proceeded acceptance issues were
known to the PO automation team led by Dave Smith. To whatextent these
issues were discussed within Post Office and with outletend users! have no

knowledge.

.Finally, I'd like to add the following: The project suffered a numberof significant

shocks and was frequently chaotic, the procurement method was inappropriate
for the solution being contracted and the main sponsor BA, upon whose
requirements the chosen solution was Partially based, withdrew toward the end of
the development. There were frequentand significant slippages by Pathway and
the contract was let with masses of un-scoped work (agreements to agree) to be
completed on all sides. The relationship between Post Office and Benefits

Page 17 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

Agency was strained (Post Office being conscious of an imbalance of power and
suspicious of BA's intentions) and the BA’s commitment to the project was half-
hearted. The PDA despite enjoying an overabundance of consultants and
management drawn from both sponsors struggled to make a difference.
Acceptance was a prescribed contractual event; it served its purpose but it did
not mean that the solution was ‘reliable and robust’. From my experience care
and serious attention would need to continue to have been applied to the system
as it moved through rolloutand beyond. Years later, when | learned that PO had
Prosecuted multiple sub-postmasters based on assurances from Fujitsu’s thatno
explanation other than fraud was Possible, | was shocked. Shocked because
among other things PO would appear to have completely changed its view of
Horizon since the time up to 2000 while | worked on the Project. | did support
cancellation of the project in early 1999 as | mentioned before and having worked
on many postal automations in my subsequentcareer with the Escher Group, |
remain of the view that cancellation would have been the correct decision for PO

at the same time as the BA cancelled followed by a revised project.

Statement of Truth

‘\

Page 18 of 20
WITNO04150100
WITN04150100

Page 19 of 20
WITN04150100

Horizon Release
Managementto Dave
Miller, re Issues Log

as of 3 April 1998
(V.1.0)

WITN04150100
Index to First Witness Statement of John Meagher
No. | Exhibit Number | Document Control URN
: g Description Number __
4 WITN0415_01/ Fax from Matt Taylor, | POL-0025069 | POL00028587

Page 20 of 20
