Witness Name: Mrs Joan Bailey
Statement No.: WITN0316_01
EXHIBIT: WITNO316_01/2

THE POST OFFICE HORIZON INQUIRY

EXHIBIT 2

Page 1 of 3
Markets Branch Office
6/16 New York Street
Leeds

T 0845 601 1022

Strictly Confidential

Please note that it will not be possible for you to withdraw your resignation without our
prior written consent.

It would assist us in our task of appointing a new subpostmaster in the area if you could
indicate your intentions regarding your premises by signing and returning the enclosed
reply slip to me as soon as possible,

Yours sincerely

Colin Burston
Agents Contract Manager

Thank you for your letter of 11 March 2011 purporting to give notice of your resignation
as the Subpostmaster of the above Post Office®Howey branch.

We note that your letter gives less than the three months’ notice required by your
Subpostmaster Contract and it is therefore not a valid notice to terminate that contract.
However, we are willing to accept your letter as notice to terminate your contract with
effect from 11 March 2011 which will be your official last day of service.

Your notice of resignation is accepted without prejudice to any rights or claims Post
Office Ltd may have under the subpostmasters’ contract or in law. You are,still required
to make good any outstanding shortages, as well as any further deficiencies highlighted
by future enquiries which arose whilst you were subpostmaster.

| must also make it clear to you that Post Office Ltd regards your resignation as one

made in order to avaid summary termination of your contract. [This will mean that you
will not be eligible to make an application to the Discretionary Fund.]

ww.postoffice.co.uk

Limiea

SRR

Page 2 of 3
Please note that it will not be possible for you to withdraw your resignation without our
prior written consent.

It would assist us in our task of appointing a new subpostmaster in the area if you could
indicate your intentions regarding your premises by signing and returning the enclosed
reply slip to me as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely

Colin Burston
Agents Contract Manager

Page 3 of 3
